detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10033global networks and local values: a comparative look atgermany and the united states260 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309073103 | doi 10.17226/10033committee to study global netoworks and local values, computer science andtelecommunications board, national research councilglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.global networks and local valuesa comparative look at germany andthe united statescommittee to study global networks and local valuescomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencesnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing boardof the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their specialcompetences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by a grant between the national academy of sciences and thegermanamerican academic council. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this project.international standard book number 0309073103library of congress control number: 2001099571additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, nwbox 285washington, dc 20055800/6246242202/3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.educopyright 2001 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a.wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon itsown initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the instituteof medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chairman and vicechairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcommittee to study global networksand local valueskenneth h. keller, university of minnesota, chairkenneth w. dam, university of chicago law school (resigned)paul a. david, all souls college, oxford universitykenneth keniston, massachusetts institute of technologyhenry h. perritt, jr., chicagokent college of law, illinois instituteof technologyrobert spinrad, xerox palo alto research center (retired)george vradenburg, america online, inc. (resigned)german delegation from the maxplanckprojektgruppechristoph engel, maxplanckprojektgruppe, chair of the germandelegationklaus w. grewlich, center for european integration studies, bonn;college of europe, bruges; universit−t freiburgbernd holznagel, universit−t mnster, institut fr informations,telekommunikations und medienrechtmichael hutter, universitaet wittenherdeckeraymund werle, maxplanckinstitut fuer gesellschaftsforschungmartina zitterbart, institut fuer betriebssysteme undrechnerverbund (resigned)u.s. staffnational research councilherbert lin, senior scientistnicci dowd, project assistant (through september 1999)mickelle rodriguez, senior project assistant (through february2001)janice sabuda, senior project assistantgerman staffmaxplanckprojektgruppe recht der gemeinschaftsgterjoachim d–lkenanja moosmannlorenz mƒllerwolf osthausnote: though this report is formally a report of the national research council, preparedin accordance with nrc rules and procedures, it is in fact the product of a u.s./germansteering group effort that was carried out with christoph engel and kenneth keller servingas cochairs.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairdavid borth, motorola labsjames chiddix, aol time warnerjohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstthomas e. darcie, at&t labs researchjoseph farrell, university of california at berkeleyjeffrey m. jaffe, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesanna karlin, university of washingtonbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, whizbang! labs, inc.donald norman, nielsen norman groupdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt, chicagokent college of lawburton smith, cray, inc.terry smith, university of california at santa barbaralee sproull, new york universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitymarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistalan s. inouye, senior program officerjon eisenberg, senior program officerlynette i. millett, program officercynthia patterson, program officersteven woo, program officerjanet briscoe, administrative officermargaret huynh, senior project assistantdavid drake, senior project assistantjanice sabuda, senior project assistantjennifer bishop, senior project assistantdavid padgham, research assistantbrandye williams, staff assistantglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacebackgroundit is described alternatively as the òthird wave,ó the òinformation revolution,ó or the òvirtually connected world.ó whatever the rhetoric used tocapture the impact of information technology in general and global networks in particular, it leads inevitably to the assertion that these developments will have a profound and increasing impact on individual life, socialcommunities, commerce, and government. but what kind of impact andhow, specifically, will it occur? for some it appears to be a set of risks andthreats. for others, it amounts to almost unbounded opportunity.both assertions may have elements of truth. opportunities and risksare twins. unfortunately, because most discussions of the likely effectshave been rather general and conjectural, there has been little basis forjudging either the optimism of the technophiles or the pessimism of thetechnophobes. where opportunities are concerned, conjecture and uncertainty have few negative consequences; the ingenuity of creative people,the workings of the market, and the acceptance by society of useful newtools will determine soon enough which technological applications willfind a place in our lives and in what ways. the risks are another matter. itis important to try to anticipate the social effects of a new technologicaldevelopment in order to understand what tools and strategies might beused to reduce the risks or minimize the negative impacts.the societal implications of new information technologies have notbeen universally welcomed. most nations, including both fundamentalistand dictatorial nations as well as liberal democracies that tend to haveglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacehigh respect for personal freedom, have individual values that may bethreatened by new information technologies. for example, in 1996 thebavarian attorney general forced compuserve to ban a couple ofnewsgroups on issues of homosexuality that were perfectly legal in california. similarly, some types of nazi propaganda that would be criminally prosecuted in germany are constitutionally protected as free speechin the united states.local governments have traditionally been responsible for countermeasures against information regarded as socially harmful. however,todayõs global telecommunications may constrain the options available togovernments for controlling information, limit the effectiveness of oldpolicy tools, and make it more difficult for governments even to understand or identify the values held by the populace at large. governmentsmight lose considerable ability to influence or preserve values that aredifferent from those elsewhere in the world, or even to manage regionaldifferences within their own boundaries.many questions regarding social organization arise. to what extent isit possible to organize power along territorial lines in a world of globaltelecommunications? what new loci of power and influence are madepossible? to what extent do global telecommunications enable power tobe organized around personal interests rather than geographically basedor limited communities? what is the impact of such organization on social development? how will the roles of government and of societychange as a result of global networks? will all governmentsñor even alldemocratic governmentsñchange in the same way? are there scenariosin which governments may use the power of networks to enhance theirpower?to address some of the issues related to the impact of global networkson local values, the germanamerican academic council asked for astudy in this area. in response, the u.s. national research council established a committee in accordance with its usual procedures. the germandelegation, under the auspices of the german maxplanckproject groupon common goods, law, politics, and economics, were intimately involved in all aspects of the development of this report (participating inmeetings, writing, and so on), but were not formally approved as nrccommittee members.a comparison of germany and the united states was thus appropriate for two reasons. the procedural reason is that the expertise of thecommittee members was more concentrated on these two nations than onothers, and that it was the germanamerican academic council thatasked for the study. the substantive reason is that germany and theunited states have many important similarities (e.g., a welldevelopedinformationtechnology infrastructure and a commitment to democracyglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixand the rule of law) and many important differences as well (e.g., differing values that each nation wishes to uphold). for this reason, this reportis structured around an exploration of the potential impacts of global telecommunications on values of germany and the united statesñspecifically some of the values associated with democracy, privacy, freedom ofinformation, and free speech.study planin carrying out its study, the committee to study global networksand local values met for the first time in the spring of 1998 and six moretimes (including two symposia described below) to deliberate. the symposia were integral to the study, as they involved speakers from a rangeof disciplines and helped to expose the committee to a much broader rangeof input and perspectives than what was represented by committeeexpertise. in this role, the speakers served admirably. (individuallyauthored papers from these symposia can be found online at <http://www.mpprdg.mpg.de/dresden1.html> for symposium 1 and at <http://www.mpprdg.mpg.de/woodsh.html> for symposium 2. these papersare also available in hard copy.1)purpose of this reportthis report focuses on the relationship between global informationnetworks and political, economic, and cultural institutions and norms,which, in aggregate, are referred to as òlocal values.ó the study has examined the effect of global networks on the ability of individual nations andcommunities to protect or perpetuate indigenous values and systems, andit has examined the policy approaches available, at least in the unitedstates and germany, to achieve those endsñthat is, to alter, control, orotherwise affect the local impact of information networks.this report is intended to help policymakers understand the issues,how they are linked to one another, and how action targeting one problem or issue can have effectsñoftentimes unintendedñon others. it combines positive and normative analyses. the positive analysisñdescribingand explaining the current situation, attempting to predict likely development paths and their future effects, and forecasting the consequences of1christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., 2000, understanding the impact of globalnetworks on local social, political and cultural values,ó law and economics of internationaltelecommunications, vol. 42, badenbaden: nomos; christoph engel and kenneth h. keller,eds., 2000, governance of global networks in the light of differing local values, law and economics of international telecommunications, vol. 43, badenbaden: nomos.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.regulatory actionsñaims at making clear what the present and potentialproblems are. the normative analysisñassessing the seriousness of theproblems, making judgments on whether they require societal action, and,if so, commenting on what the course of action might beñemphasizes thedifferent levels and the range of formal and informal structures, institutions, and policies available to deal with the problems identified. furthermore, the report recognizes that legislators and the traditional politicalstructures are not the only institutions that societies depend on to dealwith perceived problems. a host of less formal political institutions andactors can, at times, be more effective, as they have been in much of thedevelopment of global networks that has already occurred. therefore, theanalysis in this report is not directed exclusively to traditional policymakers, but is also intended for professional groups, commercial institutions, nongovernmental organizations, and the broad array of other entities that make up civil society.finally, it is worth noting that the report does not make specific policyrecommendations. rather, it offers insights that the committee hopes willbe useful to policymakers in thinking about critical decisions.acknowledgmentsthe committee wishes to express its gratitude to the participants inthe two symposia, whose contributions were critical for helping the committee to better understand the issues. staff of the maxplanckprojectgroup on common goods, law, politics, and economics and the u.s.national research councilõs computer science and telecommunicationsboard provided helpful support, both logistically and intellectually.most importantly, the u.s. and german delegations to the committeeacknowledge each other for a willingness to overcome their cultural differences and work through the misunderstandings that often characterizemultinational study teams. at first, a common vocabulary and workingstyle seemed to elude the committee. but over time and with patience,committee members from the two delegations were able to work out arough consensus on important concepts and definitions. (indeed, at timesthe process of deliberation was selfreflectiveñsome of the issues discussed in this report played out during the committee process.)the committee also thanks the germanamerican academic council(gaac) for making this project possible, noting in particular the help ofdr. rolf hoffmann and dr. johannes belz in facilitating interactions between the committee and the gaac.xprefaceglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs (nrcõs) reportreview committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the reportmeets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscriptremain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:michael froomkin, university of miami school of law,james hamilton, duke university,herwig kogelnik, lucent technologies,viktor mayerschoenberger, kennedy school of government,david post, temple university,margaret jane radin, stanford university, anddebora spar, harvard business school.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the reportbefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by morristanenbaum. appointed by the national research council, he was rexiglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.sponsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and thatall review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for thefinal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committeeand the institution.xiiacknowledgment of reviewersglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontentsexecutive summary11introduction and context151.1aims of this report, 151.2background, 171.3this study, 181.4germany and the united states: some contrasts, 191.5structure of this report, 222the evolution of global networks232.1introduction, 232.2evolution and design of global telecommunicationsnetworks, 262.3the value dimension of networks, 362.4global networks and changing values: towardconvergence or divergence?, 423understanding local values and how theyare affected by global networks463.1introduction, 463.2are values always the issue?, 483.3the function of values, 513.4the locality of values, 583.5the legitimacy of values, 593.6the impact of global networks on values, 61global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontents4democracy and political institutions744.1democracy, political institutions, and power, 744.2the impact of the internet on democracy, politicalinstitutions, and power, 754.3constitutional policy, 975free speech and the internet1065.1introduction, 1065.2the values involved in free speech, 1075.3common and different traditions and the internet, 1085.4operationalizing the regulatory goal, 1195.5internet content regulation as a challenge togovernance, 1236privacy and freedom of information1336.1introduction, 1336.2privacy, 1356.3freedom of information, 1566.4note added in proof, 1697the impact of global ecommerce onlocal values1707.1introduction, 1707.2commerce and values, 1717.3the impact of ecommerce on local commercialvalues, 1737.4effects on local commercial values, 1777.5the impact of ecommerce on global networks, 1857.6the impact of ecommerce on local, social, andpolitical values, 1888governance in cyberspace: multilevel andmultiactor constitutionalism1908.1introduction, 1908.2governance, 1909information networks and culture2059.1introduction, 2059.2cultural hegemony, 2089.3global networks and class issues, 2169.4public and private spaces, 2189.5generational phenomena, 221global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxv10principles and conclusions22410.1governments and the evolution of local values, 22410.2democracy, 22510.3regulatory structure, 22610.4free speech, 22710.5privacy, 22810.6freedom of information, 22910.7technology development, 22910.8culture and technology, 230appendixñbiographies233global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.global networks and local valuesglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summaryhow do global networksñespecially the internetñaffect a communityõs political, economic, and cultural values? how do these values,in turn, affect the ways in which global networks are designed, operated,and regulated?as a first step toward addressing some of the issues related to theimpact of global networks on local values, and vice versa, the computerscience and telecommunications board of the national research council(united states) and the maxplanckproject group on common goods,law, politics, and economics (germany) conducted a study whose goalwas to help policymakers understand the issues, how they are linked toone another, and how action targeting one problem or issue can haveeffectsñoftentimes unintendedñon others.to keep the scope of the study manageable, the committee to studyglobal networks and local values concentrated its work on germanyand the united states, two countries that are different enough to contraston a variety of critical issues yet similar enough to invite useful comparisons. in addition, the study did touch on some questions from a moreglobal perspective. furthermore, instead of making specific policy recommendations, it sought to develop insights that will be useful to policymakers around the world in thinking about policy decisions.the internet as global networkthe internet was initially created for the purpose of linking academiccomputer scientistsõ research, and the technologyñmost importantly, theglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2global networks and local valuesprotocolsñto support the early version of the network was created to meetits needs. but while todayõs internet is widely regarded as a new mediumfor all to exploit and use, the underlying protocols have not changed significantly since, and they still embody the values of those early days. forexample, one value of that era was trust; destructive hacking was not regarded as much of a problem, and the protocols were designed with thatassumption in mind. today, much of the concern over cybervulnerability results from those protocolsõ inattention to security.the internet is a network of networks that is truly global. the tcp/ipprotocol, on which the internet is based, allows a network to be designedin such a way that the òintelligenceó that controls interactions is locatedprimarily at the nodes and edges of the network (i.e., under the control ofinformation suppliers and end users rather than some òglobaló centralauthority). thus, the internet is not subject to strong centralized management in its daytoday operations. technical decisions about architectureand design are coordinated at present through an informal workinggroup, the internet engineering task force (ietf), though this maychange in the future. in particular, as the internet becomes more important to governments and business interests, commercial and political pressures are likely to emerge that seek to change the traditional forms ofinternet management.it should be noted, however, that the success of the internet is largelythe result of the lack of a master plan to guide its development. in its earlystages, the internet was promoted and funded, but not designed, by theu.s. government. this is not to say that government input was irrelevant.indeed, the government made three critical decisionsñto allow the original research and education network to evolve toward a generalpurposenetwork, to select tcp/ip for the nsfnet and other backbone networks,and subsequently to privatize the nsfnet backboneñthat had a powerful influence on the internetõs evolution. nevertheless, direct control overfuture development of the internet through comprehensive action planswill be even more difficult in the future, if only because the internet hasnow extended itself across so many national borders and has mobilizedsuch a diverse ensemble of interested parties.because the internet is not subject to centralized management over itsoperations (and arguably should not be in the future), the fact that itcrosses local and national boundaries introduces new dimensions of concern for communities accustomed to exercising sovereignty within theirborders. thus, the presence of the internet raises the essential question ofhow (or whether) they should exercise authority over this new medium.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3valuespublic opinion tends to start from a simplistic hypothesis: global networks threaten local values. but before they take action, policymakersshould first understand whether values are really the issue; what valuesdo for the individual, society, and government; whether the values arelegitimate and thus deserve protection; and how global networks mightaffect local value orientations.values help individuals understand, decide, and even exist. valuesendow individuals with a normative language that allows them to distinguish and judge their own behavior. and this allows them to decide oncourses of action, and to preserve selfesteem.values help society to convey information, facilitate coordination, andgive the group an identity. precisely because they share values, the members of a society can interpret the behavior of other members and establish expectations about it. through the sharing and communication ofvalues, the behavior of individuals can be coordinated and made cohesive. building a community essentially involves aligning people withshared values.for government, values are the link to its citizenry. they provide abasis for the development of statutes to which people are inclined to adhere. they give legitimacy to governmental action. and shared values arethe bedrock of a national identity.individuals are not likely to have a consistent order of values, andeven less are societies or states. a more appropriate picture is a basket ofvalues that are in tension and in permanent motion. history, culture, andpublic discourse shape the dominant balance of these values at any giventime. nations, societies, and individuals differ less by adhering to entirelydifferent values, and much more by how they balance them.values can be either formal (like tolerance) or substantive (like national pride).1 modern societies are characterized by strong formal andrelatively weak substantive values; but no society has ever existed without some shared substantive values.protecting local values is not a value as such. the locally prevailingvalues can be inappropriate for a changed world, for example, or they canbe illegitimate (like obedience to an autocratic regime).1formal values (american legal scholars might term these òneutraló values) are, to a firstapproximation, those associated with social processesñrules of behavior that facilitate discourse and, indeed, can be a key element in making a community possibleñwhile substantive values come closer to moral convictions or beliefs. while the committee recognizes thatthis distinction is not always crisp, it is useful for this report. more discussion of this pointcan be found in chapter 3.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4global networks and local valuesthe potential impact of global networkson local valuesglobal networks can influence local values in a number of ways. thenetworks may enable individuals to remove themselves from the reach ofa communityõs influence on enforcing a particular set of values. that is, ifan individual dislikes a value or a set of values dominant in his or herlocal environment, networks enable that person to exit from the community.global networks give individuals access to values that differ from theones prevailing in their society of origin, and to different ways of balancing competing values. having been exposed to the fact that values andtheir balance are historically contingent, individuals can use this knowledge for questioning their societyõs traditional values.global networks may lead to a convergence of values, raising concerns over cultural hegemony. in particular, the central role of the unitedstates in developing and populating the internet, the predominance ofenglish in internet content, and the vitality of the traditionally egalitarianinternet culture all contribute to what some outside observers characterize as u.s. cultural hegemony.global networks enable communication that is almost devoid of context. the user often does not know the content provider. internet use ismostly unnoticed by the physical communities to which the user belongs.this is important because values are embedded in context. trespasserscannot be reminded of the value if the violation remains invisible.the internet and the democractic processthe internet has potentially large effects on democracy and the political process generally. established political arenas are more easily engagedthrough the internet than through conventional channels, and the existence of new arenas may challenge existing institutions, especially those ingovernment. political actors gain leverage by virtue of the internetõs ability to facilitate organization; the internet also allowsñfor better orworseña larger degree of unmediated communication between the public and its political leaders.the internet can also change the political process. it enables issues tobe brought to the forefront of policymaker attention in very short times,and it lets stakeholders and advocates press their cases in a multiplicity offorums. meanwhile, the internet and its associated technologies providetools for policymakers to make their case to the public without intermediaries.the internet can change the balance between direct and representaglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5tive democracy in favor of the former: it allows broader and faster publicdissemination of more types of information and ideas relevant to thepolicymaking process. but whether the internet will result in a more effective selection processñthrough which ideas can be sifted and evaluated in a reasonable and deliberate mannerñis an open question.because of its pluralizing potential, the internet increases the likelihood that transnational conflicts will ariseñbut because there is no sovereign international authority to adjudicate and, especially, to enforce, theresolution of internetdriven conflicts is highly complex. at the same time,the internet and information technology have the potential to fractionatethe public because they allow individuals to customize the informationthey receive.the internet poses different challenges to the legal and constitutionalenvironments in which the united states and germany operate. to theextent that the courts are able to rely on the values expressed in theirrespective constitutions (rather than rights that have been explicitly articulated in the documents themselves), they will have greater flexibilityto facilitate evolution of their legal and constitutional environments as thetechnologies and uses of the internet change.finally, government reactions to the internet may not necessarily bebenign or constructive. indeed, governments may well choose to use moretraditional commandandcontrol regulation to deal with what they maysee as problems created by the internet. such actions do not necessarilyserve democratic and freedompreserving interests.freedom of speechalthough both the united states and germany recognize a constitutional right to freedom of expression, the interpretation of that right in thetwo countries is significantly different. moreover, and just as important,the weight given to that right in comparison with other values is differentin the two societies. as a result, the legal structures and protections thathave developed to implement the right are different, and they exemplifywhy harmonization of the laws related to many aspects of freedom ofexpression on the internet is likely to remain quite difficult.consider two types of speech for which the united states and germany have different legal regimes. hate speechñthe willful public expression or promotion of hatred toward any segment of society distinguished by color, race, religion, or ethnic originñis generally proscribedby the german legal system. such a prohibition is not surprising given thenationõs determination to avoid the reestablishment of a national socialistauthority. by contrast, hate speech is generally deemed a constitutionallyglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6global networks and local valuesprotected form of expression in the united states; only when such speechcan lead to a hateengendered crime is it prohibited.a second type of speech that the two countries regard differently isspeech that is deemed detrimental to minors. both nations proscribe childpornography. but they have dealt differently with material that might bepsychologically traumatic to minors. the united states has sought to passlaws that hold providers criminally liable for supplying minors with materials that are òobscene,ó òindecent,ó òpatently offensiveó (the communications decency act, or cda), or òharmful to minorsó (the child onlineprotection act, or copa). cda was held unconstitutional, and copawas overturned at the district level and now awaits appeal. germany hasproscribed the distribution to minors of material that is òimmoral, [has] abrutalizing effect, [gives] incentive to violence, crimes or racial hatred, . . .[or glorifies] the war,ó but these laws have not been seriously challengedin court.the global nature of the internet makes it extremely difficult andcostly for national authorities to unilaterally implement laws and regulations that reflect national, rather than global, moral standards. but commercial law (or private law, as it is usually known in europe), selfregulation, and encouragement of intermediation provide additional tools.commercial law is useful when material on the network injures a clearlyidentifiable party (for example, if a web site published libelous materialabout a person or violated someoneõs legally protected privacy).selfregulationñthrough siteidentification and labeling schemes,ageverification software, and the provision of filtering softwareñallowsfor greater diversity of internet material, enhanced freedom of expression, and customization of controls to fit the needs and desires of individuals. intermediaries, such as host providers, can play a useful role inoffering the public a regulating or authenticating service. that is, hostproviders can market their internet access software by promising to include certain kinds of content and to exclude others. in each of these alternatives, government has a role in ensuring their quality; thus, they areexamples of òhybridó regulation, combining governmental and nongovernmental approaches to the overall regulatory process.the internet, privacy, and freedom of informationpotential tensions between privacy and freedom of information (foi)illustrate contrasts between a substantive value (privacy) and a formalvalue (transparency in government, as exemplified by freedom of information). privacy asserts the ability of individuals to control and restrictthe dissemination of information about themselves, while foi refers tothe free availability of information related to the conduct of governmentglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7business. both public and private institutions gather, organize, store, andin some instances disseminate information about people. thus both kindsof institutions are key actors in threats to, as well as protection of, privacy.both are also involved in foi issues, though private institutions play onlyan indirect role.though privacy and freedom of information are not necessarily inopposition, they do come into conflict in some instances. for example,information on individuals is collected by governments. asserting an absolute right to privacy would argue for never releasing such information,while asserting an absolute right to foi would argue for releasing any ofit on demand. in these cases, the substantive value of privacy is in conflictnot only with the formal value of transparency of state activities, but alsowith the public interest (in the prevention and prosecution of criminaloffenses) and commercial interests (in the collection and exploitation ofdata).global networks such as the internet have raised the stakes significantly for both privacy and freedom of information. clearly, they facilitate dissemination of information held by both public and private institutions. but perhaps more significantly, computers and software havegreatly enhanced the storage, mining, sorting, and reorganizing of data.this has increased the ability of institutions to develop comprehensiveand accessible profilesñon private individuals as well as on the actions ofgovernmental bodiesñfrom disparate databases and put the informationinto useful formats.the german and american approaches to privacy and freedom ofinformation are opposites of each other. germany, and european nationsin general, have comprehensive systems of law and regulation that reflectstrong commitments to protection of privacy. the united states has apatchwork of incomplete protections reflecting uncertain commitment toprivacy. with respect to freedom of information, the situation is reversed.the united states has a comprehensive system in place that reflects itscommitment to access. germany has a patchwork system, reflecting itsambiguity about access.in the context of the internet, privacy and freedom of informationraise many policy issues. for example, because routine consumer transactions can easily involve players in a number of countries, applying national regulations represents a major extraterritorial extension of domestic or regional law. furthermore, attempts to find a common solution toprivacy problems in a globally networked world are difficult because nations such as germany and the united states approach privacy from verydifferent political and legal viewpoints and traditions. germans traditionally vest considerable trust in government to protect their privacy interests. by contrast, americans tend to mistrust governmental institutionsglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8global networks and local valuesand have a strong tradition of relying on market forces not only to regulatethe economy but also to serve many other social needs. as a consequence,americans have been more ambivalent about turning to the governmentto protect their personal privacy.despite these differences, both germany and the united states overthe last 25 years have developed fairinformation principles that reflectsubstantial agreement on basic questions regarding privacy. these principles include openness, individual participation, collective limitation,data quality, finality, security, and accountability. however, it should benoted that implementation of fairinformation practices may differ significantly from system to system even though the same general principlesor framework applies in all cases.international law could theoretically play an important role in the legal protection of personal privacy because of the ease with which personal data can be transferred electronically across national borders. harmonization can be effected through conventional treaties that expresssubstantive rights and that obligate national authorities to enforce thoserights through national legal institutions. but treaties work only whenthere is nearcomplete agreement on the values involved; furthermore,negotiating them is a very slow process.an alternative to treaties are framework agreements based on òhybridó forms of international organization. in these matrices, or frameworks, of international public law, private selfregulation is used to workout the details. such hybrid regimes will be acceptable only if they offernew flexibility in rule makingñif they tailor substantive requirements tothe realities of rapidly changing technologies. they also must offer moreflexibility and lower transaction costs for complaint and disputeresolution, and an effective statebased system to ensure compliance.freedom of information is a pillar of democratic societies, and one ofthe greatest potential contributions of global networks is enhanced publicaccess to government information. as court decisions, legislative documents, and regulations of administrative agencies become more easilyavailable through the internetõs world wide web, the rule of law isstrengthened.such òprimary legal informationóñinformation having the force oflaw, such as parliamentary enactments, judicial decisions, and comparableinstruments from administrative agencies such as rules and ordersñmustbe public for effective governance. but as noted above, public records containing personal information can pose a conflict between freedom of information and privacy rightsña conflict exacerbated by advances in information technology that make it more practical to extract and crosslinkpersonal data from public records.similarly, notes, drafts, and intermediate documents of public offiglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9cials and bodies can give the public insights into the decisionmaking processes of government and administration, but how far a society should goin providing access to such records is a matter requiring further discussion. the value of transparency in the decisionmaking process must beweighed against the need for administrators or judges and their advisorsto have candid discussions without which the quality of decisions mightwell be reduced. government also needs space and time in which to assess arguments and conduct its own debates with a degree of privacy.the international legal complications related to freedom of information are neither as pervasive nor as challenging as those related to privacyprotection, and the drive for harmonization is less urgent. the differencesarise because in the foi area, the principle underlying national law is tocompel disclosure of government information, while in the privacy arenathe principle is to prohibit disclosure of personal information. therefore,transborder data flows are a lesser threat to freedomofinformation values than they are to privacy values. even under changed technologicalconditions, each country can pursue its own foi policy since it exercisescontrol at the point of origination of information.nevertheless, there are reasons for a nation such as germany to try tobring its freedomofinformation principles closer to those of the unitedstates. first, global networks expose people to governmental openness inother states, which can lead them to demand more openness and access intheir own country. second, a restrictive national policy with respect tofreedomofinformation principles can be undermined to a certain extentby the dissemination capabilities of the internet. third, and perhaps mostimportant, economic considerations may provide an even stronger motivation for adopting freedomofinformation principles in germany; access to public information increases the predictability of political conditions that may affect economic actors.commercevalues associated with commerce can be placed in three categories:those values directly related to the fairness of doing business (e.g., òfairótaxation and competition); those related to basic constitutional foundations of commerce (e.g., property and contract); and those related to other,more general institutions (e.g., the rights to privacy and to informationaccess or delivery).in an internet environment, small businesses often face lower costs ofentry than they might in the physical world. thus, they can occupy newniches of promising commercial activity more easily, and large numbersof smallbusiness entities seek to identify and construct such niches. onthe other hand, ònetwork effectsó associated with the internet environglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10global networks and local valuesment can help lead to òwinner take alló situations for larger companiesthat already enjoy significant market share, thus facilitating their furthergrowth and dominance. as for taxation, the relative permeability of national borders to internet traffic (and many of the goods and services thenetwork can carry) is likely to increase the difficulty of imposing taxes onsales made to foreign customers through the internet.enforcement of intellectual property rights in an information age isgreatly complicated by global networks. because these networks make itprofoundly easier to copy and transmit information, old balances of property rights against òfair useó have been upset, and a new political andsocial equilibrium has not yet been established. the moral rights of authors, which allow an individual to try to prevent the distortion of his orher workña concept wellrecognized in the european community butnot in the united statesñseem particularly challenged by the ease withwhich digital representations can be disseminated.new practices in the internet realm also appear to raise issues aboutcontract. for example, in an electronic transaction, it is arguably harder toconfirm the voluntary and informed consent of the parties involved, ascontract terms are often hidden on a web page. in other cases, computerprograms make selections that imply contract acceptance. in still othercases, obligations may automatically be incurred with an acquired information product.governancethe examples addressed aboveñcommerce, free speech, privacy,freedom of information, democracyñillustrate that germany and theunited states differ on the role of the state in promoting social integrationand protecting local value systems. americans emphasize individual liberty, reliance on markets to organize economic activity in the face of technological change, and the use of a variety of nongovernmental organizations to mediate political change. germans tend more to look to the stateas a protector of values, especially when these values are threatened bymarket and technological forces.despite these differences, it is clear that for both nations, the state isan important actor in managing the impact of the internet on theseñandotherñareas. states will be obliged to come to terms with how governance in cyberspace is to proceed, and in doing so will need to draw onthe full range of governance mechanisms available to them.at one level, nonregulatory mechanisms are available. technical solutions and informal rules of behavior can help to lubricate points of friction caused by the conflict of values. for example, filtering and portalsglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11help to target the information that is accessible to individuals, and informal rules for behaviors, such as ònetiquette,ó facilitate interaction.on the other hand, social conventions are nonbinding, which makesthem weak tools for compelling behavior in persons unwilling to conformto such conventions. thus, when rules are necessary, legal tools of onesort or another will generally prove more effective.national law and regulation are likely to be of limited effectiveness,however, because global networks make national boundaries highly porous with respect to information. in principle, extraterritorial enforcementof national laws and rules is possibleñassuming cooperation from othernationstatesñbut in practice such cooperation is the exception ratherthan the rule. nevertheless, while beforethefact denial of access to information is technically hard to achieve, the presence of individuals on sovereign soil provides a route through which local laws can be enforced.further, intermediaries such as service providers or credit card agenciesare subject to national regulation as well.international legal harmonization is an obvious solution to conflictsover values in cyberspace. it can be achieved through agreements thatallocate regulatory authority or by harmonizing the regulations themselves. the former is unlikely, however; states tend to balk at cooperatingwhen their own laws and attitudes toward a particular issue differ fromthose of the state whose laws they are being asked to enforce. only whenthere is consensus about an issue can international cooperation be quicklyand effectively achieved.a second possibility is the use of internationally coordinated privatelaws to regulate conduct on global networks. the role of the state underthose circumstances is simply to interpret and judge the validity of contracts, to protect peopleõs interests in the contracting process, and to helpthem in the enforcement of legal titles. in addition, tort law can establishliability, generating financial incentives for private entities to refrain frominappropriate conduct. as a general rule, national privatelaw systemsare much better coordinated internationally than are systems of publiclaw; thus private law may have greater potential to facilitate governance.finally, hybrid regulationñan arrangement that involves elementsboth of private cooperation and public lawñhas some potential. fromthis perspective, governance is about the allocation of power not only in apublic setting but within private associations as well, and power is exercised by a multitude of actors at different levels of authority and operation. in hybrid regulation, public law provides a framework for privateselfordering that meets certain minimum requirements. over time, thismay lead to an increasingly limited role for the state, as new actors appearwho assume regulatory powers that have traditionally been exercised bythe state.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12global networks and local valuesglobal networks and cultureglobal networks affect culture in three ways. first, they give rise toconcerns about hegemony. networks provide an infrastructure whoseactual characteristics are largely determined by those who design and usethem, and the fact is that one nation is dominant. the majority of theinternetõs designers and users, and much of its hardware and software,hail from the united states. thus some fear that the preponderance of theinformation available on the network is likely to reflect the interests andculture of american users more than those from less influential states.the committee to study global networks and local values believesthat these fears are overdrawnñat least for western industrial nations.the reason is that these states have the resources to create language andcultural òzonesó that cater to their own interests and tastes. so, for example, most german, french, and japanese computer and internet userscan conduct all of their daytoday activities in their native languages because content providers have already generated or translated informationfor local consumption. furthermore, even if it is indeed u.s. companiesthat provide the bulk of the software in use, these companies realize thatother nations represent markets large enough to warrant the developmentof software customized to their particular needs. thus for developed nations it appears likely that the use of information networks will reflectlocal values rather than replace them.for the developing world, the situation is far more complex. in thenewly industrialized countries of east asia, for example, economic globalization is considered a key to development. these nations see globalnetworks as a tool that they have a natural advantage in adopting ratherthan as a threat to local culture. on the other hand, the incentives forlocalization of network content and applications are much fewer therethan for the developed world. to the extent that the united states seeks topromote democratic change in developing nations, its efforts may be seenas promoting forms of cultural hegemonyñfor example, in the technicalstructure of global networks that make it difficult for these nations to interdict the flow of information they deem undesirable.second, global networks affect the distribution of power and information within and between social classes. in fact, these networks appearmore likely to affect relationships between groups defined by professionand level of education than between those defined by national identity.because internet technology will not diffuse throughout a society in auniform manner, and those that obtain it first are most likely to be members of privileged classes, incentives to provide societal services to allclasses may wane if the privileged classesñbecause of their access to theinternetñare able to obtain such services on their own; this may be espeglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary13cially true in nations without a strong countervailing tendency towardegalitarianism. such changes result from the differential relationships ofthese groups to the internet, different interdependencies between groupsthat occur as a result of the internet, and changes in the modes of operation of certain professions that affect activities unrelated to electronic networks as well as those directly related to the networks.finally, global networks shift boundaries between public and privatespaces. historically, those boundaries, in both principle and practice, havebeen largely determined by cultural norms. which people know about usand what they know, what they physically see of us, how we feel about itand the extent to which we control it, differ widely from one culture toanother. how and where one entertains, the candor and directness withwhich one expresses ideas, how publicly and under what circumstancesone displays oneõs body, are all related to the boundaries between publicand private spheres but follow no obvious, logical, or consistent pattern.in the physical world, it is reasonably clear how to maintain these boundaries. but network technologies have the potential to shift them in eitherdirection, depending on circumstances and the sophistication of the user.encryption technologies, for example, can increase the effective domainof private space; on the other hand, connecting to the web can increasepublic space by exposing the contents of oneõs computer to inspection oralteration.principles and conclusionsglobal networks present a variety of new challenges to national governments. while in some cases governments have faced these challengesbefore, global networks have some potential for altering the balances ofpower between government and those governed that were established inprenetwork eras. nevertheless, the internet is not the only influence onthe evolution of values, and a multitude of other influences will affectsuch evolution as well. thus, a governmentõs stance toward global networks (and the internet in particular) must be part of a larger strategyaimed at promoting the healthy evolution of a societyõs value set. that is,government must respond to (rather than simply resist) the many changesoccurring as society becomes better educated, more diverse, and morefully connected to the wider world around it.because the internet is only one factor, albeit an important one, inglobalization and modernization, the focus of policymakers when policyaction is necessary should be on outcomes rather than on tools or modalities. thus they should seek to define what outcomes are desirable andundesirable rather than seek to regulate one particular instrumentalitysuch as the internet.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14global networks and local valuesa second important point is that commandandcontrol regulation isunlikely to be well matched to the technological realities of the internet.an alternative to commandandcontrol regulation is the use of selfregulation and intermediation within a statutory framework. this hybrid approach to regulation is likely to be more effective than commandandcontrol regulation in addressing many aspects of the public interest, andit serves as counterpoint to formal regulation. one reason is that globalnetworks are characterized by a complex system of market forcesñprivate, public, and quasipublicñand a stable balance among them is easierto achieve when stakeholders are well informed and can take an activepart in shaping their roles. commandandcontrol regulation often attacksa wellbalanced status quo; because hybrid regulation builds on the statusquo, it is more likely to be successful.finally, the history of the internetõs technology suggests that it wouldbe a mistake for governments to seek to control the future developmentthrough comprehensive action plans. indeed, despite u.s. governmentpromotion and funding of the internet in its early stages, at no time didsome kind of master plan exist to guide the internetõs evolution. alternatives to centralized approaches, such as coordination and selfregulation,are worth considering, though they may require new forms of hybrid publicprivate international regimes.chapter 10 discusses other principles and conclusions related to freespeech, privacy, and freedom of information.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.151introduction and context1.1aims of this reportglobal telecommunicationsñparticularly the internetñcan in principle change the ability of national governments to preserve their nationsõvalues. the everincreasing bandwidth of communications technologies,and their diffusion internationally, makes it possible for large volumes ofinformation to cross national borders much more easily than in the past.and because informationñdepending on its content and who receivesitñcan enhance or detract from a nationõs ability to govern itself, we mayreasonably expect that information technology will have a nontrivial impact on the conduct of national policy.clearly, no easy generalizations can be made in advance about thesocial and political effects of most technological developments. the influence of a new technology on a society is seldom determined solely by itstechnical characteristics alone. the innovations it spawnsñthe systemicchanges it promotes or makes possibleñdepend on interactive, bidirectional, and iterative processes that constitute the societyõs social, political, economic, and cultural life. indeed, much has been written on thissubject1 describing the intricacies of those interactions.global information networks are no different in this respect, althoughtheir very breadth and transformative nature make the challenge all the1see, for example, merritt roe smith and leo marx, eds., 1998, does technology drive history? cambridge, ma: the mit press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16global networks and local valuesgreater. as the very term implies, they are not developed by nor are theycontained within a single, homogeneous, or even coherent society. muchof their power and potential derives from the connectivity they provideacross large distances, geographic barriers, time zones, and politicalboundaries.the effectiveness of global information networks depends on someuniformity in technical standards, agreedupon rules and operating procedures, and compatibility of hardware and software. in each of theserespects, choices have to be made that are based primarily on technicalconsiderations and the values held by the technologyõs first developersand users. but although uniformity or interoperability may be technicallydesirable, it is much less clear that it is socially desirable, at least to theextent that it limits the accommodation of local needs and values.moreover, as the global network diffuses more and more widelywithin each nation, the values, needs, and desires of a much broader spectrum of people have to be considered. the target is a moving one in several respects: the increasing level of penetration brings additional groupswith different characteristics into contact with the new technology; thegroups themselves evolve in their adaptation to the network; and the technology continues to develop, offering new potential uses as well as newchallenges.taken together, these considerations suggest three kinds of questionsthat define the aims of this report: what can be said about the interactionsbetween information networks and different social/political/cultural systems? how are these interactions affected by the global nature of the networks? what changes in these relationships can be expected over time?the last question is particularly troublesome and, in a report focusedon the future, particularly important. because of the iterative and interactive nature of technology development, analyses of the present state ofaffairs may be either irrelevant to or misleading about the future. whowould be willing to predict with confidence that the socalled òdigitaldivideóñthe seriously skewed access at present to the benefits of information technology among different nations and different socioeconomicgroupsñwill be a transient phenomenon or, alternatively, an embeddedcondition that will only intensify in the future? are the perceived threatsto civil society, local businesses, or governmenttaxation authority inherent in the technology or will they disappear as societies adjust to the dynamics of a new system? to what extent can one expect that, over time,there will be technological fixes for the tensions or conflicts created by theintroduction of global networks?the working hypothesis in this report is that each country is affecteddifferently by global networks, depending on its own local values. evenwhen the nominal effect is substantially the same in different countries,global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and context17they may perceive the impact differently; that is, their governments ortheir people may find it more or less disruptive. finally, countries mayreact in different ways, in accordance with the structures and traditions oftheir governance systems.although it is difficult to provide answers to the questions posedabove, this report attempts to explore them in some detail. the premise isthat by raising the issues at this early point in the development of globalnetworks, societies and policymakers will be encouraged to monitor developments. and they will have a framework for doing so, thus positioning themselves to take action as the dynamics of the interactions betweenthese new global networks and local values become clearer. the discussion also highlights the importance of incorporating, both through institutional and technological design, as much flexibility into the system aspossible, thereby allowing for salutary changes to cope with tensions orconflicts as they arise or are recognized. in this respect, technologicalòlockinó is something to be studiously avoided.1.2backgroundthis report focuses on and compares the united states and germany.that choice grew out of an interest in both countries to pursue the studyon which the report is based. as noted in the preface, the germanamerican academic council asked the u.s. national research counciland the german maxplanckproject group on common goods, law,politics, and economics to undertake the task as a joint venture. both institutions saw this as an opportunity not only to explore an issue of mutual interest but to do so in a way that could draw on scholarly strengthsin both countries, provide greater clarity about the issue itself through thecomparisons and contrasts that would be possible, and build a model forpossible future collaborations. in this last respect, it was not lost on eitherinstitution that developing models for collaborations of this kind is oneimportant social/political response to the very changes being broughtabout by the globalizing influence of information technology.a study limited to the united states and germany has obvious shortcomings. to be truly comprehensive in addressing the interactions betweenglobal networks and local values, one would have to examine the entirespectrum of countries. it would range from the scandinavian nationsñwhich are extensively penetrated by the internet and have the greatesthomogeneity and the least rigid political and social systemsñto those, likenorth korea, myanmar, or certain countries in the middle east, that tightlycontrol or even attempt to seal themselves off from global networks.on the other hand, comparing two industrialized, relatively wealthy,and extensively networked countries with similar but not identical politiglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18global networks and local valuescal systems and similar but not identical value systems can yield insightsfor policymakers in both countries. the united states and germany obviously meet these criteria. in addition, they are countries whose languagesare primarily english (in one case) and primarily german (in the other),and they are sufficiently large that each has already made practical choicesin deciding how to react to the influence of global networks. their similarities serve to control the number of variables; their differences makeclearer how global networks can affect and be affected by relatively wellidentified local values. furthermore, it is hoped that the comparison willoffer some guidance as to how differences in judgment or reaction in thetwo countries might be resolved or accommodated, given the constraintthat the networks must operate globally and harmoniously.this reasoning suggests, in fact, that although a study of a broaderrange of countries might provide greater insight into the interactions between global networks and local values, it could actually be of more limited use to policymakers. countries with vastly different cultures or political systems will certainly be challenged by global networks in verydifferent ways, but there may be less to be learned that is applicable topolicy choices through an explicitly comparative study of the kind undertaken here; that is, there is likely to be little in the way of policy approachesthat is adaptable to one country from the other when the two are widelydifferent and there are few options available that would harmonize policies across the much broader cultural and political gaps.1.3this studythe u.s.german committee that was assembled to plan and carryout this study (see the appendix) covered a range of disciplines, includingeconomics, law, political science, sociology, engineering, and science andtechnology policy. in addition to its several planning and writing meetings, the committee organized two symposiañone in dresden in february 1999, and another in woods hole, massachusetts, in june 1999, towhich individuals with an even broader range of professional, academic,industrial, and publicpolicy backgrounds were invited.the dresden symposium focused on the numerous ways in whichglobal networks are affecting local institutions and values, or are likely todo so in the future. commissioned papers addressed conceptual questionsñsuch as the meaning of values and the several ways in which values are embedded in political, social, and economic institutionsñas wellas analytical questions concerning actual or potential impacts. the valuesthat inhere in the global networks themselves were also considered.the woods hole symposium focused on potential responsesñby governments, other institutions, and less structured groupsñto the new conglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and context19text, potential conflicts, and other changes that the penetration of globalnetworks into local societies may likely bring about.the papers commissioned for the two symposia have been publishedin their entirety.2 these papers and related discussions also provided thecommittee with much of the background material on which this report isbased, although its organization and content were separately determined.1.4germany and the united states: some contraststhe similarities between germany and the united states are fairlyapparent. the question is, how do they differ? obviously, any attempt todescribe two complex cultures with a few brief comments based on a limited number of characteristics is bound to lead to oversimplification. however, if one views the exercise as merely an attempt to identify political,social, and cultural differences that might give rise to different kinds ofinteractions with global networks, it can provide a useful starting pointfor this study. the following descriptions should be viewed in that light:¥political/social organization. many observers would contrast germanyand the united states by describing the former as somewhat òhierarchicalóin a number of respects and the latter as rather òhorizontal.ó germans aremore willing to delegate authority for many kinds of societal decisions, tobelieve in and rely on experts or on those formally charged with decisionmaking responsibility, and to expect that social and political problems canbe approached using an orderly, rational, and formal process.americans, on the other hand, are increasingly impatient with representative democracy, as evidenced by the growing use of ballot referenda in many states and the number of issues that have moved from theagendas of specialized agencies to the forum of public debate. the adventof the internet has caused many to envision a return to a style of governance much like that of early new england town meetings. americansare now much more likely than most europeans to turn to the internet asa source of information rather than to designated experts.much has been written in recent years about the demise of citizeninvolvement in the united statesñfewer people voting in elections, reducedparticipation in civic groups, and a loss of public support for a òsocial safety2christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., 2000, understanding the impact of globalnetworks on local social, political and cultural values, law and economics of internationaltelecommunications, vol. 42, badenbaden: nomos; christoph engel and kenneth h. keller,eds., 2000, governance of global networks in the light of differing local values, law and economics of international telecommunications, vol. 43, badenbaden: nomos.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20global networks and local valuesnet.ó3 some have argued that the concern may be overstated (or they havequestioned some of the explanations offered for the phenomenon), but polling data show increasing numbers of americans responding in the negative to a question asking, òdo you trust your neighbors?óon the other hand, one explanation offered for the willingness ingerman society to delegate authority is the relatively high level of trustamong citizens with respect to government. the trust appears to be related to the expectation that individuals in and out of government willfulfill their responsibilities. moreover, the reaction to abuse of that trustmay be all the greater in germany, as evidenced by the strong backlash torecent revelations of fundraising improprieties in the christian democratic party.¥social cohesion. the united states is a highly mobile society withlittle attachment to place. university students often choose schools without regard to where they have grown up, routinely moving hundreds tothousands of miles to do so. workers expect to relocate to other parts ofthe country several times in the course of one or several careers. extendedfamilies do not expect to live close to one another. the countryõs population density is relatively low, singlefamily dwellings are the norm, suburban communities continue to grow, and city life is the exception ratherthan the rule. with place a less important factor, the internet offers a particularly viable organizing link. email is now a common mode for familycommunication. and with distances from home to work a major problemand public transportation very limited, new ideas such as òtelecommutingó offer an attractive possibility.germany has a higher population density, shorter commuting distances, and relatively stable attachment to place. city life is a central feature of social structure, personal marketing, and living generally. thusthere are fewer needs for and attractions to a web existence, and more tobe sacrificed in choosing that alternative.¥nationalism and internationalism. germans, like most europeans,have a strong sense of history and geography. they also have an international perspective: their educated classes are multilingual; their televisionprogramming is polyglot; their economic interdependence with othercountries is evident in everyday life. indeed, germans have been leadersin the integration of europe. within their own country, their awareness ofhistory and the relative homogeneity of their society create a sense of tradition, which leads to skepticism about change. at the same time, theirhistory has sensitized them to the dangers of nationalism and led them to3see, for example, robert putnam, 2001, bowling alone: the collapse and revival of americancommunity, new york: touchstone books.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and context21the pragmatic view of the nationstate as a rational construct rather than adivine or natural order.americans, on the other hand, generally have little sense of historyor geography. moreover, separated by oceans from both europe and asia,they have an impatience with internationalism that manifests itself todayas either neoisolationism or unilateralism. their lack of knowledge ofother languages is well known. unconstrained by an historical perspective, and ethnically heterogeneous, they are unusually open to change. itis a society with great social mobility, a widespread entrepreneurial spirit,and receptiveness to technological innovation. one observer has notedthat americans tend to look first at the opportunities presented by change,while germans look first at the risks.at the same time, americans create unity by promoting a shared pridein the idea of their country as a nation of immigrants and the values it represents. that very heterogeneity saves americans from the worst aspects ofnationalism, but they do not have a sense of proportion about their role in theworld. combined with their population size and economic power, this omission often leads them to be inadvertent agents of hegemony.¥technical/economic factors. in a number of ways, the efficiency ofgerman society, its trust of government, and its commitment to narrowing economic gaps and class distinctions provide an impetus for thespread of new technologies in everyday life. magnetic insurance cards,automated videotape rental, and informationtechnologybased systemsfor regulating and monitoring traffic have all penetrated german (andeuropean) society more than they have that of the united states. on theother hand, the local telecommunications systems remain de facto monopolies. this creates a pricing structure that slows internet penetrationand use by raising the cost of broadband òlast mileó communication linksand by failing to make flatrate access schemes available.the more decentralized governance and market orientation structures in the united states have facilitated deep penetration of a web culture in several ways. competition in telecommunications has led to substantial reductions in the cost of web connection, to flatrate accessschemes being the norm, and to the availability of many competing highbandwidth systems via telephone lines, cable systems, and satellites. decentralization, market orientation, and a somewhat lower level of concernfor uniformity of access have led to a faster, if inhomogeneous, spread ofinternet connections and use.¥religion. both the united states and germany nominally separatechurch and state, but the role of religion is different in the two societies.americans, far more than germans, attend religious services and are involved with church, synagogue, or mosque activities on a regular basis.this is a source of perennial political conflict in the otherwise secularunited statesñwhether it be on prayer in public schools and at publicglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22global networks and local valuesevents, or the teaching of evolution, or stemcell research. these conflictsextend to the internet world on issues such as pornography and freespeech. in german society, on the other hand, the overlap of religious andsecular life appears to be relatively modest.1.5structure of this reportin examining the influences of global networks on the two countries,this report attempts to be specific but not exhaustive. it looks at pornography and hate speech, at privacy and freedom of information, at culturaldiversity and hegemony, at the local values associated with democracy,and at electronic commerce. in separate chapters, it puts these specificissues into a general framework that addresses global networks, local values, and their reciprocal influence. in so doing, it singles out issues forexamination in order to illustrate how diverse the relationship betweenglobal networks and local values can be.the body of the report is divided into three sections. the first dealswith contextual issues: how the technology evolved to its present form,how that form may affect its future growth and regulation, and how wecan come to an understanding of values that would be useful in this assessment. the second section uses these concepts to examine the effects ofglobal networks on a number of specific issues, including privacy, freedom of information, free speech, and the political and commercial structures in which global networks are embedded. it also suggests alternativeapproaches to network governance. the third sectionñthe penultimatechapterñraises a number of cultural issues not discussed elsewhere; itprovides an opportunity to raise questions that cannot easily be approached in the u.s.german context, and so it is more openended. thefinal chapter summarizes the high points of the report and offers conclusions.clearly, some very important issues are not considered here in anydetail. the most obvious among them are intellectual property, electroniccash, consumer protection, and the impact of global networks on financialmarkets. two factors led to the decision not to include them. first, muchhas already been written about these issues elsewhere.4 second, they appear to be sufficiently farenough removed from the other issues considered in this report that there would be no great gain in treating them here.given the practical limitations on the reportõs length and comprehensiveness, it seemed better to exclude them than to address them superficially.4see, for example, computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil, 2000, the digital dilemma, washington, d.c.: national academy press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232the evolution of global networkswe shape our buildings; thereafter they shape us.ñwinston churchill2.1introductionthis chapter examines the evolution of global networks, mainly theinternet, and seeks to relate general features of the architecture and design of these communications systems to the values inherent in or reinforced by the technology. the focus is not on specific values such as privacy, intellectual property rights, or free speech, some of which areanalyzed in other chapters of this volume, but rather on two more generalphenomena: how values and interests have shaped and become embedded in the specifications of technological systems, and how the technicalfeatures of such systems in turn affect the values of the communities thatmake use of them.the internet emerged as a meganetwork, so to speak, of technicallyand socially heterogeneous electronic communications networks. therewere no formal obligations imposed on participants to converge on anyuniform set of technical practices or social values in developing or usingthe internet. at the same time, the benefits of everwider connectivityachievable by the system provided strong incentives for diverse publicand private entities to ensure that hardware, software, and organizational structures were compatible and complementary. thus far, thisprocess of de facto standardization has been limited to technical specifiglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24global networks and local valuescations for interoperability and to basic social norms and business practices that are recognized as being conducive to the further growth ofòinternetworking.óthe way that the internet has evolved historically from its origins inarpanet, and the development of the world wide web (www) fromits beginnings at the european center for nuclear research (cern) ingeneva, underscore a paradox. although the ònetwork of networksó hasprovided a culturally and politically heterogeneous array of societies withglobal connectivity, the key technologies of the system were originallydesigned to suit the needs of publicly funded scientific research groups.while widely distributed geographically and situated in a variety of academic and quasiacademic institutions, these groups were nonethelessvery homogeneous with regard to the values shared among their respective work cultures.moreover, the scientific work groups within which the internetõs coretechnology was formed made little provision for coping technically withsuch issues as content, privacy, security, and identity.1 the relative emphases reflected a focus on resource sharing, communication, and collaboration among the original communities of designers and users, whosemembers were scientists and engineers selected according to criteria oftechnical competence and, in some cases, of national security.it should not be surprising, therefore, that some palpable sociocultural frictions emerged as the network of networks became a universalcommunications facilityñthe òglobal information superhighway,ó in1990s argot. the difficulties that have arisen over the control of content(based on òacceptabilityó concerns) on the internet are, in some sense, areaction to the technical and, increasingly, economic ease with which theinternetõs reach can be extended into many diverse cultural settings. theset of electronic communications systems that evolved into the internetcarried with it technological design features that were in some respectsquite unlike those of the existing telecommunications networks: more content can be discovered and pulled in from more sources, and more can besent, relatively easily and inexpensively.one consequence of these features was that they enabled the rapidspread of digital communications channels that simply bypassed established licensing procedures and other kinds of authorization that are evi1of course, given the limitations on resources embodied in the first connected computingsystems, an early feature was simply logging in, which could be enhanced to support different levels of security in access control. attempts to introduce security for specific contexts oruser groups date from the 1970s. see stephen s. kent, 1999, òsecurity and the internet (circa19801990),ó acm sigcomm tutorial: a technical history of the internet, available online at<http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/dragon/sigcomm/tl/kent.slides.ppt>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks25dentñfor example, in broadcasting. radio and television have affordedlocal or national political jurisdictions the opportunity to preassign responsibilities for, and place a variety of restrictions on, the content andconditions of programsõ delivery.a second noteworthy dimension of the òvalueó conflicts that haveemerged with the internetõs explosive growth stemmed from the formation, among some pioneer users of these internetworked facilities, of anew and distinctive cultural ethos of òcyberspace.ó this culture drewstrength from the fusion of network engineersõ and software programmersõ enthusiasms for experimentation in this new technological domain,and it evinced an occasional antiauthoritarianism that took many facesñfor example, frustration with the controlled telecommunications contextin which the internet technology arose, the extracurricular developmentof unix (a programming language fundamental to the early internet)within at&t, and the creativity of the òcomputer hackeró communitiesthat only later became associated with destructive intent.popular perceptions tend to inflate the role of the internet as the mostrecent among the òtechnologies of freedom,ó2 and they tend to intensifyrepresentations of any governmental posture other than laissezfaire ascontests between a reactive authoritarian state and those who adhere tothe libertarian, democratic ethos of the internet. but although antiauthoritarianism is now part of the popular culture or ideology often associated with the internet and its early developers and users, this aspectñgiven the role of large institutions in guiding and funding much of thefundamental internet development workñshould not be overstated.nevertheless, antiauthoritarianism was one major reason why theevolution of the internet led to significant technical departuresñwith respect to network architecture, cost structures, the services it carried, andthe innovative òbusiness modelsó that have coevolved with itñfrom previous telecommunications systems.3 as with other technological developments, social and organizational goals affected the design and evolution of the internet, first becoming òembeddedó in specific networkimplementations and later manifesting themselves in protocols, technicalstandards, and operating procedures. this ensemble of characteristics, inturn, shaped the social conventions and behavioral norms that developedamong users of the technology. much may be learned from this history,which is presented in more detail in the next section.2ithiel de sola pool. 1983. technologies of freedom. cambridge ma: belknap press.3these fundamental attributes of the internet have been chronicled in a series of computer science and telecommunications board reports: realizing the information future (1994),the unpredictable certainty (1996), and the internetõs coming of age (2001), all nationalresearch council reports published by the national academy press, washington, d.c.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26global networks and local valuesa third major issue that needs to be addressed is the extent to whichthe ubiquity of the internetõs technologybased infrastructure will promote convergence in the values of the disparate user communities aroundthe world. this is a complex matter, raising questions about whether thechanging purposes for which the network of networks is being used willdrive alterations in its architecture and technical features, as well as questions about the extent to which those changes can accommodate local pressures to affect network configuration or to control content through localregulatory interventions. this issue is discussed below and in chapter 3.without drawing premature conclusions at this point, it appears unlikelythat a single, globally uniform value system will emerge. still, one shouldbe cautious about attempting to òpredict the unpredictable,ó4 given theuncertainties that surround, and are in turn created by, the continuingrapid pace of advance in digital network technology.2.2evolution and design of globaltelecommunications networksglobally pervasive telecommunications networks, even those in theprosaic form of the public telephone and telex, are a comparatively newphenomenon. in the last decades of the 19th century telegraphy was ableto acquire something approaching global reach by means of submarinecables, but the number of nodes of the òvictorian internetó remained limited to the industrially advanced countries and their colonial possessions.5even in those regions, telegraphic access tended to be restricted to themajor commercial centers that lay along the seaboards or that were linkedby railways. indeed, it was not until the 1960s and 1970s that mature telecommunications systems, which had evolved as monofunctional(singleservice) networks for the transmission of voice and text, achievedhigh penetration rates throughout industrialized countries and somethingapproaching truly global coverageñalbeit with an emphasis on majorpopulation centers.thus global òcoverageó is not the same as a ubiquitous presence oreven universal access to basic telecommunications. the great majority ofthe worldõs people still live under conditions that do not afford them basic local telephonic services, let alone global connectivity (which still relies to a considerable degree on the telephone network).4david j. farber. 2000. òpredicting the unpredictableñtechnology and society,ó in understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, christophengel and kenneth h. keller, eds., 2937. badenbaden: nomos.5tom standage. 1998. the victorian internet: the remarkable story of the telegraph and thenineteenth centuryõs online pioneers. new york: berkeley books.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks27progress, of course, has involved changes in the mix of technologies.while the telephone network continues to grow, the number of telex usershas fallen as that technology has been replaced by facsimile (fax), whichgrew explosively during the 1980s. around the world, all these networkshave been affected by the operation and ownership largely of entitiesñpublic administrations (postal, telephony, and telegraphy authorities, orptts) or private regulated monopoliesñthat provided the services undercommoncarrier and universalservice regimes.the rise of the internet has been associated with privatization of telecommunications and relaxation of ptt control in many countries (e.g., withthe introduction of competitive service from nontraditional players such asinternet service providers, or isps). this pattern reflects movement awayfrom the inherently hierarchical architecture and control model of telephonyand telex (both within countries and historically in the international, interconnected network environment), the rise of direct countrytocountry dialing and other modern features associated with the new global networkenvironment, and declining relative telecommunications prices (which stilltend to be higher than in the united states and less likely to be flatrate thanto vary with time on the line and distance), itself a goal.the design of the telephone system and the prevailing business models, as well as cultural and economic factors, powerfully shape the waywe use the telephone, which is nowhere more obvious than in comparinguser behavior across nations. for example, flatrate local charges for business and residential customers may encourage frequent and long telephone calls (though charges do not fully explain the extent to which, inwestern societies, the teenage children of middleclass householders engage in interminable afterschool telephone conversations). other evidentchanges beginning in the late 1990s relate to the spread of mobile (cellular) phones, and observers speculate about the cultural impact of anywhere/anytime calling behavior.but although private communications practices, and the organizationof commerce and industry, have been transformed in many respects bythe diffusion of the telephone, we have no evidence that local and national cultural values have been significantly altered by the telephoneõsadvent. still less is there evidence to support the claim that the spread ofubiquitous telephone access, in and of itself, has been a strong force promoting convergence of social or business norms toward uniform regionaland national, let alone global, value systems.66ithiel de sola pool, ed., 1978, the social impact of the telephone, cambridge ma: the mitpress; christian pinaud, 1985, entre nous, les telephones. vers une sociologie de la telecommunication, paris: insep editions; claude s. fischer, 1992, america calling: a social history of thetelephone to 1940, berkeley, ca: university of california press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28global networks and local valuesnetworks for data communication have a more uneven history thanthose for voice, although they have largely been built on the same underlying infrastructure (e.g., through the use of lines provisioned by telephone companies). early data communications networks emerged in the1960s and 1970s along with timesharing computer systems. the majorcomputer vendors developed software that supported interconnection oftheir machines, and consequently the early data communications networks were proprietary rather than public. most of them were corporatenetworks linking different sites of a firm via leased telephone lines. pioneer users were large corporations in the electronics and automobile industries and firms in the financial services sector; the multinationals tookthe lead in creating private global networks, primarily to facilitate intraorganizational data exchange.beginning in the 1970s, this same approach was expanded by intermediaries, thirdparty providers of socalled valueadded networks (vans,such as telenet and tymnet in the united states) to serve companies thatcould not afford the cost or inconvenience of developing their own networks. vans grew in the 1980s by expanding points of presence in countries around the world, providing them with dialup and leasedline connections. also in the 1980s, some of these companies began to offer service(e.g., ge information servicesõ ge*nie) to the general public at comparatively low rates for nonbusinesshour use. they competed with other businesses having a òbulletin boardó style as well as timesharing roots, such ascompuserve (which introduced consumer service in 1979).this was also the period during which vans experimented withthirdparty interconnection of different businesses through the structured,controlled technologies associated with electronic data interchange (edi).these edi services supported the exchange of documents in standard formats through central hostcomputer systems; all parties to a transaction(e.g., buyer and seller) needed to be subscribers to the vanõs edi service.vans were treated as enhanced services in the u.s. regulatory context,making them exempt from telecommunications regulation.7stateowned and regulated private monopolytelephonenetwork operators around the world moved slowly to enter the growing markets fordata services. a combination of regulatory restrictions and technical andmanagerial incompetence (reflecting, in part, emphasis on voice and lackof experience in data communications) appear to have constrained theseorganizations. initially some of the ptts in europe, with the germanbundespost at the forefront, developed circuitswitched data networks7provision of international service involved arrangements with international record carriers for international transit service and arrangements with ptts for local points of presenceand/or gateways to local data networks.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks29that mimicked the model of the telex network, thereby displaying the extent to which they remained òlocked intoó the traditional commercial vision associated with the architecture of the basic telephone system.only in the early 1980s did the alreadyexisting telephone organizations move to packetswitching technologies. ptts tended to select thenonproprietary protocol standard, x.25, which was associated with the international organization for standardizationõs (iso) open systems interconnection (osi) reference model; x.25 was approved in 1984 by the international telecommunication union (itu, through what is known as theitut, the telecommunications standardssetting arm).8 as noted above,most of the private corporate networks at this time relied on proprietaryprotocols, such as the ibm corporationõs systems network architecture(sna) or the digital equipment corporationõs decnet standards. thepacketswitching mode in the proprietary as well as in the x.25 networksrelied on a hierarchical network architecture, which conformed to traditional management notions of the manner in which information shouldoptimally flow and be controlled within the large corporate organization.this, as shall be seen, was very different from the architecture of theinternet. outside the united states, this publicutility approach to packetswitching was associated with countryspecific public data networks(pdns), some of which involved countrytocountry gateways (based onthe sister protocol standard, x.75, also used for connections to vans).similar to telephony charging, pdn and van pricing tended to involveconnectiontime and traffic (e.g., òkilopacketó) charges.early commercial datacommunications networks and servicesñcorporate and van plus pdnñprovided crucial experience that shaped thedevelopment of the global telecommunications system and created readiness for the internet takeoff in the mid1990s.9 the context was confused,however. it was an intersection, and occasionally a collision, of the business and engineering orientations that were traditional in the world of theptts, and the world of computer vendors and dataprocessing and datacommunications services. stalemates and acrimony sometimes markedproceedings of technical committees in national and international telecommunications standards organizations during the 1980s.108marvin a. sirbu and laurence e. zwimpfer. 1985. òstandards setting for computer communication: the case of x.25. a detailed examination of the development of x.25,ó ieeecommunications magazine 23:3545.9marjory s. blumenthal. 2000. òarchitecture and expectations: networks of the worldunite!,ó the promise of global networks, jorge reina schement, ed., 152. washington, d.c.:aspen institute. available online at <http://www. aspeninst.org/publicationsl/bookstorecommunicationspromise.asp>.10u.s. congress, office of technology assessment. 1992. global standards: building blocks forthe future, tct512. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office, march, pp. 1214.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30global networks and local valuesthis discord gave way, by the late 1990s, to broad agreement on manybasic principles concerning global networks. these principles include global interoperability (compatibility) and even openness of networks. butthe process, unfolding largely in the 1980s but extending into the 1990s,involved complex tussles among iso, the itu and its principal constituents, the ptts, u.s. telephone companies, corporate representatives (notably ibm, with a major stake in sna), and the heterogeneous supportersof the internet protocol suite known as tcp/ip. complicating the picturewas telephonecompany development of standards for enhancing telephony networks, such as the integrated services digital network (isdn)and asynchronous transfer mode (atm) technology. but to simplify discussion, a major focus of international negotiation was on the relativemerits of tcp/ip vs. osi, which the former ultimately dominated.11the osi reference model describes a sevenlayer architecture defining functions, services, and interfaces for datacommunications systems.there is a related family of osi protocols, such as x.25 and x.400 for messaging and x.500 for directories, that implement what is described in thereference model and that have been developed through conventional standardssetting processes.12 hence, osi has been described as a òmetastandardó rather than a conventional set of interoperability standards.13 acritical dimension of osi is the european prominence in its development,measured by the locus of key engineering activities and isoõs locationand environment. in particular, european computer vendors, europeangovernments, and the commission of the european union saw the osiprogram as an instrument of industrial policy to protect european manufacturersñwhich already were major vendors of proprietary network solutionsñfrom the predominance of ibm and other u.s. firms. the effortto provide an alternative, or even the prospect of one, was intended bysome to arrest the widespread deployment of ibmõs sna network standard in europe.1411susanne k. schmidt and raymund werle. 1998. coordinating technology: studies in theinternational standardization of telecommunications. cambridge, ma: the mit press.12todd shaiman. 1995. the political economy of anticipatory standards: the case of the opensystems interconnection reference model. university of oxford m.sc. thesis in economic andsocial history. september.13paul a. david and mark shurmer, 1996, òformal standardssetting for global telecommunications and information services. towards an institutional regime transformation?,ótelecommunications policy 20(10):789815; paul a. david, 2000, òthe internet and the economics of network technology evolution,ó understanding the impact of global networks onlocal social, political and cultural values, christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., 4071,badenbaden: nomos.14in the same way, many in the european telecommunications industry came to regardisdn not only as the route to providing a seamless means of data communication via teleglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks31the interplay between osi and tcp/ip was not straightforward;15recollections of those involved reveal a fair amount of acrimony there aswell. yet experience and familiarity with tcp/ip, the development ofwhich had been documented publicly since 1969 through requests forcomments (rfcs), clearly contributed to osi.16 the articulation of sevenlayers, for example, is an elaboration of the traditional four layers ascribedto basic internet technology. that description, plus specific references tolayers 1 through 7, is widely used in discussing internetworking today,though otherwise the terminology tends to be different.in the end, however, some of the concrete engineering design work ofosi standards committees was acknowledged or absorbed by the internetengineering task force (ietf). in 1989, for example, the ietf open pdnrouting working groups addressed internetworking involving x.25based pdns using x.121 addressing, and the network working groupeven proposed experimentation with osi network layer protocols overthe internet and the creation of an experimental osi internet (rfc 1070).as these examples illustrate, there were individuals who were òbilingualó in these standards environments, people who attempted to work onsome kind of coordination, if not integration, of approach. but they werenot in the mainstream of internet technology development.17 althoughtcp/ip was adopted as a u.s. military standard (around 1980), the contention with osi in the united states came to a head in the late 1980swhen the national institute of standards and technology promulgated aphone lines, but also as the means of stabilizing the ptt monopolies on the eve of deregulation and liberalization. the peculiar combination of abstract principles and concrete economic interests may be one reason why neither osibased networks nor isdn was evertranslated into an integrated system diffused widely within national networks, let alone ona global scale. see paul a. david and w. edward steinmueller, 1990, òthe isdn bandwagonis coming, but who will be there to climb aboard?,ó quandaries in the economics of datacommunication networks, economics of lnnovation and new technology, 1:4362.15t.m. egyedi. 1999. òtension between standardisation and flexibility revisited: a critique,ó standardisation and innovation in information technology slit 1999, proceedings of the istieee conference on standardisation and innovation in information technology (siit 99), aachen,germany, september 1517, 1999, kai jakobs and robin williams, eds., 6574. piscataway,nj: ieee.16david m. piscitello and a. lyman chapin, 1993, open systems networking: tcp/ip andosi. addisonwesley professional computing series; t.m. egyedi, 1999, òtension betweenstandardisation and flexibility revisited: a critique,ó standardisation and innovation in information technology slit ô99. proceedings of the ist ieee conference on standardisation and innovation in information technology (siit 99), kai jakobs and robin williams, eds., 6574,piscataway, nj: ieee.17this social attitude and discrimination were evident in the criticism lobbed occasionallyat the original executive director of the internet society, who had a history of involvement instandards setting both at u.s. and international organizations.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32global networks and local valuesfederal information processing standard that related osi to u.s. government needsñthe climax of the government open systems interconnectionprotocol (gosip) initiative. gosip crystallized evolving concerns with osiin the technical and business communities, and its demise in 1994 (througha finessing that offered a choice between it and tcp/ip in government procurement) marked the end of serious u.s. consideration of osi.18by the mid1990s, the market preference for tcp/ip was clearly established, in part because of its comparative simplicity, which facilitateddevelopment of commercially viable products across a range of computing platforms.19 by the late 1990s, the penetration of tcp/ip technologyinto private (e.g., corporate) networks was reflected in the use of the termòintranets,ó an obvious play on òinternet.ótensions and misunderstandings among osi and tcp/ip proponentshad as much to do with attitudes toward standardssetting as about technology or even international competition. people in the internet community have historically looked askance at telephony standardssetting, associating it with the slow progress that helped to occasion their own workand with highly bureaucratic and timeconsuming procedures. by contrast, the internet standardssetting process focused on working implementations. the philosophy was articulated by mitõs david clark (theoriginal internet architect and architecture board leader), who had beeninvolved in protocol development since the 1970s: òwe reject kings, presidents, and voting. we believe in rough consensus and running code.óthis widely repeated characterization, voiced at a 1992 meeting, has beenechoed as a motto by many and codified in official documentation of theinternetõs architectural principlesñthemselves embodied in the tcp/ipprotocol suiteñand of the ietfõs approach to their implementation.20the ietfõs roots date back to the arpanet. its rfcs were initiatedto facilitate quick dissemination and discussion of the ideas and technicalspecifications that had been suggested by members of what was then asmall but geographically dispersed networking community, funded bythe advanced research projects agency (arpa).21 if a suggested proto18shirley m. radack. 1994. òthe federal government and information technology standards: building the national information infrastructure,ó government information quarterly11(4):373385.19it has been observed that standards can benefit from a bandwagon effect, and this wasthe case with tcp/ip, for which software and product development grew steadily. seemartin c. libicki. 1995. standards: the rough road to the common byte. washington, d.c.:center for advanced concepts and technology, national defense university.20brian carpenter, ed. 1996. òarchitectural principles of the internet,ó internet engineering task force rfc 1958. available online at <http://info.intemet.isi.edu:80/innotes/rfc/files/rfcl958.txt>.21janet ellen abbate. 1999. inventing the internet. cambridge ma: the mit press, pp. 7374.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks33col seemed interesting, it was likely that someone would implement andtest it. implementations that proved useful were copied to similar systems on the net.in this way, the number of technical specifications and the number ofpeople involved in òstandardizationó grew. everyone who was interestedand had access to the arpanet could participate, and the results wereavailable free of charge. with more and more people getting involved ininternet standardization, however, the ietf procedures and the standardsapproval procedure became somewhat formalized. only since 1992has the term òstandardó been officially used for technical specificationsthat have completed the full process of standardization (rfc 1311).the ietf is now split into more than 100 working groups coveringeight to ten functional areas. working groups can be easily created, andmost of them are dissolved after they have finished their task. in contrastwith most standardization organizations, participation in the ietf and itsworking groups is open to anyone. a formal membership is not required.broad and unrestricted discussion of the proposals via electronic discussion groups and mailing lists is possible. before internet standards areapproved, at least two independent implementations must have beencompleted. they must work and must be interoperable.the success of tcp/ip does not imply that the way it developed couldbe emulated. by the mid1990s, the ietf was under strain, reflecting growthin the number of participants and a diversification of interests in developing and implementing the technology. new users, service providers, andnetwork operators make it much more difficult to use the same informalconsensus mechanism as before to coordinate further technical changes inthe system. development of the protocols for the web, for example, hasproceeded under the auspices of the world wide web consortium, whichcoordinates with the ietf but is a membership organization. and a varietyof industrybased consortia have emerged to address specific kinds of technology and expedite the standardsdevelopment process.the difficulties encountered in attempting to move to a new generation of the tcp/ip protocol stack, which would enlarge the address spacesignificantly and add other features, illustrates the problem.22 althoughthe new protocol (ip version 6) was adopted by the ietf, and althoughbackwards compatibility with ip version 4, now widely in use, is guaranteed, not many are ready to migrate from a good to a better technical standard; they hesitate to incur switching costs because no authority can guarantee that everyone else will also switch. in the old nsfnet days, thedecision to switch to a new protocol would have been comparatively easy22see cstb, the internetõs coming of age, 2001.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34global networks and local valuesbecause the national science foundation (nsf) could stipulate it as a condition for those who wanted connection to this attractive network. as another committee of the computer science and telecommunications boardobserved, ò[f]or the internet, . . . the explicit government directive to setstandards [in the early arpanet period, the beginning of the internet] hasbeen replaced by a process driven by vendor and market pressures, withessentially no topdown control. . . . currently, the internet communityseems to make shortrange decisions with some success, but longrangedecisions, which reflect not only immediate commercial interests but alsobroader societal goals, may not get an effective hearing.ó23virtually the only public global data network open to corporate andpersonal use is the internet. the fact that the internet comprises thousands of technically distinct networks is a direct result of the design of thetcp/ip protocol suite, which allows internet services to be run on top ofnetworks based on other protocols, such as x.25, sna, and ethernet. theinternetõs architecture and standards separate applications (from the webto internet telephony) from the underlying infrastructure, whereas conventional telephony grew as an application that was tightly coupled to itsinfrastructure. in telephony, the òintelligenceó that made applicationspossible was based in equipment inside the network; in the internet, thatintelligence is largely in the software running on equipment attached byusers at the òendsó of the network.24that the internet standards were developed in an open process facilitated their diffusion; broad participation was possible and use of the standards was unencumbered. meanwhile, implementations by hardware andsoftware vendors could be proprietary, contributing to the profitability ofmany businesses built on this technology.25 there has also been opennessof a sort in the business of internet service provision: no single networkoperator or service provider owns or controls òthe net,ó and this networkof networks essentially constitutes an òunmanagedó system.that characterization is a mixed blessing. as a union of different networks, the experience of a user communicating across multiple networksmay devolve to a lowest common denominatorñone slowspeed or lowquality segment can degrade the whole experience. this problem is of 23see cstb, realizing the information future, 1994, p. x.24for a fuller explanation of the internetõs generality, flexibility, and architecture, seecstb, realizing the information future (chapter 2) and the internetõs coming of age.25ironically, despite the openness and bottomup character of internet standardization, itis not easily accessible to outsiders. only insiders understand what is being negotiated inrequests for comments and discussed in developersõ meetings. a meritocracy, the ietfpioneers believed that there were technical solutions for every problem, and that a solutioncanõt be the optimal one if it needs to be voted on.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks35particular concern for users (a minority today) with applications that demand high speed or minimal delay. thus, the internetõs technology andarchitecture do not make it a uniform experienceñone reason why largeproviders such as america online or uunet have been trying to growlarger and provide complete endtoend communications, much as thevans did.26as competition for customers has grown among isps, and concernabout service quality along with it, connections among networks have become problematic; isps tend to discriminate among networks in makingjudgments about whether and on what terms to effect interconnections.27although the technology makes interconnectionñinternetworkingñeasyin principle, business decisions have made it complicated in practice sincethe mid1990s. at the same time, the growing use of the internet increasesits value as infrastructure for a growing body of users and uses. this, inturn, will increase pressures for some kind of management and/or coordination system, as well as for mechanisms to support enhancements toquality of service (which might minimize delay for critical applications,for example).28in its early commercial period, the internet architecture has promoteda horizontal pattern of organizations, in contrast to the more vertical, hierarchical, and controlled world of telephony. the ease of user attachment to the internet makes it comparatively easy now to set up links to avariety of sources of information and entertainmentñand to exchangeinformation and communicate with other usersñall without being tied toa single service provider. even the smallest enterprise thus has the potential to achieve a global market presence. but this potential can be misleading, as new issues are arising now that a growing number of enterprisesand individuals have figured this out. how, for example, can all theseplayers compete for attention, or even be found, in an increasinglycrowded internet marketplace? and how do small enterprises thrive inthe face of an economics that continues, as time progresses, to promoteconsolidation in markets for both suppliers and users of internet technology? chapter 7 on commerce has a related discussion.26see cstb, the internetõs coming of age, 2001.27see cstb, the internetõs coming of age, 2001.28see blumenthal, òarchitecture and expectations: networks of the worldunite!,ó 2000.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36global networks and local values2.3the value dimension of networksdifferent social values and goals have influenced the evolution of datanetworks. systems engineers, military leaders, business executives,policymakers, and private usersñwhether consciously or otherwiseñshape the technical characteristics of these communications systemsthrough technical proposals and practical decisions that reflect their individual needs, preferences, and world views. once these values becomeòembeddedó in the implementation of a particular network, they becomelatent, not only in the technical standards themselves but in the operatingprocedures, social conventions, and behavioral norms that develop amongthe technologyõs users.these phenomena are not unique to the internet; they are evidentacross a wide range of technologies, such as various forms of manufacturing automation, and reflect the very human processes of technology design and use. they arise because standards affect the architecture of information. as libicki notes, standards promote different patterns regardingwho is connected to whom and what is expressed easily or not; socialrelations vary, depending on whether a communications protocol is topdown or bottomup; and the choice of programming language affects therelationship of programmers to their managers.29like protocol standards, many nontechnical norms facilitate compatibility and interoperability among users. because they, too, have òpositivenetwork externalitiesó that promote their de facto acceptance, this largerstructure of technological and social practices acquires considerable inertia and hence becomes difficult to change.30 moreover, the stronger thecomplementarities among the component elements of the resulting structure, the more likely it is to undergo gradual adaptations through incremental modification rather than radical change.this is the sense in which one may speak of particular features of thesystemsõ software components, or of certain conventions among networkusers, as having become òlocked in.ó but it is important to emphasize thatthe extent of òlockinó depends on the degree of complementarity amongcomponents. tcp/ip illustrates the point. because the internet, comparedto other communications networks, can tolerate great heterogeneityamong the components that may be interconnected, it permits a greaterdiversity of practices and associated values among its users, facilitatingthe inclusion of a broad range of systems in the overall network. this29see libicki, standards: the rough road to the common byte, 1995.30karl wameryd. 1990. òconventions: an evolutionary approach,ó constitutional politicaleconomy, 1:83107.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks37inclusiveness can inhibit radical modification of the systemõs underlyingtechnologies. this is another face on the internet as infrastructure: broaddependence can slow evolution.interconnectionñinternetworkingñis thus the most obvious valuein the internet, though just one stage in a complex evolution. it embodiesone possible technical solutionñalbeit a solution that was reinforced byits comparative generality and flexibilityñto interconnecting host computers of different kinds of networks based on different technologies. theinternetõs principal forerunner, the arpanet, developed while alternative solutions were being worked on or were already available. they included the efforts of computer vendors such as the parc xns protocolfrom xerox and the unixtounix copy protocol (uucp), originally developed in the bell labs of at&t and licensed out at very low cost. theseefforts reflected a perceived need among researchers to interconnect thetechnically diverse networks that had already come into existence, at leastin the united states.31an intentional expansion of networking into the research communityña broadening of interconnectionñwas enabled by nsfõs mid1980slaunch of nsfnet, a network that connected six research supercomputercenters and became a backbone (along with networks established by thedepartment of energy and the national aeronautics and space administration) for the larger network of networks.32 a crucial early decisionof nsf, after intense internal negotiations, was to base nsfnet ontcp/ip.33 another important decision led nsf to foster development ofregional networks, which aggregated traffic from and provided technicalsupport to smaller networks such as campuses.34these regional networks evolved in the second half of the 1980s, andmany of them were cosponsored by business organizations that, withincertain limits, were allowed to use the networks for commercial purposes.thus, a new type of hybrid network appeared on the landscape of datanetworks, and with a very different set of users. some of the regional31katie hafner and matthew lyon, 1996, where wizards stay up late: the origins of theinternet, new york: simon & schuster; john s. quarterman, 1990, the matrix. computer networks and conferencing systems worldwide, bedford, ma: digital press; peter h. salus, 1995,casting the net. from arpanet to internet and beyond, reading, ma/ menlo park, ca:addisonwesley.32see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1988,toward a national research network. washington, d.c.: national academy press.33juan d. rogers. 1998. òinternetworking and the politics of science: nsfnet in internethistory,ó the information society 14:213228.34see cstb, realizing the information future, 1994.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38global networks and local valuesnetworks spun off commercial networksñfor example, nysernet in thenew york area produced psiñbut most of the original regional networksfaded away after the removal of nsf support (prompted by the commercialization of the backbone), the decommissioning of nsfnet in 1995,and the rise of commercial isps. during their heyday, however, these regional networks and their local tributariesñbased on local area network(lan) technology, x.25, sna, decnet, and other systemsñwere heterogeneous both socially and technically.interconnection was only one dimension; just as important was themotivation behind it. this included not only the need for communicationper se but the sharing of information and computational resources. thesefactors were illustratedñand exploredñin the expansion of lans. asthe number of workstations and personal computers in businesses anduniversities began to grow, vendors began to develop network technology to interconnect the computers and make it possible for users to shareinformation and move files.35many organizations adopted ethernet, token ring, or token bus technology and built their own (isolated) networks, which were used for internal purposes and initially not designed for connection to external networks. but in the second half of the 1980s, more and more lans, includingmany campus networks, were linked to the internet, while corporatelans were linked to private widearea networks. these developments,and their influence on how and where people did their work, stimulatedbusiness executives to rethink strategies of vertical integration. they began to consider technologybased alternativesñsuch as decentralization,outsourcing via interorganizational networks, and the creation of the networked firmñto the traditional model of the corporation.as networks evolved outside the business domain, the interplay ofvalues and technology was even more apparent. most of the noncommercial networks interconnected universities, governmental and nongovernmental organizations, and eventually private households, selfhelpgroups, and the like. these noncommercial networks grew up among usercommunities with similar interestsñinitially, people who were active users of particular computer systems or software and who wanted to communicate with kindred spirits. such systems could be called òcooperativenetworks,ó because users or user organizations were involved in settingup the network and coordinating its functions, even though a traditionalnetwork provider sometimes operated it.35computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999.funding a revolution: government support for computing research. washington d.c.: nationalacademy press, pp. 169183.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks39notable cooperative networks that evolved in the research and education communities were the computer science network (csnet) andbitnet. email communication, which unexpectedly had proved to bethe most popular application of arpanet, was the dominant service incsnet and bitnet as well. supported with limited funds from the national science foundation, csnet connected computer science departments that had no access to the arpanet and therefore lacked sophisticated facilities to communicate, collaborate, and share ideas.early on, computer scientists formed a kind of community, initiallybuilt around the timeshared computer and later around programminglanguages, operating systems, and computer networks.36 their sense ofbeing pioneers in a revolutionary change of informationprocessingshaped the spirit of collaboration, informality, and even social responsibility behind the values and rules that guided these researchersõ use ofnetworks in the late 1970s and early 1980s.37 however, by the late 1980s,the increase in nsf support for networking by other kinds of scientistsled to concern among computer scientists that their own support could beeroded. here, sharing collided with competition for resources.38bitnet was an extragovernmental effort. based on ibm technology,this completely decentralized network was set up by universities and research centers to facilitate information exchange between faculty, students, and administrative staff. bitnet extended the computercommunications infrastructure beyond csnet, both in terms of the number andkind of people connectedñthat is, it involved a much wider range of researchers than computer scientists alone. bitnet was associated witheducom, a nonprofit consortium of highereducation institutions thatfacilitated access to information resources in teaching, learning, scholarship, and research.all the early academic and research networks fostered email discussion vehicles. most remarkable was the uucpbased usenet, a systemof newsgroups (bulletin boards) that was originally designed as a forumin which unix users could discuss their problems and assist each other.very soon, usenet grew into a platform for a broad variety ofnewsgroups, including antiauthoritarian student groups and hacker com36arthur l. norberg and judy e. oõneill. 1996. transforming computer technology. information processing for the pentagon, 19621986. baltimore: johns hopkins university press. seealso cstb, funding a revolution, 1999.37volker leib and raymund werle. 1998. òcomputemetze als infrastrukturen undkommunikationsmedien der wissenschaft,ó rundfunk and fernsehen 46(23):254273.38see cstb, funding a revolution, 1999.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40global networks and local valuesmunities.39 usenet relied on selforganization and also on selfrestraint.many of its rules and norms gave rise to an informal code of conduct forinternet usersñsuch as ònever disturb the flow of informationó and òevery user has the right to say anything and to ignore anythingóñthat issometimes referred to as netiquette. this code was viewed by those whoadopted it as a natural extension of the fundamental values of americansociety, such as freedom of speech.as the complex of research and education networks grew, federal program managers became concerned about the ways in which governmentfunded infrastructure would be used. the result was an effort, at least bythe program managers, to limit usage of the early internet components,and notably of nsfnet, by means of an òacceptable use policyó (aup).in practice, enforcing an aup was difficult; it depended on an honor system. and it effected a distinction between those with legitimate accessand thoseñtypically, parties seeking commercial gainñwithout it.practically, though, the more people experienced the communicationscapability and information access afforded by the internet, the more theywanted to use it; differentiating sanctioned research and education activities from other uses seemed increasingly arbitrary and artificial. avoidingthe effect of the aup, in fact, was one reason for the commercialization ofthe internet backbone and the decommissioning of nsfnet in 1995. toenable that transition, nsf provided seed funding for publicñas opposedto the intragovernmentalñnetworktraffic exchange points (network access points), at which multiple providers of private backbones could interconnect. this step promoted interconnection and the prospect of multiple isps; commercial isps, meanwhile, had banded together tounderwrite their own exchange facilities, the commercial internet exchange (cix).40in contrast to the multifaceted growth of computer networks in theunited states, progress was slower overseas. although both the csnetand bitnet networks, as well as the arpanet,41 had links to europe,the longlasting european aversion to tcp/ip appears to have been a crucial reason why research and education networks developed slowly there39michael hauben and ronda hauben. 1997. netizens. on the history and impact of usenetand the internet. los alamitos, ca: ieee computer society press.40see cstb, realizing the information future, 1994. also see juan d. rogers, 1998, internetworking and the politics of science: nsfnet in internet history, the information society14:213222; carl malamud, 1993, exploring the internet. a technical travelogue, englewoodcliffs, nj: prenticehall.41the joint academic network (janet) was setup in britain and used by universities,the ministry of defense, and research organizations. see malamud, exploring the internet. atechnical travelogue, 1993.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks41and never transformed themselves into commercially viable networks. ittook tcp/ip and its supporters another half decade to achieve acceptancein continental europe.42 the german example may be the best illustrationof policy failure in this respect; industrial policy goals, a commitment toòopen standards,ó and the conviction that it could catch up with the technology leader by a solo effort more or less ensured this failure.ibmõs initiative to launch and sponsor the european academic andresearch network (earn, an extension of bitnet) in the early 1980swas welcomed by the research community. within 6 months after earnstarted operation, 75 mainframes had been interconnected in germany.by the mid1980s, more than 500 computers in the research organizationsof 19 countries were linked to earn. this system required permissionfrom the european telecommunications monopolies, which up to that timehad never agreed to allow data to be transmitted across national bordersthrough private lines. the earn board of directors had to struggle hardto get that permission. there were also problems with governments. theywere concerned that earn might be part of ibmõs strategy to expandmarket dominanceñnot least because initially only ibm mainframes anddigital equipmentõs vaxes could be linked via earn. although somegovernments had no objection to the project, others, among them the germans, were only willing to give the green light on the condition that earnevolve into an osibased system. this was agreed to, but it never actuallymaterialized.the german government reacted to earn by initiating thewissenschaftsnetz (science network). this was consistent with government programs to support the german computer industry and its mostprominent corporation, siemens. technical standards played a significantrole in this strategy. in a concerted action, most european governmentshad declared support for open, nonproprietary standards based on theosi frame of reference. germany thus insisted that the wissenschaftsnetzbe based on osi standards as well. it was managed by the vereindeutsches forschungsnetz (german research network association),whose members were drawn mainly from universities and large nonacademic research institutions.in contrast with the united states or the united kingdom, where dedicated organizations were charged with operating the network, in germany the pttñthe bundespost (telekom)ñwas regarded as the ònaturaló candidate to provide this service. the bundespost had the monopolyright for networks but extremely little experience with packetswitched42malamud, exploring the internet. a technical travelogue, 1993.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42global networks and local valuesdata communications.43 like practically all of its european partners, thebundespost was committed to osi. thus the wissenschaftsnetz was embedded in an institutional structure controlled by people who were notonly not open to alternatives to osi but rigorously rejected applicationsfrom computer scientists and software engineers to support tcp/iprelated r&d.althoughñor becauseñosi was shielded from competition, it tookyears until products based on osi standards were available that had anyappeal for users x.400based email software, for instance, did not appearon the market until tcp/ipbased products were well established.44 thatlack of competition, together with its reliance on an official and ratherslow osi standardization process and its failure to involve users in thedevelopment of products and services, greatly limited the german research and education networkõs evolutionary dynamics. thus thewissenschaftsnetz did not attract many users.today, internet service providers, telephone companies, cabletelevision companies, wireless device and service companies, computer hardware and software vendors, media companies, and all kinds of firms engaged in ecommerce use the internet as an infrastructure and a businesschannel. this has again changed the character of the internet, but it hasnot done away with its fundamental characteristics: decentralization, userinvolvement, openness, and selforganization (by which is meant a network infrastructure designed to allow groups to organize themselves touse it). it would be misleading, however, to infer that todayõs òcommunityó of internet users is homogeneous, cohesive, collegial, or has values,objectives, and skills similar to those of the early internet pioneers. butthis only means that, from a culture and values perspective, the internethas become even more heterogeneous than it was a decade ago.2.4global networks and changing values: towardconvergence or divergence?what has been emphasized in the preceding sections of this chapter ishow the characteristics of the internet derive from its development path,how users have influenced that path of development, and how the resulting network has and will continue to influence the users. an importantfurther question to consider is how a system with these technical and social43raymund werle. 2000. òthe impact of information networks on the structure of political systems,ó understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and culturalvalues, christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., 167192, badenbaden: nomos.44schmidt and werle, coordinating technology, 1998, pp. 230243.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks43characteristics can be òcoordinated.ó depending on who is addressing theissue, that word may mean managed, governed, or regulated. but each ofthose terms is valueladen and can generate significant resistance, especially among those most closely associated with the internetõs origins.45it remains to be seen whether the antihierarchical culture of information freedom that is so much a part of the internetõs history will surviveand continue to animate resistance to local regulation. this history feedsthe perception, in some quarters, of the internet as sociotechnologicallyso distinct from other communication systems that it should be treated asa special caseñthat it should not be brought into the established framework by which sovereign states and local political entities have longsought to control or regulate access to information.a source of countervailing economic and political pressureñindeed,a countervailing òcultureóñhas been created by the policy decision topromote this technology as the communications infrastructure for interactive electronic commerce. in many countries, the internet is seen as apositive force for economic development, generating acceptance despiteconcerns about some of the content that may be communicated or usesthat may be supported. as a consequence, the efforts of technologists,entrepreneurs, and internationalbusinesslaw specialists to facilitategreater use of the internet for conducting public business are being widelyhailed today as socially beneficial innovations.among the likely consequences of these developments is reinforcement of the dual trend toward, on the one hand, adapting the internet formore secure and private pointtopoint communications, and, on theother, using it as a medium for mass broadcasting of video, music, andtext. the alignment of business interests with the first of these would seemto favor technologies that weaken the abilities of government to monitorand control content in interactive communications, an area that sovereignstates have traditionally been less disposed to regulate.46 still, businessorganizations have long ago learned to accommodate themselves to thegreater sensitivities of governments regarding unregulated broadcaststhat might carry unwelcome news or disruptive messages.meanwhile, at the international level, the itu (like other nongovernmental organizations) has been assessing how it could respond to the upheaval in telecommunications and related activities, from standards set45see blumenthal, òarchitecture and expectations: networks of the worldunite!,ó 2000.46ithiel de sola pool. 1990. technologies without boundaries: on telecommunications in aglobal age. cambridge, ma: harvard university press, chapter 7.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44global networks and local valuesting to broader policymaking, associated with the internet. the failure ofosi to achieve commercial success and the success of tcp/ip commercially sent clear signals about process problems. an indication of the potential for change, or at least a willingness to consider different approaches, is a 1998 itu document that observes: òcompetition intelecommunications is rapidly becoming a true market force whose evolution cannot be planned by policymakers, a force which increasingly isseen as best regulated on the basis of principles that are not specific totelecommunications but derived from a broader economic, social and cultural perspective.ó47some of the concerns posed by the internet relate to its technologiesfor distributing information, which affect private parties with propertyinterest in certain content as well as governments interested not only inprotecting those privateproperty rights but also in meeting their own mission needs (which may be expressed in differing degrees of support fordistribution of different kinds of content to different segments of the population). the internet presents òthe culture of sovereign controló with technical challenges that are not present when information comes embodiedin conventional, tangible media such as newspapers, books, films, phonograph records, and audiocassette tapes or when signals are transmittedthrough physical channels, as is the case with telegraph, telex, and telephone messages. even with regard to the broadcast media, domestic regulations and international conventions that restrict broadcasters to particular frequencies also serve to make it more feasible to identify, and interferewith, transmission and reception of particular sources of radio and tvmessages.nevertheless, increasing commercial use of the internet is drivingboth technical changes and consideration of nontechnical interventions.as lessig has put it, the òchanges that make commerce possible will alsobe changes that will make regulation easy.ó48 for example, company interests in understanding customer behavior have driven the design ofmechanisms for collecting personal information; this has led to increasedprivacy concerns, and to experimentation with technologies to permitanonymous interactions. large organizations that use the internet havedeveloped firewalls, which can limit traffic coming into and going out ofthe organizationõs network, as well as softwareñe.g., email filtersñtomonitor the kinds of communications that network users send. mean47international telecommunications union, draft strategic plan for the union 19992003,dated 1998. available online at <http://www.itu.int/newsroom/press/pp98/documents/stratplan9903.html>.48lawrence lessig. 1999. code and other laws of cyberspace. new york: basic books, p. 30.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the evolution of global networks4549see david d. clark and marjory s. blumenthal, 2000, òrethinking the design of theinternet: the end to end arguments vs. the brave new world,ó presented at tprc, september 24; available online at <http://www.tprc.org/agendaoo.htm>.while, governments are contemplating use of the internet for criminalpurposes and the feasibility of eavesdropping or otherwise intervening incommunications. all of these developments raise questions about whetherthe fundamental internet architecture principles can be preserved.49do these developments pose a threat to local values? the analysis inthis chapter suggests that the increasing dominance of a commercial culture on the internet will be likely to produce a situation in which localjurisdictions will have considerable autonomy as well as greater technicalcapabilities to restrict local consumption of internet content, at least aslong as they do not use that power in blatant efforts to protect local commercial enterprises from the competition of politically powerful international media organizations. the implication is that the variations in localcultural norms are unlikely to be swept aside by the future spread andpenetration of internetbased services.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.463understanding local values and howthey are affected by global networks3.1introductionsome value judgments, like the objection to child pornography, areessentially universal. but even nations as culturally close as the unitedstates and germany are divided on many value issues. for example, inthe light of its history, germany has actually banned rightwing publications that would be allowed, even if not admired, in the united states. onthe other hand, americans in large numbers deem certain materials pornographic that most germans would find inoffensive (see box 3.1 for theseand other examples). these kinds of contrasts would seem to lead to thestark and simplistic assertion that global networks threaten local values.but the reality is much more complex. the purpose of this backgroundchapter is to lay the conceptual foundation for understanding what values are, so that the interaction of global networks with the particularvaluedriven issues addressed in later chapters can be better understood.there is no universal agreement on what the term ôòvalueóõ means.the dictionary definition (òa principle, standard, or quality consideredworthwhile or desirableó1) has a questionbegging quality to it. althoughalmost all behavioral and social scientists deal with values in one way oranother, they tend to avoid the term and replace it with more specificconcepts. economists, for example, typically focus on behavioral responses to incentives, with the assumption that they are a measure of1the american heritage dictionary of the english language, third edition. new york:houghton mifflin company.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected47box 3.1 public views of internet risksa study commissioned by the bertelsmann foundation1 posed two questions to people 18 years and older in the two countries. the first questionconcerned risks that they associate with the internet. each interviewee couldname as many risks as he or she wished. the responses were as follows:riskusagermanydata protection22%24%pornography13%17%protection of minorsa21%6%fraud, manipulation8%3%presentation of violence2%3%athe distinction between pornography and protection of minors is one of perception, not necessarily of substance, by the persons who responded to the interviewersof the bertelsmann foundation. the same caveat applies to the distinction betweenpornography and nudity in the second table.the second question addressed attitudes toward censorship. each interviewee was allowed to name the kinds of content that he or she would liketo see banned from the internet. this yielded the following:content typeusagermanyracist speech63%79%violence39%61%pornography59%60%politically radical speech26%58%nudity43%13%these responses are striking in number of aspects. first, although similar percentages of respondents in the two countries felt that risks were associated with internet content, german respondents were much more likelyto endorse banning such content. second, the distinctions made betweenpornography and nudity suggest very different perceptions in the two countries of what constitutes pornography. third, the similar percentages ofpeople judging pornography to be a risk, compared to the divergenceamong those judging possible injury to minors to be a risk, also suggest adifference in perception. finally, the wide range of reactions to differentkinds of objectionable speech in the united states compared with germany appears noteworthy.1bertelsmann foundation, ed., 2000, òrisk assessment and opinions concerning the control ofmisuse on the internet. results of representative surveys conducted in the united states, australia and the federal republic of germany.ó a project by the bertelsmann foundation, germany,in conjunction with the australian broadcasting authority (aba), allensbach archives, ifdsurvey 3296, available online at <http://www.stiftung.bertelsmann.de/internetcontent/english/frameset. htm content/c2000.htm> (30.03.00); printed version in jens waltermann and marcelmachill, eds., protecting our children on the internet: towards a new culture of responsibility,global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48global networks and local values(and do not themselves affect) values. nevertheless, analysis of valueshas increasedñand improved in qualityñwith the recognition that values can change; they can be affected by public policy, and they influencehow people respond to public policy.2this study aims specifically at understanding the influence of globalnetworks on local values, and the public unease to which it gives rise, inorder to provide advice to political actors on howñand whetherñto takeaction. under the circumstances, it is difficult to avoid the general question of what values are, what function they have for the individual, society, and government, and what makes them local. the following sectionstake up these issues and their implications.3.2are values always the issue?although public concern with the impact of global networks is oftencast in terms of the effect on local values, in some instances the perceivedthreat to a value is a proxy for a more tangible threat. thus, if people askto be shielded from inadvertent access to depictions of brutal violence,they may well be driven by a fear of the traumañthat is, the mental injuryñthat exposure to such scenes might produce rather than a principledobjection to the exposure itself. some forms of crude pornography mightfall into the same category. thus, the objection could be based both on anormative conviction concerning graphic violence and a selfpreservingconcern for oneõs mental health.there is a subtle, but real, difference here. measures aimed at promoting a normative conviction, or value, are intended to encourage conformity among those who might not be inclined to accept it, though asingle violation would not challenge its validity or lead to any great harm.a trauma, on the other hand, hits those whose normative conviction maybe quite firm. and a single exposure can be enough to cause unacceptableharm.3in fact, although there are some differences in how they are manifested in the united states and germany, arguments to limit access topornography or portrayals of violence are frequently justified in terms ofthe need to protect minors rather than as a question of morality. to someextent, the approach may be disingenuous in that adults who object todepictions of nudity might simply find it more convenient and effective2henry j. aaron et al., eds. 1994. values and public policy. washington, d.c.: brookingsinstitution.3j. douglas bremner and charles r. marmar, eds. 1998. trauma, memory, and dissociation.washington, d.c.: american psychiatric press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected49to use the childprotection argument than to have to defend the value inthe abstract. of course, this strategy could lead policymakers and designers to develop legal tools and technical approaches specifically directed atminors, which would do little to deal with the actual concerns thatprompted the outcry.4the german treatment of nazi speech illustrates still another distinction (box 3.2). the use of nazi symbols, open adherence to nazi ideology,or the distribution of nazi publications without a strong disclaimer is atabooña very strong form of protecting and enforcing a value judgement.anyone openly breaking the taboo, even once, is alienated from the community. yet, the violation does not necessarily threaten the taboo. in fact,occasional breaches can even help a society enforce the tabooed value; itcan be argued that the common and visible defense of the taboo can serveas a powerful social bond. at the limit, a society may even define itself byits shared taboos.5 to some extent, these same arguments might alsoapply to values that are part of what has been called political correctness.finally, there are the circumstances in which the potential harm is notthe content itself, but its use in the outside, nonvirtual world. the mostobvious case is the publication of bombbuilding instructions. the concern in that instance does not arise because the communication challengesthe principle that it is wrong to kill people. the value itself is not in danger, though peopleõs lives might be.in these examples, the issue is less a threat to a local value than it is abroader social or political problem. but there are also instances in whichglobal networks may serve to promote local values that have been undermined by political considerations. for example, global networks givegerman citizens access to environmental information that the germangovernment holds but has been hesitant to release, despite its legal obligation to do so. and the very fact that information of that kind is madeavailable in other countries through the internet may pressure germanadministrators to move toward more open policies.6compared to the situation in germany, the issue of government openness has been less problematic in the united states. moreover, globalnetworks serve to multiply sources of information there at a time whenconsolidation in other media has raised concern that the diversity of viewpoints made available to the publicñalso a clear local valueñmight bereduced.4see chapter 5 (òfree speech and the internetó) for more discussion.5horst reimann. 1989. òtabu,ò staatslexikon. freiburg: recht wirtschaft gesellschaft, 420.6see chapter 6 (òprivacy and freedom of informationó) for more discussion.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50global networks and local valuesbox 3.2 the nazi taboo: germany versus amazon.comin the summer of 1999, german minister of justice dr. herta d−ublergmelin called on amazon.com and barnesandnoble.com to stop sellingand distributing the english translation of hitlerõs book mein kampf togermany. d−ublergmelin also urged german media giant bertelsmannto influence barnesandnoble.com, in which it has a 40 percent interest.furthermore, a speaker of the german ministry of justice suggested that itwas possible to prosecute managers of barnesandnoble.com andamazon.com when traveling in germany. in initial discussions, the companies were resistant; a spokeswoman from amazon.com said: òwe are au.s. store. we view this as though a german was on vacation here andwent into a physical bookstore and bought the books.ó but amazon.comand barnesandnoble.com later decided to stop shipping mein kampf tocustomers located in germany.the issue came up when a germanbased researcher for the wiesenthalcenter ordered mein kampf and other books from the two online booksellers. the researcher who ordered the hitler book from amazon.com received an email suggesting that he might also be interested in whitepower, by the american nazi leader george lincoln rockwell. in 1999,the numbers of orders of mein kampf reached a top ten list for germanbuyers, a fact that the company displayed on its web site. however, as thedisplayed statistics showed, many of the german buyers bought the booksnot for racial motives but for historical and academic interests. they alsobought inoffensive biographies of hitler, historical studies, and even booksby karl marx.it is illegal in germany to distribute writings like mein kampf, designedto incite racial hatred, at least in the german language (para 86 and 130german penal code). foreign exporters to germany must heed these prohibitions, although the case with respect to english translations is not unequivocal. in 1995, german authorities successfully prosecuted and jailedan american citizen, gary lauck, for distributing illegal propaganda andfor encouraging racial hatred. he served a fouryear sentence.in most countries the publication of mein kampf can be prevented byrefusing to license the copyright, which is held by the state of bavaria asthe legal successor to hitlerõs publisher. that is not possible, however, inthe united states and in the united kingdom. the rights to publish meinkampf in these countries were sold in 1933.sources: john burgess, òamazon reverses on hitler book,ó washington post,november 18, 1999; michael hanfeld, òhitler lesen,ó frankfurter allgemeinezeitung, august 11, 1999.amy harmon, òtechnology: internet sale of nazi books in germany is assailed,ónew york times, august 9, 1999.stefan ulrich, òmachtlos gegen mein kampf,ó august 11,1999.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected513.3the function of valuesto understand a concept as complex as that of values, one needs to beable to interpret and apply it. for purposes of the present study, that canbest be achieved by delineating their function for the individual, for society, and for government. in this way, one neednõt be wedded to a particular set of values. in fact, by being clear about the functions that valuesserve, their òevolutionary potentialó becomes clear as well.3.3.1understanding is interpretingalthough philosophers have put considerable effort into makingsense out of the question, òwhat is a chair?ó, most of us are satisfied thatwe know one when we see one. for the semantically identical question,òwhat is a local value?ó, the commonsense answer does not work as well.what a value is depends on how we look at it, and the framework foranalyzing the question is not neutral. the way the problem is framed isinherently normative, and it inevitably has an impact on whatever answer is given.nearly all the behavioral and social sciences have their own view ofwhat values are. ethics is obviously about values, but philosophers alsorely on values when they insist that understanding is interpreting. theyargue that reality cannot be understood without some attempt to interpret what its purpose is and what it does.7 some philosophers go evenfurther. they conceive of humans as social animals and see normativity(or values) as the precondition for passing from the isolated individual toa society.8rationalchoice analysis starts from the premise that each individualmaximizes his or her own utility. rationality, rather than a morality ofgroup obligation, guides decisions. this view is predominant in economics, but also has its adherents in political science and sociology. the distinction between preferences and restrictions is fundamental in rationalchoice models. values become institutions that restrict choice. badconscience is considered to be a psychic cost. commonly shared valuesare modeled as social norms. these restrictions are interpreted as toolsthat facilitate the coordination of behavior and, in that sense, as goods notprovided by the market.97hans albert. 1978. 8norm, person, gesellschaft. berlin: duncker & humblot.9gary s. becker. 1976. the economic approach to human behavior. chicago: university ofchicago press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52global networks and local valueson the other hand, secondgeneration models of rationality incorporate values into a more nuanced understanding of preferences. in thisperspective, preferences are no longer taken for granted; values are key tothe formation of preference.10 a third view starts from the observationthat two or more persons may share a given value. this is a way of adding context, or history, and leads to rational choices and behaviors thatoptimize values involving more than one individual.11sociology is concerned with the societybuilding function of values.integration theory views values as a sort of a social glue. in the approachof systems theory, each subsystemñfor example, the economy, the law,or politicsñis held together by its particular formal code, such as price,legality, or power. the formality of the code opens subsystems up toflexible principles, or values, that may differ from society to society.12sociology also provides a way to interpret or measure how more generaldescriptions of a societyñsuch as its closed or open natureñmanifestthemselves in particular value sets.13in psychology, which is concerned with explaining behavior, valuesarise in at least three different ways. they help the individual understandthe social environment to which he or she reacts. they manifest themselves as attitudes that help the individual choose between competingcourses of action. and they motivate behavior, inducing the individual totranslate attitude into action.14the study and practice of law are about formal institutions. the interpretation of statutes or the identification of analogous cases in law isinevitably shaped by values.15 in legal methodology, this is called teleo10elinor ostrom. 1998. òa behavioral approach to the rational choice theory of collective action,ó presidential address of the american political science association 1997, inamerican political science review 92(1; march) 122.11mark granovetter. 1995. òeconomic action and social structure: the problem ofembeddedness,ó american journal of sociology 91(3; november): 481510.12dirk baecker. 2000. ònetworking the web,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller,eds., understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values,law and economics of international telecommunications, vol. 42, 93111, badenbaden:nomos.13gabriel a. almond and sidney verba. 1965. the civic culture: political attitudes anddemocracy in five nations: an analytic study. boston: little.14john robert anderson, 1999, òcognitive psychology and its implications,ó new york: freeman;nicola dıring, 1999, kommunikationsprozesse, identit−ten, soziale beziehungen und gruppen, gıttingen: hogrefe; sarakiesler, jane siegel, and timothy w. mcguire, 1984, òsocial psychological aspects of computermediated communication,ó american psychologist 39:11231134; sherry turkle, 1996, òconstructions and reconstructions of self in virtual reality: playing in the mudõs,ó the american prospect 24 (winter), available online at <http://www.prospect.org/archives/24/24turk.html>.15josef esser. 1970. vorverst−ndnis und methodenwahl in der rechtsfindung. frankfurt:athen−um.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected53logical construction. in the modern world, where neither history nor divine authority establishes law, the legitimacy of the legal code is, itself, anormative question. in other words, laws need to be legitimated by values.16 and the law adds a helpful methodological distinction betweenrules and principles. rules can be expressed in conditional terms: if a,then b. principles are characterized by their finality. those bound by aprinciple seek to realize it in each situation to which it might apply.17values are more like principles than rules.finally, cultural theory adds relativity to the picture. in this perspective, value a is not only liable to be replaced by value b over a period oftime. they might command attention at the same time, even though theymay promote entirely different perspectives or even be somewhat contradictory. cultural theory deliberately foregoes intellectual neatness and,on the contrary, investigates how societies manage to balance differentsolidarities, or value orientations. it thereby also helps us understandwhy and how values change.18this rapid tour is obviously not meant to be an exhaustive discussionof the meaning of the term òvalues.ó19 indeed, our understanding of whatvalues are, and what makes them òlocal,ó will always be tenuous andsubject to change. however, the framework is useful in remindingpolicymakers of the many dimensions of the issue that must be considered when examining the influences of global networks. policymakersmust also be aware of the functions that values serve as they considerwhere and when action is called for. the following sections address thatquestion.16it should be noted that a number of legal scholars, particularly in the united states,would argue that law and values are not quite as separable and values are not quite asarbitrary as is suggested in this paragraph. and americans would not necessarily link lawand formal institutions in the ways that germans would. however, this formulation allowsboth german and american systems to be placed in the same framework and still allows forarguments that societal laws should conform to or reflect natural lawñwhich, in a sense, isan argument for how the legal code is legitimized.17robert alexy. 1996. theorie der grundrechte. frankfurt am main: suhrkamp.18michael thompson. 2000. òglobal networks and local cultures; what are the mismatches and what can be done about them?ó understanding the impact of global networks onlocal social, political and cultural values (law and economics of international telecommunications 42), christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., badenbaden: nomos, 113129.19further material elucidating the function of values for individuals, society, and government is to be found in elkhart scilicet, 1998, on custom in the economy, oxford, england:clarendon press; and bruno s. frey, 1999, economics as a science of human behaviour, boston:kluwer academic publications.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54global networks and local values3.3.2function for the individualvalues endow the individual with yardsticksña normative languagethat allows him or her to distinguish. they provide guidance on whethercertain behaviors are desirable or not, and to what extent. they provide abasis for deciding on oneõs own behavior. but understanding, judging,and deciding are normally a balancing exercise, with several values coming into play, and not all of oneõs actions are actually guided by such adeliberate decision process.20 nevertheless, it provides both comfort andassurance to have a set of values, and the capacity to apply them in adeliberate process of decision making, when faced with new circumstances.the normative grammar of personal values also helps to form hypotheses of what the behavior of other individuals means. and it helpspredict how others are likely to react to a personõs actions. in both ways,values serve as a cognitive tool to guide social behavior.finally, an individual needs values for selfevaluation. human beings require selfesteem, which comes from a sense of achievement. personal values tell the individual which achievements are worthy of selfesteem. indeed, one can argue that values are a key to consciousnessitself; many argue that consciousness presupposes the ability to look atoneself from the outside, and values are an instrument for doing so. byadopting a set of values, the individual effectively gains access to an external reference that, in effect, provides the independent point of observation that is necessary for consciousness.213.3.3function for societyfrom a practical point of view, individuals are always part of somesociety. they may move from one society or social grouping to anotherthroughout their lives, but each one contributes to shaping a personõs values and, in turn, displays values shaped by the individuals who compriseit. some argue that the very notion of reality is socially constructed, andthat individual values are socially preformed.22 others go further, argu20for greater detail see gird gigerenzer and peter m. todd, eds., 1997, simple heuristicsthat make us smart, oxford: oxford university press.21wolfgang kersting, 2000, òglobal networks and local values. some philosophical remarks from an individualist point of view,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds.,understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, 927,badenbaden: nomos; dıring (supra note 14).22gebhardt rusch and siegfried schmidt, eds. 1992. konstruktivismus. geschichte undanwendung. frankfurt am main: suhrkamp.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected55ing that only by defining himself or herself as a member of a normativelyconstructed society can an individual become a person, conscious anddistinct from other animal species.23nevertheless, it makes sense to distinguish between the role that values play for the individual and the related but distinct role that valuesplay for society. unlike the state, society is not a clearcut concept anddoes not have precise boundaries. each social interaction, from the mosttransient to the most permanent, from two individuals in a business transaction to the citizens who make up a nation, is a manifestation of someform of society. individuals may be part of a narrowly defined socialgroup, such as a profession. they may view themselves as being part of amuch more loosely knit network like the community of workers. theonly link may be a territorial one, as for the inhabitants of a region. or thesocial nexus may be the factual overlay of a legal condition, such as citizenship. the voluntary and virtual community of the internet and itsmany epistemic (specialized) subgroups are, in this respect, merely asomewhat modified societal form.from the viewpoint of society, values basically serve three purposes.they convey information, they facilitate coordination, and they give thegroup an identity. society is first and foremost an informational community. precisely because they share values, members can interpret the behavior of other members and establish expectations about it. this is particularly important in judging the credibility of what one person says toanother about his or her intentions or commitmentsñthat is, theindividualõs behavior in the future. the greater the extent to which theintended or promised behavior conforms to a common value, the morecredible is the transmitted information.the communication of information is key to the coordination of behavior, as game theory shows. if two individuals canõt talk to each otherbefore they act and share no common values, neither has a basis for making an educated guess as to how the other will behave. and if they talk toeach other but do not understand each otherõs values, neither can predictwhether the other will keep any promises made.finally, some common value acceptance is the bedrock of group identity. all members of the group must actually adhere to the value, and allmembers want to be sure that all others do so as well. normative valuesform a cognitive framework for allowing individuals to understand socialreality. moreover, society organizes itself around shared values. thusthe function of society is to help individuals by guaranteeing values, andthe function of these same values is to give cohesion and identity to the23jakobs (supra note 8).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56global networks and local valuessociety. common values, in other words, are a key ingredient in societalintegration.24 and integration reflects how society and the state are tiedtogether.if a single local value is challenged or eroded, social cohesion andintegration are unlikely to be deeply affected. indeed, a societyõs set ofvalues has never been totally stable over time. traditional values havebeen challenged whenever a sufficiently large stratum of society has beenexposed to different cultures. but society is an adaptive organism; it adjusts to the new values, rebalances the old ones, and usually bends without breaking. however, all societies have certain values that are fundamental for the selfdefinition of the group and that weaken group cohesionif challenged. when several such values are challenged simultaneously,rapid adaptation can be highly threatening.these, then, become important analytical benchmarks against whichto judge the effects of global networks. but it is not easy to isolate theinfluence of global networksñand in particular the internetñfrom otherfactors that affect local values. for example, in both europe and theunited states, postworld war ii affluence and the application of manykinds of technology have promoted similar patterns of changes in valuesñalbeit with differing trajectories.25 by altering peopleõs perceptionsof their nationõs wellbeing and of their own wellbeing, affluence canindirectly alter local values and, across nations similarly situated, promote some convergence of values. that convergence may eitherstrengthen or weaken efforts to preserve remaining differences, as is evident in the conflicts within the united states over multiculturalism andthe implications of an increasingly heterogeneous, pluralistic societywithin with a single nation.263.3.4function for government and formal institutionslegal formality distinguishes state and society. the state is what it isbecause its constitution defines it to be so. but such a formally constructedstate can take almost any form. at one extreme, it is little more than afictionñthe assertion, for example, of an exile group that controls no ter24klaus g. grunert. 1994. òcognition and economic psychology,ó in hermannessays on economic psychology, 91108.25daniel yankelovich. 1994. òhow changes in the economy are reshaping americanvalues,ó in henry j. aaron et al., eds., values and public policy. washington, d.c.: brookingsinstitution.26see yankelovich, ibid; also nathan glaser, 1994, òmulticulturalism and public policy,ó inhenry j. aaron et al., eds., values and public policy, washington, d.c.: brookings institution.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected57ritory, provides no services, and has earned no recognition. at the otherextreme, it may exist as an absolute dictatorship, with great power but nolegitimacy. in neither case is there a need for values. realworld statesfall inbetween. they are connected with their citizenry and related totheir society by shared values. these values serve three purposes. theyprovide a basis for the development of statutes to which people are inclined to adhere. conversely, they give legitimacy to a government whoseactions and laws conform to the shared values. and finally, commonlyshared and protected values are as important an instrument for buildinga national identity as they are for building a social identity.3.3.5the dynamics of valuesit is important to remember that time itself alters the relations between individuals, society, and the state. individual life has a definedbeginning and an equally defined end. since no one is born with a set ofvalues, each person has to learn them. states can also begin and end. anew state is founded by secession, unification, or revolution. and in thesame way, an old state can perish. such events change values over timefor people and the states of which they are a part.27 this is equally true ofsocieties or social groups. local values may have their origins in a blurredpast that is seldom completely abandoned. however, the set of valuesevolves over time, triggered by events in the world, a changed composition of the population, or fresh ideas. indeed, one may argue that this is ahealthy dynamic, responsive to changing circumstances, producing moreopen societies, and recognizing the fundamental relativity of values.the evolutionary perspective draws attention to the salutary effectsof a value system that can adapt to change over time. this is analogous tothe value of biodiversity in providing a gene pool that, through selection,can adapt life on the planet to changed conditions. anthropologists havelong drawn a parallel between genes and memes (characteristics of a culture that allow it to develop and change).28 the parallel suggests thatcultural diversity and the maintenance of marginal cultures is more thanthe nostalgic protection of a living museum.2927states do not always recognize this reality. uncovering old statutes, still on the books,that reflect the sexual mores of a previous era is a favorite pastime of the u.s. media, andbritish courts are still willing to rely on cases or statutes from the middle ages.28robert boyd and peter j. richerson. 1994. òthe evolution of norms. an anthropological view,ó journal of institutional and theoretical economics 150:7287.29paul a. david. 2000. òthe internet and the economics of network technology evolution,ó understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values,christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., badenbaden: nomos, 3971.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58global networks and local values3.4the locality of valuessome values are essentially universal, such as the revulsion to childpornography, while other values are nearly so, stretching over large partsof the world. the developed world, for example, is such a community,sharing a commitment to concepts such as human rights. still other values are connected with language zones, for language can provide a common understanding of a concept or, alternatively, can reflect the existenceof such an understanding. consider the english word òreasonable.óthere is no accurate german equivalent. and, indeed, germans, in general, value reasonableness less highly than, say, the english.many values do not spread beyond national borders. however, thisdoes not mean that local values are merely those that underlie a givenlegal order. it is true that governing is easier when constituencies sharevalues, but in democratic states it is at least debatable whether government has a mandate to form the values of its citizens. many lawyers goeven further. they argue that government may only ask its citizens toobey the law, not to believe that statutes are morally binding. consequently, penal law may protect the prevailing values only insofar as theirviolation yields socially destructive results. it is the action that is penalized, not the intention. if government oversteps the borderline betweenlegal and moral obligation, it risks becoming totalitarian.30the appropriate link between locality and values is thus not government, but society. for the last hundred years or so, there was little practical difference between the two; in the era of the nationstate, the territorialreaches of government and society were more or less the same. butwhether culture and state will continue to be so closely linked is by nomeans assured; many ask whether globalization will leave cultural boundaries unaffected. after all, the connection between the national economyand the national state already appears to be fading.31historically, culture has not always been linked to territory; it hasfrequently been more closely connected to ethnic groups. that is equallytrue today, particularly as global networks have made it rather easy tomaintain close connections across long distances, and as significant migrations have brought new diversity to the ethnic makeup of many countries. it may therefore be more appropriate to define the locality of valuesby their link to a specific culture.3230a classic on totalitarianism is frank neumann, 1983, behemoth:the structure and practiceof national socialism, 19331944, new york: octagon books.31see fritz w. scharpf. 1999. governing in europe: effective and democratic? oxford: oxforduniversity press.32anthony giddens. 1984. the constitution of society: outline of the theory of structuration.cambridge: polity press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected59finally, not all values spread homogeneously over an entire nation.regional differences are often quite robust, having been recognized andpreserved by wellentrenched regional cultures. in this respect, too, theconnection of values to culture is apparent.in describing the locality of values, one needs to distinguish a valuethat is locally practiced from one that is locally embedded. since no valueis adhered to without exception, embeddedness seems to be the more appropriate measure. it is also analytically easier to handle. embeddednessis achieved through institutions, both formal and informal, and institutions are easier to discern than mere practice or belief. even more importantly, institutions can be more easily connected to a social or legal entity.that allows us to determine how far the value reaches and to identifylocality, even where more than one institution protects the same substantive value.at first blush, this ambiguity looks like an analytical drawback, notan advantage. but locality is more related to a value system than to aparticular value. because modern societies do not really live in accordance with a hierarchical, rigid, and totally coherent order of values, therewill be overlaps and even inconsistencies among the values promoted byvarious institutions. what makes one society distinct from another is thespecific balance of values.3.5the legitimacy of valuesalthough we cannot do without values, this doesnõt mean that theprotection of values should be treated as the highest obligation of a society. too many values, the wrong values, or an improper balance of themcan even be dysfunctional. even if a set of values served well in the past,it may be a mistake to maintain it as the social environment changes.the link between values and institutions is instructive in this respect.institutions provide the means for dealing practically with social dilemmas, but there is almost always more than one institution that can do thejob. the choice between the options is normally not exclusively guidedby the expected efficacy of the institution or the costs associated with it,but also by group interest. to do something that serves the common goodhas always been a much easier way to extract rents from others than byopenly asking for the redistribution of wealth.33 for example, thomasjefferson, in pressing for the creation of publicly supported universities,argued that they were necessary óto avail the state of those talents, sown33jack knight. 1994. institutions and social conflict. cambridge: cambridge universitypress.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60global networks and local valuesequally among the poor as the rich, which perish without use if not soughtfor and cultivated.óthe legitimacy of a set of values depends on the function they have tofulfill. for family life, or for behavior toward old friends, different valuesare appropriate than for buying a book from an internet bookseller. although the result thus depends on the context, the categories can be generalized. a first distinction is the one between formal and substantivevalues.34 the archetypal formal value is tolerance. it deliberately leavesopen which substantive values another person may adopt, and asks us torespect that decision.other formal values are, for example, the moral obligation to keeponeõs promises, to abide by legitimate statutes, or to pay taxes. obviously, a person needs greater specificity than that. to make decisionsabout behavior or to understand the social environment, he or she requires substantive values. but formal values provide the means for leading a fairly consistent life. the distinction between the formal and the34see, for example, kersting (supra note 21). the formal/substantive distinction madehere and in other parts of this report is not intended as a legal description, but as a briefrecapitulation of a philosophical taxonomy. formal values are, to a first approximation,those associated with social processesñrules of behavior that facilitate discourse and, indeed, can be a key element in making a community possibleñwhile substantive values comecloser to moral convictions or beliefs. we recognize, as many political philosophers have,that the distinction is not crisp. nevertheless, we believe it is useful. an important questionis the relationship of these values to the legal system, a question made difficult for tworeasons: first, the terms themselves cause confusion because, although they are familiar inthe european context, they are not used as commonly in the u.s.; and, second, the relationship between values and law is viewed differently in angloamerican and european jurisprudential thought. with respect to the first issue, in legal terms, the formalsubstantivedistinction maps roughly onto distinctions drawn in american jurisprudence regarding neutrality and nonneutrality of law. in the context of first amendment law, for example, itcorresponds to the difference between contentneutral regulation and contentbased regulation. more generally, the european concept of formal values in the legal system wouldappear to correspond to the liberal rule of law, which is often said to rest upon the stateõscommitment to neutrality or neutral principles, such as equality before the law and theavoidance of preference for one value choice over another. with respect to the second issue,the idea that there are clearly distinguishable nonneutral and neutral choices in law andthat neutrality is a key element in a liberal rule of law seems to be more controversial inangloamerican jurisprudential and political thought than the formal/substantive distinction is in european thought. some liberal thinkers deny that neutrality is a principle ofliberalism; see, e.g., donald herzog, 1989, happy slaves, chicago: university of chicagopress. furthermore, there is significant school of thought denying that neutrality is eitheranalytically coherent or possible in practice. in this view, liberalism involves particularvalues that the state prefers over other particular values; see, e.g., joseph raz, 1986, themorality of freedom, oxford university press. the latter view is supported in part by theinfluential writings of john dewey in the early twentieth century; see, e.g., liberalism andsocial action, prometheus books, 1935.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected61substantive is analogous to that of government and society. in publiceducation, for example, there is a continuing debate as to whether thevalue content of the curriculum should be limited to the formal, orwhether the government should use the institution to instill more substantive values. many believe that governments and society alike shouldstay away from actively promoting substantive values. but as a practicalmatter, it is hard to imagine how any societal cohesion could be maintainedwithout actively promoting at least some commonly shared values.a useful way to promote societal cohesion without imposing excessive rigidity might be to emphasize sets of values rather than any singlevalue. as suggested above, such a local set of values is more than thejuxtaposition of a number of values and less than a strict hierarchical order. it is a web of values, with knots of greater and lesser importance forthe network. some may be untied or loosened, on the basis of individualpreference. others need to be strongly fixed and could be challengedonly by a broad and longterm movement originating in a significant stratum of society.the notion of a web of values sheds light on a related phenomenon.the isolated individual is not only a member of society at large, but alsoof smaller social groups. the more coherent these groups, the strongerthey are tied by substantive, rather than formal, values. they formepistemic communities,35 a phenomenon made both easier and morewidespread by the advent of global networks. if society at large is not todisintegrate into a constellation of such epistemic communities, substantive group values must be outweighed by equally strong formal values atthe level of society at large. this places a heavy burden on the institutionsthat protect these formal values.3.6the impact of global networks on values3.6.1caveatsas the discussion in this chapter should make clear, casting light onthe impact of global networks on local values is not a straightforwardtask. the complexities of values and value setsñthe different functionsthey serve for different levels of social aggregation, as well as their dynamic changeñmean that welldefined causeandeffect relationshipsmay not exist.global networks are themselves a moving target and thus provide an35on epistemic communities see peter m. haas, 1992, òintroduction: epistemic communities and international policy coordination,ó international organization 46(1):135.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62global networks and local valuesuncertain starting point for the analysis. the degree of technical standardization has been consciously kept to a minimum. the internet, as anetwork of networks, is open to new networks and to qualitative change.the rapid commercialization of the internet introduces further uncertaintiesñfor example, how much will ecommerce change the traditionalegalitarian internet culture? equally uncertain is the extent to which global networks will be split into language and culture zones.36furthermore, global networks are not the only challenge to local values. an older and no less powerful challenge stems from transnationalbroadcasting. migration and tourism bring people from different culturalbackgrounds together. even international trade in goods is not alwaysvalueneutral. how goods are designed and marketed is influenced bythe culture at their place of origin.finally, the impact of global networks on local values is not one ofstrict cause and effect. technology does not determine social development. at most, it impedes traditional paths for the development of localvalues, and opens up new paths. more often, it does no more than changerelative costs and opportunities among alternatives. therefore, the relationship between global networks and local values is not unidirectional.global networks may have the potential to change the evolution of thelocal set of values, but the process can also work the other way round.local values can alter the development path of global networks. an obvious example is the demand to design internet portals in a way that distinguishes between the physical locations of users. if this became reality,global networks would be effectively renationalized, in order to limit theincursion of foreign values.the effect of global networks on local values and their balance is likelyto be indirect. faced with new opportunities and risks, the individual islikely to reshape his or her preferences in a way that better fits the changedenvironment.37 this is often done unconsciously.38 sociologists point outthat restrictions and, more specifically, institutions tend to reshape preferences. in practical terms, global networks can thus affect local values bychanging social and political structures (see chapter 4), or ways of doingbusiness (see chapter 7).what followsñan attempt to identify specific ways in which globalnetworks have the potential to alter local valuesñis thus only one cutthrough a very complex relationship.36on the technological background and its development, see chapter 2.37michael domjan. 1998. the principles of learning and behaviour, pacific grove.38see, for example, leon festinger, 1962, a theory of cognitive dissonance, stanford, ca.:stanford university press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected633.6.2the effect of global networks on value orientationsalthough some advocates of cyberculture argue otherwise, globalnetworks do not themselves represent an entirely new form of society or anew state. at most, they give birth to new transnational social groups.normally, they are no more than a new communication medium for persons who remain members of social groups that are rooted in real life.global networks do sometimes make it easier to òleaveó an original socialgroup, or even a state, and become a member of a new group, society, orstate. but the individual can not help but remain a member of his or heroriginal group and state. the question, however, is whether the regularcontact with global networks changes the relationship between the member and that original group or state. more specifically: does the use ofglobal networks potentially change the individualõs set of values in a waythat alienates him or her more profoundly than before from the set ofvalues embedded in local institutions?39the answer to that question depends on how global networks affectvalue orientations. one can envision four possibilities: global networksare potentially globalizers, pluralizers, convergers, or decontextualizers.that global networks potentially are globalizers sounds much like atruism. but with respect to values, it can mean two different things. thefirst interpretation is closely related to what economists call systems competition.40 an individual, who dislikes a specific value in the local set, orthe composition of that set more generally, uses global networks to exitfrom the local environment. this could occur if and when global networksactually allow a person to leave the social group entirely. more likely, global networks might allow a person to split his or her activities in such a waythat the activities viewed unfavorably by the local value system are out ofthe reach of those local institutions that enforce the system.41in contrast to this rather passive role of global networks, one can alsoenvision circumstances in which the networks serve to globalize a value.for example, western societies, to a greater or lesser degree, endorse openand wide political discourse in which people can participate regardless of39globale dynamik, lokale lebenswelten. der schwierigeweg in die weltgesellschaft, frankfurt am main: suhrkamp; ronald robertson, 1992, globalization, london: sage; benno werlen, 1993, society, action and space: an alternative humangeography, london: routledge.40competition among institutions. basingstole: macmillan.41christoph engel. 2000. òthe internet and the nation state,ó in christoph engel andkenneth h. keller, eds., understanding the impact of global networks on local social, politicaland cultural values (law and economics of international telecommunications 42). badenbaden:nomos, 201260.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64global networks and local valuesgender or class. networks promote a globalization of that value, whichcan lead to conflict with some traditional local values. even in this instance, the global value may not replace the local one. it may only reach asegment of the local society or it may govern internet activities alone whileother local life is still governed by the traditional values. or the newglobal value may simply offer an alternativeñanother option from whichmembers of the local society may choose (though not without risk).although the globalization of values is not very frequent, the pluralizing effect of global networks is ubiquitous. through global networks, anindividual comes easily and frequently into contact with entirely unknownforeign values or with differently balanced sets of values. in that way, global networks force the individual to confront the fact that value systems arefundamentally relative, and that one lives in a pluralistic world.42 in laterchapters, this is illustrated by the very different views that germans andamericans have about such issues as nudity, privacy, and the balance between the right of free speech and protection against libel.on the other hand, there are those who fear that global networks,rather than exhibiting and celebrating pluralism, may actually promotean unhealthy convergence of values.43 those who hold this view point tothe fact that most global networks, and the internet in particular, originated in the united states. even today, more than twothirds of internettraffic links american users and suppliers. because of this history, thesecritics charge, most global networks are deeply influenced by u.s. valuesystems. the predominance of english, the preoccupation of most providers with the u.s. political climate, and, above all, the democratic vitality of the traditional egalitarian internet culture all contribute to whatsome outside observers characterize as u.s. cultural hegemony.44some convergence of values, of course, may be a necessary precondition for truly global networks, or at least might facilitate their functioning.to the extent that it promotes formal values (and not just a set of conventions, such as the national agreement to drive on the right or the left sideof the street), netiquette is a case in point.4542william alton kelso, 1978, american democratic theory: pluralism and its critics, westport,conn.: greenwood press; roman herzog, 1987, òpluralismus, pluralistische gesellschaft,óevangelisches staatslexikon, vol. 2, roman herzog et al., eds., 25392547, stuttgart: kreuzverlag.43benjamin b. barber. 1998. òpangloss, pandora or jefferson? three scenarios for the future of technology and democracy,ó in raymond plant, frank gregory, and alan brier,eds., information technology: the public issues, manchester, england: manchester universitypress, 177191.44see chapter 4.45its contents are repeated by sally hambridge, ònetiquette guidelines,ó available onlineat <http://www.cybernothing.org/cno/docs/rfc1855.html> (31.03.00).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected65finally, global networks are decontextualizers.46 global networkspromote social interaction, but these interactions are more contextfreethan any known before. the typical use of global networks is to retrieveinformation. there is no direct social contact between the person offeringthe content and the person accessing it; in most cases, the content provider does little more than count the number of hits. in mailing lists,news groups, or chat rooms, the user has the option to respond, but theresponse is in writing, and only chat rooms allow realtime exchange.meanwhile, the social exchange that occurs in global networks is largelyunnoticed by third parties. if the individuals in communication are concerned about privacy, they can even encrypt the message. if they seekanonymity, they can use pseudonyms or remailers. but even if they takenone of these precautions, the sheer amount of communication over global networks makes it impractical to control or even observe it.all this may threaten local values, as they must be embedded in andprotected by formal and informal institutions. and insofar as these institutions rely on thirdparty scrutiny and enforcement, it is hard to applythem within global networks. even where local values have been implanted in the conscience of the individual, they are not internetproof.for example, psychological research indicates that people pay less attention to social mores and conventions when they communicate electronically than in communicating facetoface. other work suggests that themore the situation isolates someone from the individuals that he or sheaffects, the more the person is comfortable in seeking a shortterm advantage.473.6.3potential impacts on the local set of valuesthe foregoing discussion provides a starting point for assessing howreal the danger is that global networks will erode current local values. ifthe globalization of a value actually occurs, it obviously replaces a localvalue that differs from it. for example, it is likely that the proscription ofall forms of child pornography will, over time, extend to all societies. ifvaluepluralizing influences are at work, the legal and social institutionsprotecting local values will be subject to competitive pressures, which mayalso result in forcing change. for example, the european commitment to46starr roxanne hiltz and murray turoff, 1993, the network nation: human communication via computer, cambridge, ma: mit press; kiesler, siegel and mcguire (supra note 14);turkle (supra note 14).47joachim weiman, 1997, òindividual behavior in a free riding experiment,ó journal ofpublic economics 54:185200; iris bohnet, 1997, kooperation und kommunikationmohr.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66global networks and local valuesprotecting individualsõ private information from corporate misuse is putting pressure on u.s. institutions to conform. in both instances, if an influential part of the population no longer believes that the traditional setof values should be upheld, a political process can be triggered that leadsto their abolition or change.the privacy example above illustrates two forces at work in effectingchange. making the u.s. population, or influential segments of it, awareof the greater protection for individual privacy provided in europe canlead people to press for similar protections in the united states. at thesame time, u.s. commercial interests may be moved to encourage the prescribed institutional change in order to open european markets to american ecommerce.assessing the local consequences of homogenizationñthe convergence of internet values that is driven by the historical and hegemonicinfluence of the united states on its structureñis somewhat more difficult because it is hard to separate transient influences from longertermchange. in the short run, internet language and content may be dominated by u.s. interests, and it is certainly conceivable that local patterns ofcommunication and business practices will be affected accordingly. inthe long run, however, it is entirely possible that the deeper penetrationof global networks into local societies may allow for local adaptation thatwill enable the preservation of local institutions, and indeed, perhaps evenincrease their effectiveness.the erosion of the value orientation of individuals is much more likelythan the erosion of institutions. the former depends less on globalizationthan on pluralization, homogenization, and, above all, decontextualization. these phenomena tend to make a personõs value orientation less firm. the individual begins to doubt the legitimacy of a traditional value, and if the alternative value encourages actions that areconsistent with personal interest, it might appear more attractive and evenguide the personõs behavior. but behavior in very specific circumstancesis only loosely tied to attitude,48 and this kind of òtransgressionó mayonly occur when the person is protected by the anonymity of the internet.however, it is also possible that the network influence will be muchstronger. the values of an individual are the result of a learning process.his or her contact with different value systems encountered in using global48icek ajzen and martin fishbein, 1977, òattitudebehavior relations: a theoreticalanalysis and review of empirical research,ó psychological bulletin 84:888918; icek ajzenand thomas j. madden, òprediction of goal directed behavior: attitudes, intentions, andperceived behavioral control,ó journal of experimental social psychology 22:453474.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected67networks may start a new learning process, at the end of which the traditional value is strongly diminished in the individualõs own value system.global networks can also have the opposite effectñstrengtheningoneõs original values. this is obvious where global networks allow territorially scattered groups to maintain social ties. community without propinquity becomes a viable option.49 and global networks are not onlypluralizers and decontextualizers; they also give individuals new optionsfor participation in social life and political decisionmaking.50advocacycoalitions have never before been so easy to build, and global networksmake it much easier for the average citizen to gain access to governmentinformation.51 all this helps create a greater sense of responsibility.the impact of global networks on local values need not be reduced tothe simple dichotomy of erosion or corroboration. the use of these networks can also lead to the modification of values or to the rebalancing ofthe set of values. although this involves a complicated process of unlearning and relearning, it is an attractive possibility from a political pointof view in that it can provide an evolutionary path to a more appropriateor legitimate set.the problem, of course, is that there is no guarantee that the new setof substantive values will be either more appropriate or more legitimate.during their histories, both u.s. and german society and state have managed to promote coexistence and cooperation within their societies with asmall set of substantial values and a highly developed set of formal values. unlike traditional societies that rely on strong ties among their members, modern societies such as these two achieve cohesion among a largenumber of persons with ties that are deliberately weak rather thanstrong.52 in such societies, one does not expect an occasional businesspartner to help if oneõs family is in distressñit is enough if the personpays his or her bills. strong ties are limited to very small groupings: the49saskia sassen, 2000, òthe impact of the internet on sovereignty: unfounded and realworries,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller eds., understanding the impact of globalnetworks on local social, political and cultural values, badenbaden: nomos, pp. 197200;thompson (supra note 18).50anthony downs, 1991, òsocial values and democracy,ó in kristen r. monroe, ed., theeconomic approach to politics: a critical reassesment of the theory of rational action, new york:harper collins, pp. 143170; miles kahler, 2000, òinformation networks and global politics,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller eds., understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, badenbaden: nomos, pp. 141157.51see chapter 4.52siegwart lindenberg. 1988. òcontractual relations and weak solidarity,ó journal of institutional and theoretical economics 144:3958.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68global networks and local valuescore family, oneõs closest friends, sometimes oneõs closest colleagues atwork.precisely because global networks confront a person with the relativity of value systems, and the disconcerting effects of decontextualization,there is a danger that individuals will react by seeking the comfort of amore structured, if simplistic, value system. they might be lured intoreplacing apparently eroded and weak ties with ones that are newly builtand strong, although often unidimensional. the danger is all the morereal if it is linked to institutions that typically redistribute wealth or power.political opportunists might well exploit the situation by denouncing as avacuum in values what is actually no more than a characteristic of modern life.3.6.4types of contact with foreign sets of valuesthe pluralizing and homogenizing effects of global networks dependon the nature of the contact between individual and foreign sets of values.in principle, global networks are weaker in this respect than the traditional media. because the technology of global networks (e.g., search engines) allows users to specify the information they want to retrieve, thereis less likelihood they will be exposed to information that does not fit thespecification. although it is true that todayõs users may be exposed toinformation (and hence to values) they did not seek when they follow alink, subscribe to a mailing list, or participate in a news group, technological trends toward greater specificity and precision in information retrievalsuggest that inadvertent exposure will be less likely as time goes on. thus,such exposure will be sporadic rather than systematic.furthermore, internet users need not be passive. if they dislike whatthey see, they are not only theoretically free to turn away but probablyinclined to do so. technically, an information provider may be able to useòpushó technologies to force messages onto a subscriberõs screen, but thereis still a long way to go before global networks are transformed into propaganda machines.still, the exposure to other values does have effects. for example,exposure to a different set of values can be significant for someone whosecommitment to traditional values has been weakened. in this case, thedifferent set may be attractive simply as a replacement. in such circumstances, the internet becomes the medium for a conscious learning process. global networks also help that process gain social momentum, asthey make it easy and inexpensive to spread information challenging traditional values among others who are doubtful.there is another situation in which the impact of exposure to unfamiliar ideas is subtler: a person may not realize the extent to which the lesglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected69sons of a different value system have been absorbed. only later will theindividual come to recognize the contradictions between the implicit network value system and his or her traditional system. such learning without attention is typical if values are embedded in apparently neutral contentsñsuch as in the goods and services shaped by foreign value systems.for instance, the cookies set by amazon.com to trace customer purchasing patterns give rise to a convenient service through which customers logging onto the site are made aware of new books that might interestthem. it was certainly easier for a service based on this technology todevelop in the united states, where the protection of privacy is not ashigh a priority as it is in germany. however, once they have enjoyed theconvenience of the service, people in societies that may be more consciousof privacy as an important value may nevertheless view it in less absoluteterms and come to believe that it is a tradable right, well worth relinquishing in particular circumstances.although the possibility of eroding traditional values should not beoverstated, learning a new value system does not lead inexorably to thereplacement of traditional values. the real change brought about by global networks may be the realization that modern life encourages, and often requires, living with multiple value systems.3.6.5three illustrative examplesthree examples may serve to illustrate the points made in this chapter. the first is consumer protection. in general, the german legislatureand courts have been more active in protecting consumers against unethical entrepreneurs than their u.s. counterparts. a consumer has a week towithdraw from a contract that has not been concluded in the premises ofthe provider or that the consumer has not solicited, and standard termscome under the close scrutiny of the courts. marketing material is illegalif even a small fraction of those exposed to it are misled by its statements.these rules are an attempt to balance freedom of contract with protectionof nałve consumersñto balance autonomy and paternalism. but in a globalized internetbased market, when german customers buy goods andservices over the internet they can no longer be sure that a german courtwill be able or willing to protect them in the same way.a second example relates to the limitations of copyright protection.as long as hard copies were the only meaningful way to distribute intellectual or artistic works, a compromise between the interests of the authorand of the public could be achieved: once a hard copy was sold, its ownerwas generally free to use it and to hand it over to third parties, and òfairuseó exceptions allowed individuals to make copies or quote lengthy passages of works. as more works begin to appear in electronic form, theglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70global networks and local valuesbox 3.3 bavaria versus compuservein november 1995, the bavarian criminalinvestigation authorities informed felix somm, head of compuserve germany gmbh, that fivenewsgroups with childpornography content were being carried on theservers of compuserve inc. a month later, the prosecuting authorities delivered a list of another 282 newsgroups that, the state contended, displayed sexually oriented content on the internet that was morally harmfulto youth. somm informed the parent company, which reacted promptlyand blocked all the identified newsgroups immediately.while the childpornography newsgroups remained permanentlyblocked, the newsgroups containing òsoftó sexual content were deblockedafter compuserve inc. and compuserve germany gmbh provided theirmembers with òchild safeguard softwareó that enabled parents to blocksuch content. in the months following, however, the investigating authorities retrieved individual news articles with hardpornographic content fromthe news servers of compuserve inc.in may 1998, a munich municipal court sentenced felix somm to 2yearsõ probation and fined him dm 100,000 ($56,000) for distributing pornographic materialsñpursuant to sect. 184 para. 3 of the german penalcodeñon the internet. despite expert testimony during the trial that it wasnot feasible technically to screen internet material, the judge ruled thatcompuserve should have deleted material known to be offensive.the prosecutors who originally filed the charges later reversed themselvesand argued for acquittal. a state court overturned the conviction in november 1999 after both the defense and the prosecution argued that the originalcourtõs verdict was flawed. in the meantime, the òsomm caseó was cited inthe u.s. state departmentõs 1998 human rights report, provoking a nationaluproar. in san francisco, demonstrations were organized during which participants poured out german beer to show their displeasure.sources: (1) gunnar bender. 1998. òbavaria vs. felix somm: the pornographyconviction of the former compuserve manager,ó case note in international journalof communications law and policy 1: 14. available online at <http://www.digitallaw.net/papers/index.html>.(2) the compuserve judgement of the local court munich dated may 28, 1998:summary of the facts of the judgement, multimedia und recht 8: 430, availableonline at <http://www.jura.uniwuerzburg.de/sieber/article/article.htm>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected71technical limitations that made the old compromise workable disappear.on one hand, a single digital copy can be multiplied and distributed atwill, without any loss in quality, thus making practical almost any level ofcopyright violation. on the other hand, the ease of tracing or limiting theuse of electronically published material at the source makes it practical todrastically reduce the scope of public use of the work. thus technicalchanges are forcing legal institutions to forge a new balance between therights of author and public.53a third example is provided by new technologies that offer a strongermeans of enforcement for local values. take the desire of many americans to ban nudity and sexually explicit material from the internet, or thedesire of many germans to do the same with the portrayal of violence. atfirst glance, from a local viewpoint, there appears to be no rebalancing ofinterests at issue. social norms already strongly limit broadcasting ofnudity and sexually explicit material in the united states and of violencein germany. to a considerable extent, these norms are even embedded incivil and criminal codes. internet technology makes access to foreign siteswith the locally restricted content easy, but there are some tools that canhelp localities deny or restrict access; hosts and internet service providerscan be compelled to prevent their customers from accessing sites with thelocally banned content.box 3.3 and box 3.4 provide examples of governments seeking to regulate content of foreign origin. box 3.5 describes some of the tools that mightbe used to do so.but a closer look suggests that, as a practical matter, there has been areal change. in the past, practical limitations on enforcing the majorityõsnorms provided a certain latitude for local minoritiesñthose who chosenot to conform to the normsñto evade detection. this led, de facto, to abalance between majority and minority rights that was not necessarilyprovided for de jure. the new technologies tend to reduce that leewaybecause they allow for more effective monitoring and control. given thatthe balance between majority and minority rights was not explicit to begin with, it is not easy to restore when technological advances upset it.we have yet to see whether a networked world can find acceptable waysof achieving such a balance without appearing to compromise the valuesthat gave rise to the original norms and legal structures.53see for example, computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil, 2000, the digital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age, washington,d.c.: national academy press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72global networks and local valuesbox 3.4 transnational jurisdictional issues in cyberspacein december 2000, the german supreme court upheld the convictionof a germanborn australian citizen, frederick toben, who had been foundguilty of denying the existence of the holocaust on a web site that heoperated in australia. the court held further that german law can apply toforeigners who post web content in other countries if that content can beaccessed in germany. however, while toben could face extradition togermany, to date it has not made such a request.1an italian prosecutor sought criminal action for libel and defamationagainst an unknown person for postings on a web site based in israel.following an italian divorce involving a couple with two children, themother moved to israel with their daughters (without the fatherõs consent)and married another man. the daughters were eventually located andreturned to italy, after which statements and images related to the incidentbegan appearing on a web site in israel. in the words of the court, thisweb site contained òextremely negative opinions on [the father]õs character and actions (as well as on the work of the italian judicial authorities)and were accompanied by messages inviting jews to ôfreeõ the two underage girls, ôheld captiveõ by their father, who prevented them from professing judaism.ówhile a lower court dismissed the prosecutionõs case on the groundsthat it lacked jurisdiction because of the extraterritorial publication of thematerial in question, a higher court disagreed, reasoning that defamation isan event in which there exists an action (the posting of the comments) andan outcome (somebody reading them). since the outcome in this case(viewing the web site) occurred in italy, the court concluded that there wassufficient jurisdiction to hear the prosecutorõs case.1see <http://www.wired.com/news/politics/0,1283,40669,00.html>.source: matt gallaway, òinternational jurisdiction soup,ó february 27, 2001. available online at <http://www.ecompany.com/articles/web/print/0,1650,9579,ff.html>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.understanding local values and how they are affected73box 3.5 automated tools to deny access to forbiddeninternet contentsoftware systems commonly known as filters are designed to block useraccess to particular internet material while allowing all other material topass. in general, filters can employ any of a number of techniques, singlyor in combination.one technique is to block materialspecific domain names (e.g., everything that might otherwise be accessible from the domain òexample.comó)or selected pages within a given domain but not other pages within thatdomain. lists of inappropriate sites and web pages are precompiled. afilter checks a request for a certain web page against such a list, and if therequested page is on the list, it is blocked. in addition, sites to which asuspect site links may also be blocked.a second technique is for a filter to examine the content of material thathas been requested in real time (òontheflyó) for judgments of inappropriateness. if that content is deemed inappropriate by the program that analyzes it, its display is blocked. the content may be examined for certainkeywords that are deemed inappropriate (e.g., if the requested page contains the word òbombmakingó), or an image can be processed by an imagerecognition program that checks for naked people or for nazi swastikas. (a related variant of this technique is to block the use of certain termsin search engines.)a third technique is to accept or reject material based on the content ofa òtagó that is associated with a given web page. such a tag is analogousto the rating on a tv show that indicates if it contains sexual activity, nudity, or violence. depending on the setting on the filter, the viewer may ormay not gain access to material that is tagged in certain ways.note that the effectiveness of this technique depends on a large volumeof internet content being labeled. if a large volume of internet material isuntagged, and the filter is set to pass all untagged material, the user will seea great deal of objectionable material, and hence the filter is relativelyuseless. if the filter is set to block all untagged material, the user will beblocked from a great deal of unobjectionable material, and hence the filteris overly restrictive.the vast majority of filters act to block access to specific web sites(though these sites may be specified as a class). in addition, some filtersprovide the capability to block the access of an individual (e.g., a minor) toother common internet services, such as interactive services (e.g., email,chat rooms), newsgroups, file downloading, or even ecommerce withcredit card usage.for a more detailed discussion of filters, see cstb, national researchcouncil, youth, pornography, and the internet: can we provide soundchoices for a safe environment?, forthcoming.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.744democracy and political institutions4.1democracy, political institutions, and powerfor those worried about the impact of global networks on local values, political institutions are a tool for coping with the problem. but theexisting political institutions are themselves affected by the networks.understanding how and why this is so is the aim of this chapter.some definitions are useful as a starting point. power is the ability toimpose a solution on others. it applies both within and outside existingpolitical institutions, with or without a legitimate basis and balanced ornot by the power of other actors or interests. by contrast, a political institution is an instrumental notion. the creation of political institutions presumes that there are problems to be solved by a consciously created governmentña polityñrather than by social institutions or processes. and itfurther presumes that the institutions act as agents for a collective entitywith defined geographical and subjectmatter jurisdiction. in this context, democracy comprises a specific set of publicly determined politicalinstitutions, in contrast to technocratic government or despotism.democracy can also be understood as a normative indicator of thepolitical legitimacy of a system or process. but legitimacy is a complexconcept that requires a balance between effectiveness and openness ofgovernance. this balance depends on the size and shape of the polity andon the character of the political problems to be solved.1 because any given1seyla benhabib, ed. 1996. òtoward a deliberative model of democratic legitimacy,ódemocracy and difference. contesting the boundaries of the political, 6894, 69. princeton, n.j.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions75arrangement of political institutions has implications for power and democracy, this chapter addresses the three notions jointly.4.2the impact of the internet on democracy,political institutions, and powerthe impact of the internet on democracy, political institutions, andpower is complex. moreover, it is a work in progress. clearly, globalnetworks have the potential to change political arenas, the actors withinthem, the processes of politics, and the tools of governance. they mayeven change the character of political conflicts and the cognitive frameworks or normative beliefs that drive those conflicts. to be sure, not allinstitutions, actors, and processes are equally affected, but that fact in itself is a motivation for examining the nature of these impacts in somedetail.4.2.1complexity and uncertaintyas discussed in chapter 2, global networks are themselves still in astate of continual development. in addition, a variety of organizationsare experimenting with different ways of interacting through networksand exploring a variety of (as yet unproven) business models. manyinternet services are still struggling to achieve profitable status, so theirfuture is uncertain. the optimal technical and economic strategies forbroadband transmissions at the local levelñthe socalled òlast mileó problemñare also unsettled.2 such dynamism and uncertainty make largescale outcomes difficult to predict. for example, how completely will theinternet penetrate each society? at what points will ecommerce activities saturate their u.s. markets? how quickly will germany catch up tothe united states? these factors, in turn, will affect how political institutions and power relationships evolve.there are larger issues and conflicts as well, as evidenced by the continuing battle between those who believe the internet should be privatized and those who believe it should be managed in an open and egalitarian manner. furthermore, it is hard to predict whether the attempts torenationalize the internetñthat is, to reverse the globalizing trend usingtechnical or legal tools in order to serve national cultural, social, and economic needsñwill succeed in some or any countries. it is reasonable toexpect, however, that political actors will try to influence internet developmentñprecisely because political institutions are affected by it.2see for example, computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil, 2002, broadband: bringing home the bits, in press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76global networks and local valuesthese reciprocal influences are clearly very important, as pointed outin chapter 1. global networks create and constrain opportunities forpolicymakers, who respond by trying to shape the changes to their advantage. in the united states and germany, the historical and technological starting points are very different, so global networks can easily triggervery different structural change in each of the two countries. an analysisis useful here not so much as a way of predicting the outcome in eithercountry but as a way of describing the potential of global networks tochange the political process in any polity (while acknowledging the uniquecharacteristics of the united states and germany).4.2.2political arenasthe term òpolitical arenaó refers to a set of formal and informal institutions that serves as a framework for policymaking and to which both publicand private actors have access. the traditional political arena is the nationstate, which can be affected by many characteristics of the internet. becausethe internet is global in reach, it can bring citizens of many nations intocontact with one another. because the costs of internet access are low (andgetting lower over time), more people within each nation have access to it.because its architecture supports a myriad of applications, there are strongincentives for many parties to access it. because its management is decentralized, operational control from a central organization is essentially impossible to achieve. and because of technical advances, internet communications can be conducted in ways that are more secure, secret, andanonymous than other communications have been in the past.individually and jointly, these characteristics challenge some of thetraditional roles and powers of the nation state. global networks are amedium for and a factor in globalization. they induce change in the political arena, and can bring it about as well.if the changes render a particular political arenaña locality, region,or even a nationstateñless able to deal with some issues, policymakersmay choose to transfer those issues to another political arena that seemsbetter adapted to the task. the development of public international law isan early example of this kind of globalization of the political arena. sovereign states react to a new challenge by negotiating an international treatyor setting up an international organization, thereby creatingñat least forthe issues at handña global political arena.3 in fact, there are a number of3klaus w. grewlich. 2000. òconflict and good governance in ôcyberspace,õó in christophengel and kenneth keller, eds., governance of global networks in the light of differing localvalues, law and economics of international telecommunications, vol. 43. badenbaden:nomos, 237264, 239.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions77examples of global institutions created in the past, under somewhat different stimuli, that can be adapted to address some of the current problems arising from global networks. as early as 1910, for example, a treatywas concluded to combat the distribution of òillicit papers, drawings, pictures or objects that have an international characteró;4 today the treatyapplies to electronic dissemination as well.international treaties have not generally been so readily adapted,however. the world intellectual property organization (wipo), for example, found it necessary in 1996 to propose a new treaty that wouldaddress the special problems of protecting copyright on the internet. interestingly, this was a case in which the instruments provided in the international political arena effectively finessed the national political process.those interested in extended copyright protection lost the battle in theu.s. congress. but they basically succeeded in the wipo, and congressratified the outcome when it was presented to that body in the form of aninternational treaty.but international political arenas encompass more than public international law. government agencies (e.g., the u.s. trade representative)promote international trade. the united nations (un) provides a forumfor highlevel international discussions and the application of politicalpressure. and nonpublic entities play important roles as well. for example, industry associations from many industrialized countries have negotiated an international uniform commercial code for electronic trade. asecond example is the internet corporation for assigned names andnumbers (icann), whose role is to make decisions about toplevel domain names; this entity may become a nucleus for internet regulation at amuch broader scale in the future.5global networks not only spur the development of global politicalarenas but simultaneously give local political arenas more leverage. localcommunity networks, such as the cleveland freenet and the amsterdamcity web, were the forerunners of digital communities that serve local(physical) communities (box 4.1).4treaty of 04.05.1910, rgbl. 1911, 209, as well as protocol of 04.05.1949, unts 30, 3 consolidated edition unts 47, 159. the federal republic has not yet signed the changed treaty,however.5for details, see klaus w. grewlich, 1999, ògovernance in cyberspace. access and publicinterest in global communications,ó law and electronic commerce 9: 193216, the hague;and, critically, milton mueller, 1999, òicann and internet governance. sorting throughthe debris of selfregulation,ó info 1:497520; and laurence r. helfer and graeme b.dinwoodie, 2001, òdesigning nonnational systems: the case of the uniform domainname dispute resolution policy,ó william & mary law review 43, october.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78global networks and local valuesbox 4.1 participation in the local communityñthe cleveland freenet, boulder community network, anddigital city amsterdamas the internet has become more widely used by private households inthe united states and elsewhere in the world, community information systems based in cities and regions have been established to serve them. suchòfreenetsó are typically textoriented and use a limited lowtech approachfor individualsõ free access from home.the first such system was the cleveland freenet, which went online onjuly 16, 1986. it was rooted in the case western reserve university«sfaculty of medicine, where doctors, students, and patients successfullyexperimented with electronic bulletin boards that gave them the opportunity to enter into a continuing dialogue on issues of health. as the dateindicates, the freenet was launched long before the world wide webtook over after 1991, turning the internet into an easy accessible information and entertainment tool.freenets were, in the american tradition of community organizing, afirst ambitious attempt to bring networks to the public; they are open computer systems that give free access to community news and information, aswell as basic entry to the internet. they have elements of an òelectronictown,ó as they usually sport post offices for email, libraries for research,and bulletin boards for community events, all set up in cooperation withcity administrations, community counsels, private interest groups,churches, and others. freenets have not always lived up to their envisioned character as new public spaces, however. contrary to the hopes ofmany community activists, discussion groups all too often do not deal withlocal affairs but are centered on private interests such as computers andhobbies. in addition, technical problems such as inadequate bandwidthand storage capacity have led many interest groups to leave the freenetsand sign up with commercial online services.with the advent of the world wide web, networks like the bouldercommunity network and the digital city amsterdam (de degetalestedeling) have emerged. their aim is not to provide basic access to anetwork but to select and aggregate local information for people who arealready connected to the internet. typically, they contain job offers orinformation on sparetime activities and upcoming social events. additionally, they feature links to institutions that promote civic participationñe.g., nonprofit groupsñand such institutions are actively encouraged topost relevant information on the local network site.usually, these newer forms of city nets do not provide the means forindividuals to communicate via newsgroups. that is seen by many as amajor obstacle to their active promotion of community spirit. thus, at leastat present, no more than about 1 percent of the u.s. population seems tobe reached by community nets. more and more, commercial services likeamerica online (aol) have taken over the task of managing city nets byincorporating local windows into their content.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions79moreover, the easy and inexpensive price of entry into the internetallows community without propinquity.6 it has become easier to createpolitical groupingsñpolitical arenasñalong substantive rather than geographical lines. what has generally been available for professional groupsis now spreading into other kinds of affinity groups based on particularpolitical issues, ethnic identities, avocations, and casual interests or hobbies. usenet newsgroups were the first manifestation of this trend, andthe proliferation of such groups continues unabated.this trend raises some concerns, however: if these groups isolate themselves from the larger community, the domain of traditional politics mightshrink drastically; or, if the groups become dominant actors in the nationalpolitical arena, the political process could be reduced to little more than abattle of single interests. a further concern is that these groups, by theirreach and technical capacity to gather, organize, and use information, maycreate de facto challenges to government by assuming some roles that areusually associated with government actors. for example, organizations likethe cyber angels function as a kind of private attorney general. creditcard organizations replace legal consumer protection through their commercial chargeback systems. creditrating agencies assume de facto regulatory power over the management of credit risk.sometimes the nationstate has found it wise to ignore these developments or, more to the point, has allowed them to take over the roles theyhave assumed by not challenging them. yet typically these groups do notentirely replace existing institutions. together they create a fractionatedsystem that provides neither equal protection nor efficient service; in someinstances, when several such groups emerge simultaneously, they presentcompetitive structures whose authority and responsibility are not well defined. a challenge for the future will be to sort out these relationships inmuch the same way as the member states of the european community, andthe state and federal governments in the united states, have had to do.4.2.3political actorspolitical arenas are populated by political actors who may function inseveral arenas at the same time,7 and global networks have made suchmultiple opportunities increasingly possible. but the networks have alsoexpanded the opportunities for new political actors. they have made it6michael thompson. 2000. òglobal networks and local cultures: what are the mismatches and what can be done about them?,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller,eds., understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values,2000, 113129, 123.7fritz w. scharpf. 1997. ògames real actors play.ó actorcentered institutionalism in policyresearch 51.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80global networks and local valuesmore productive for organizationsñsuch as the currently ubiquitousònongovernmental organizationsóñto participate as well. thus, the termòactorsó encompasses both individualsñcitizens, members of organizations, ad hoc participants in movementsñand organizations that promotean agenda or participate in a political process as a coherent entity. likerussian matryoshka dollswithindolls, these organizational actors canfunction as whole entities or as a collection of constituentsñindividualactorsñeach potentially acting as they see fit.these organizationsñpolitical parties, trade unions, and more looselytied collectives such as issuebased movementsñmust now deal with individualmember actors who are increasingly empowered by technology.since it is technically and economically so easy, constituencies of variousorganizations can insist on being better and more quickly informed, andthen use that information to increase their influence in the management ofthe organization. on the other hand, the very same information technologies that increase the effective power of an organizationõs membership alsomake it easier for members to leave the organization and reform aroundmore narrowly defined issues and interests; ironically, however, the morecredible the threat to exit, the more influential oneõs voice may becomewithin the organization.8 individuals, whether members or not, can alsorefocus the strength of the large group by forming ad hoc coalitions orloosely knit networks of actors. (see, for example, box 4.2.)of course, the leaders of either traditional organizations or the newerinternetspawned groups (whether part of formal management structuresor an informal leadership hierarchy) need not be passive either. the newtechnologies give them more ways to respond to their constituencies byallowing voices to be heard and to earn credibility with their constituencies through better communication of their positions and ideas. howthese factors ultimately play out, and whether they lead to a strengthening or weakening of established organizations, is likely to be determinedon a casebycase basis. for example, established organizations tend tohave easier access to power and money. on the other hand, they arefrequently less flexible in addressing new challenges. which of these twofactors dominates will vary from one situation to another.the number of organizations that count as new political actors is alsogrowing.9 once global networks spread over a country, the transactioncosts for setting up any new group fall dramatically. a mailing list is8albert o. hirschman. 1970. exit, voice, and loyalty. responses to decline in firms, organizations, and states. cambridge: harvard university press.9klaus w. grewlich. 2000. òconflict and good governance in ôcyberspace,ó in christophengel and kenneth keller, eds., governance of global networks in the light of differing localvalues, badenbaden: nomos, 237264, 251.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions81box 4.2 the multilateral agreement on investmentstruck downin 1995, the members of the organization for economic cooperationand development (oecd), together with eight nonmember states, begannegotiating the multilateral agreement on investment (mai). they weredriven by the expectation that adherence to international rules would allow for greater efficiency and more stable investment flows.the mai was meant to go beyond the scope of the existing world tradeorganization rules and be open to nonmembers as a standalone agreement. it would eliminate barriers to international investmentrelated tradeby opening most economic sectors and natural resources to foreign ownership on a nondiscriminatory basis. it also contained a uniform set of rightsby which individual firms could sue foreign governments before an international mediation panel in order to protect their investments from volatility or widely defined òexpropriation.ó in addition, no exemption for governmental procurement policies or provincial jurisdiction was conceived.over the course of the negotiations a number of concerns emerged inpublic debate, put forward by nongovernmental organizations (ngos) suchas friends of the earth international, peoplesõ global action, public citizentrade watch, world economy, the ecology and development association,and the world wide fund for nature international. they argued that byacknowledging the right of firms to sue over expropriation, the mai putserious constraints on state and local governmentsõ ability to enforce environmental laws. in the same vein, countries would be pressured to reduceprotection of natural resources in order to attract capital in globalizedmarkets, resulting in a òrace to the bottomó with respect to environmentalstandards.this international coalition of environment, development, and consumergroups took advantage of the political instability of the situation while thefinal outcome of the negotiations was still open and exploited the speed ofonline communication to wage a global campaign against the mai. it waslargely carried out over the internet, although it was coupled with influential traditional massmedia coverage. seminal newspaper articles appearedin le monde and le monde diplomatique as well as in the tageszeitung ingermany. web sites opposed to mai and regularly looked at by journalists, were established. they listed trustworthy ngos and provided indepth (though partisan) coverage of the progress of the negotiations as wellas suggestionsñcomplete with samples of letters to send to elected officials or newspaper editorsñon how to effectively express opposition.the coalition met with oecd negotiators to present them with resolutions to abandon the mai, which the government representatives initiallyrejected. this resulted in even greater organized resistance, backed byworldwide support over the internet. after a threeyear period, the negotiations stalled in 1998 and were no longer pursued by the oecd.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82global networks and local valuesenough for a start, and a quiteprofessional home page can be preparedon a personal computer. the political effectiveness of even the most modest effort can be impressive, as evidenced by the successful internationalcampaign to ban landmines, a project organized almost entirely throughthe internet and spearheaded by an individual without a power base inestablished organizations.until relatively recent times, the difference between political actors andthe public in representative democracies has been fairly well understoodand accepted. political actors made decisions for the general public. government officials or members of parliament were, of course, directly or indirectly elected by the public. however, between elections these officialsrelied, for the most part, on intermediariesñthe media, political organizations, even spokespersons and publicistsñto keep in touch with the public.in an information age, global networks have the potential to reduce(or at least change) the role of intermediaries in the political arena.10broadcasting is being supplemented and sometimes replaced bynarrowcasting. networks make it easier to access information directlyand can also make available tailormade tools for selecting and interpreting information. thus, with respect to both the provision and the interpretation of information, the trend appears to be one in which traditionalintermediaries are becoming less important.11 as a result, people will beless willing to pay for their services, with the consequence that they willbe less visible and used still less.on the other hand, networks also facilitate the creation of new intermediaries to help people find and evaluate information or express political preferences. therefore, at the same time, technology creates the potential for direct action (plebiscites) and for new brokers or new politicalintermediaries (and the bypassing of old ones) in the political arena.in a world of enormous information surplus, finding reliable information that is directly related to oneõs interests presents huge difficultiesfor an individual. todayõs search engines (e.g., google, yahoo!) are oneobvious manifestation of new intermediaries that help people find information. but there is every reason to expect that more sophisticated searchengines and other intermediary services will help people identify thekinds of information they need and to evaluate the quality of information10christoph engel. 2000. òthe internet and the nation state,ó in christoph engel andkenneth h. keller, eds., understanding the impact of global networks on local social, politicaland cultural values, 201260, 222. note also that the situation is quite different in ecommerce, where the internet, and information technology more generally, are increasing theopportunities for intermediation. see chapter 7 of this volume.11stephen coleman. 1999. òcutting out the middle man: from virtual representation todirect deliberation,ó in barry n. hague and brian d. loader, eds., digital democracy, 195210.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions83that they receive. this should not be surprising, given that these editorialfunctions are being performed today by the editors of newspapers andmagazines and books. (of course, new information intermediaries havean important commercial dimension as well, and to the extent that newintermediaries are used to support political activity, politics and commerce are not mutually exclusive.)the emergence of powerful nongovernmental organizations (ngos)has been aided in large part by the presence of global networks. ngostoo can be viewed as a new kind of intermediary, and networks haveincreased their power relative to that of governments. first, networksenable ngos to rapidly assemble large political constituencies that canbring significant pressure to bear on elected governments. and second,networks provide ngos with rapid access to enormous amounts of relevant information, much of which was previously in the hands of governments alone. (some have noted that networks similarly enhance thepower of governments to assemble and analyze information. but sincegovernments had most of the power prior to the wide availability of global networks, the result is that the relative powers of governments andngos have shifted in favor of the latter.)as these changes occur, the public has the opportunity to becomemuch more active, either as individuals or through ngos. moreover, thevalue of delegating authority to elected representatives or òexpertsó isneither as clear nor as accepted. the technical feasibility of receiving information from a seemingly unlimited variety of sources in real time, andbeing able to express oneõs view on any issue, also in real time, leads anincreasing number of people to believe that they can understand virtuallyany publicpolicy issue and that direct, popular decisionmaking is a realoption. whether this confidence is in fact justified is a different matterentirely, but such perceptions have a strong effect on the legitimacygranted by the public to the òexperts.óchanges of this magnitude can affect not only constitutional structures for policymaking; they can also alter the more subtle and informalstructures that are part of a nuanced and unwritten balance in society.the boundaries become blurred between public and private roles, between policymaking and the accountability for policy decisions, betweenpolitical and social structures. in germany, the informal but strong corporatist structure of politics might certainly be affected, as has the cohesion of party politics in the united states.the question, difficult to answer at this time, is whether the disappearance of traditional intermediaries will lead to the kind of populist, ordirect, democracy described above, or whether it will instead give rise todifferent kinds of intermediation more appropriate to a networked world.one vision of the future is described in box 4.3.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84global networks and local valuesbox 4.3 noopolitik and policy in the noospherewith a vast and growing global information infrastructureñincludingnot only the internet, but also cable systems, direct broadcast satellites,cellular phones, and so onñand a proliferation of organizations that focuson information and communications issues, the new concept ofònoopolitikó has arisen. noopolitik is foreign policy for an informationage. it emphasizes the primacy of ideas, values, norms, laws, and ethicsthat would be implemented through òsoftó rather than òhardó power.those who promote noopolitik say it is guided by the conviction thatright makes might, rather than the reverse. it would take into account bothstate and nonstate actors and the need for them to work together, but itwould not be statecentric. although national interests would be recognized in noopolitik, they would be defined as one aspect of the transnationally networked òfabricó in which all individuals and groups are embedded. while realpolitik tends to empower states, noopolitik will likelyempower networks of state and nonstate actors. realpolitik pits one stateagainst another, but noopolitik would encourage states to cooperate incoalitions and other mutually beneficial frameworks.few believe that noopolitik will supplant the realpolitik paradigm in thenear future. rather, the two forms are likely to coexist in some rough, edgybalance that, given the uneven penetration of information technologiesaround the world, will vary by region.noopolitik will be pertinent where technologically advanced societiespredominate, and less so where societies remain statecentric and hierarchical. noopolitik will be most effective where the prevalence of all manner of media allow many voices to be heard, where nongovernmental organizations (ngos) have the capacity to call attention to issues, where theissues themselves go beyond the limited spheres of national economic,political, and military policy, and where governmentngo relations arecordial.source: adapted (primarily) from the executive summary of john arquilla anddavid f. ronfeldt, 1999, the emergence of noopolitik: toward an american information strategy, rand corporation, santa monica, california.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions8512raymund werle. 2000. òthe impact of information networks on the structure of political systems,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., understanding the impact ofglobal networks on local social, political and cultural values, 159185, 174.13albert o. hirschman. 1970. exit, voice, and loyalty: responses to decline in firms, organizations, and states.4.2.4political processthe global networks that affect political actors also have the potentialto change the political process. reduced transaction costs mean that morevoices can make themselves heard before a political decision is taken.12but having voices heard is not the same thing as engaging in dialogue. atits worst, the former can result in the empowering of narrower and narrower interests, which then makes it increasingly difficult to reach compromises that settle a number of political issues simultaneously.on the other hand, global networks do make it easier for politicalissues to surface. traditional political actorsñand those who have traditionally controlled the mediañare much less able to control the publicagenda when effective, lowcost means of communication are available toall people. ad hoc groups can quickly unveil an issue, putting government officials and others into a reactive stance (see box 4.4 as one example). the seattle wto protests also illustrated this point, as did thecampaign undertaken against cnn by veterans when the network erroneously reported that the nerve gas sarin had been used during the vietnam war (box 4.5). easier access to information and easier access to political arenas thus reinforce each other.global networks not only give the governed new opportunities to beheard; they also make it easier to switch political arenas (a phenomenonthat hirschman describes as òexitó).13 political actors are mobile and canchoose the political arena in which to press their case. nongovernmentalorganizations promote the protection of amazon forests by transmittingaerial photographs of burning forests to their offices in the united states,which then distribute the information around the world and encourageother governments to apply pressure on brazil. money can be movedacross national boundaries to markets and venues with more favorabletax structures. businesses can cut the value chain into smaller and smallerpieces, coordinating their activities through information networks andoptimizing the geographical location of each part. nationstates findthemselves negotiating with multinational corporations rather than regulating them.even individuals gain new exit options. physically moving to another country or changing nationality may be as difficult and costly asbefore, but òvirtual migrationó is now possible. individuals can cut manyglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86global networks and local valuesbox 4.4 internet and rebellion: the case of chiapas, mexicothe internet has played a decisive role in the ongoing fight in chiapasña state in southern mexico close to the guatemalan borderñbetween asmall number of rebels and the mexican government. chiapas is one ofthe poorest regions of the country, with an underdeveloped economic andeducational infrastructure; it is inhabited mainly by indigenous mayan indians.in an uprising against the poor living conditions and a host of social,economic, and political issuesñincluding the perceived òneoliberalismóof the 1994 north american free trade agreementñthe small zapatistaarmy of national liberation (ezln) occupied several cities in chiapas.however, what began as a traditional revolt soon turned into what commentators called a ònetwaróñthe formation of vast transnational networkmediated coalitions capable of waging an informational war against themexican government and in support of the rebelsõ cause.when the rebellion started, the mexican government tried to find a military solution and to block information transfer to the outside world. because mexico is a country with a closely controlled publictelevision system, limiting media coverage was relatively easy to do. foreign mainstreammedia, such as american television stations, soon lost interest in what appeared to be a dwindling local conflict after the initial shootings were over.however, for some years before the rebellion and continually over itscourse, the zapatistasñwho themselves had no direct connection to theinternetñmade material available to independent journalists and sympathetic individuals and groups; they did this through interviews, letters, and,most particularly, large numbers of faxes. from there, the information wasuploaded to the internet and rapidly circulated among newsgroups andother forums for informal discussion or professional assessment.all this outreach finally led to a mass mobilization in support of theezln, both on the internet and in the form of demonstrations in mexicocity and other major cities around the world. faced with internationalattention and expressions of solidarity, the mexican government was forcedto abandon its military approach and undertake negotiations with thezapatistas under the scrutiny of the òinternet eye.óthe conflict is still not settled, though the new mexican governmentappears to be committed to finding a solution. today, thousands of websites are devoted to the ezln«s struggle and to the larger issues of nonviolence, minority rights, and selfgovernment. interestingly, the online campaign has stimulated the mexican government to establish a web presenceto offer its own perspective on the conflict. various institutionsñincluding, for example, the university of texasñregularly gather and distributesuch information.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions87of their social ties in the physical environment and replace them with virtual connections to epistemic and affinity groups all over the world. manycommentators have pointed out how this disengagement is taking its tollon civil society and the sense of community.144.2.5governance toolsthose in power often learn to use new technologies quickly. this islikely to be true with the internet as well, and indeed there are alreadysigns of it. driven by initiatives and directives such as the national performance review, the government performance and results act, andomb circular a130 (concerning the management of federal informationbox 4.5 the marzullo incident: the power of onein 1998 the cable news network (cnn), owned by time warner corp.,aired a newsmagazine show titled ònewsstand.ó in one particular program, newsstand charged that in 1970, during the vietnam war, the u.s.army undertook operation tailwind to deliberately drop sarin, a nervegas, in laos to kill american defectors.tom marzullo, a former member of u.s. special operations forces invietnam, had learned of cnnõs interest in operation tailwind even beforethe program went on the air. having been outraged by earlier cnn storiesabout the work of the special forces in vietnam, he independently researched operation tailwind. using little more than his personal computer and online databases, marzullo scoured official archives and questioned special forces veterans whom he reached via email. within daysof the broadcast, he was on the internet with a full and telling rebuttal.a flurry of emails and internet postings persuasively established thatthe cnn story was highly inaccurate, the product of shoddy research.within a month, marzulloõs internet campaign succeeded in humbling aworldwide news organization and time warner publicly retracted the storyand apologized to the veterans.retired majorgeneral perry m. smith, a military adviser to cnn whohad not been consulted prior to the showõs airing, credited his òinternetadvisersó with persuading him to resign his position at cnn to protest theshowõs inaccuracy. smithõs resignation helped further spread this òinternetuprisingó of special forces veterans.14see, for example, robert putnam, 2001, bowling alone: the collapse and revival of american community, new york: touchstone books.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88global networks and local valuesresources), almost every department of the u.s. government has movedvigorously to develop data banks, mailing lists, and web pages to facilitate communicating with the public. these efforts, which have generateda great deal of freely available information, build on the tradition of openness in u.s. society. but they also serve to create direct links to the publicthat effectively bypass the traditional media.some have argued that if this direct communication with the publicdisplaces or reduces the role of the traditional media, which often serve aswatchdog, it may actually reduce government accountability. on theother hand, others argue that media mergers have so concentrated power,and commercial considerations have so limited indepth reporting andanalysis, that the print and broadcast media may themselves have become part of the problem. in any case, it is highly unlikely that the publicwould endorse or accept a strategy that consciously limited the right ofthe government to communicate directly with its constituents.obviously, government can also use technologies to learn much moreabout its citizens and their activities, and to try to exercise influence andcontrol over those activities. as an example of the latter, broadcast mediahave provided a powerful tool for many totalitarian regimes. networks,by contrast, have thus far proven much more resistant to government efforts to bring them under control.the factors underlying such resistance are multiple. one is the absence of limitations on signal transmission imposed by distance. becausethe range of traditional broadcast media is powerconstrained, the number of nodes that must be regulated is limited to those that service a givengeographical area; beyond that area, the laws of physics attenuate the signal to negligible levels and hence there is no need for regulation.a second factor is the manytomany character of the internet. in anenvironment in which the number of suppliers of information can be essentially as large as the number of recipients, suppressing all possible suppliers of a given piece of information is very difficult. government has thuslost, for all practical purposes, the tool of òprepublicationó censorship. itdoes retain the power to sanction the transmission of information, but sucha power is rather blunt, and its use entails great costs to a government whosepolity is sensitive to the rights of individuals. (see also box 4.6.)the altered role of government in a networked world should not imply the demise of governments so much as it does the need for new strategies. unilateral state actions need to give way to strategies of negotiation with various social actors.15 sovereign power does not disappear,but it becomes more useful in providing leverage than in conferring abso15scharpf (supra note 7) 200.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions89lute authority. in this networked society, governance often involves recognizing and nudging certain networkrelated social and economic structures. even in settling political questions, central government is likely torely more on selfgovernance by technical, commercial, or societal bodiesthan on detailed regulatory prescriptions. this is now commonly calledòhybrid governanceó or òhybrid regulation.ó16the american system of governance, because it is less hierarchical,already relies on hybrid governance to some extent. however, germanauthorities tend to see major changes, resulting in an altered and moresubsidiary role for government (gew−hrleistungsverantwortung) in whichit no longer is responsible for the direct provision of all public goods.instead, it ensures that autonomous social systems act to provide thosegoods. this changed emphasis can be expected to affect the political process and political culture as much as the regulatory framework, but it isan example of a value shift that may be salutary.these comments should not be seen as implying that governmentsõreactions to the internet will necessarily be benign or constructive. it isnot beyond belief that they may employ traditional commandandconbox 4.6 publius: a censorshipproof internet publishing systempublius is a web publishing system, developed by researchers at at&tand new york university, that is highly resistant to censorship and provides publishers with a high degree of anonymity. in essence, publiusencrypts digital content (say, a document), fragments the result, and distributes it among a number of web servers in such a way that the content canbe reconstructed as long as a certain fraction of the fragments are available.for example, the fragments might be distributed to 100 servers and a person able to recover 35 fragments (any 35) would be able to reconstruct thedocument. however, if 34 or fewer fragments were recovered, the contentof the original document could not be determined.the cooperating web servers in this system are totally passive and cannot, by themselves, reconstruct the original document. therefore any entity that provides publicly accessible storage online for any purpose can beused as a cooperating web server. but because multiple servers are neededto recreate the document, publius breaks the onetoone correspondencebetween a web document and a server.16more on hybrid governance is contained in chapter 8.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90global networks and local valuestrol regulation, wellsuited to the internet environment or not, to deal withwhat they may see as internetrelated problems. if and when such actionsoccur, they may not serve democratic and freedompreserving interests.17for example, the u.s. congress sought to protect minors from exposure tosexually explicit material on the internet by passing the communicationsdecency act of 1996, a statute that was subsequently overturned on constitutional grounds. (see chapter 5 for a more detailed discussion.) in a nation without judicial review of legislative actions, such a law might havestoodñdespite its infringements on the freespeech rights of the populace.4.2.6conflictsbecause global networks reduce many of the constraints of distance,different ideas, attitudes, political convictions, customs, and cultures canmix in entirely unexpected ways. the richness and value of this mix isobvious, but so too is the increased opportunity for conflict. conflict, ofcourse, is possible in any society, but a shared national history and a political system shaped by debates and compromises over hundreds of yearshelp to narrow differences and provide incentives for accommodation.reopening a debate in an international context, where one nationõs hardwon resolution is pitted against anotherõs, is likely to prove difficult, because the representatives from each nation who may be charged with resolving the conflict are necessarily closely tied to the consensusbuildingprocess within their own national societies.18adding to the problems of international conflictresolution that derive from the historical and cultural baggage of the interested partiesñthat is, the nationstatesñare the shortcomings of international politicalinstitutions. first, the administrators and professionals who run international organizations, from un agencies to the wto, can make no claim tothe legitimacy that comes with election to office; the personnel of suchorganizations are appointed to their positions. there are no truly international parliaments, and as long as no supranational or even internationalidentity emerges, constitutional reform is not likely to change this state ofaffairs. the german public, for example, would hardly be willing to accept a european union political decision just because a majority of deputies from other member states agreed to it.17for more discussion on this point, see, for example, part iii of a. michael froomkin,1998, òthe empire strikes backó (òthe great looming internet ironyó), chikent l. rev.73:1101.18miles kahler. 2000. òinformation networks and global politics,ó in christoph engeland kenneth h. keller, eds., understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, 141157, 146 and 147.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions91second, the european union notwithstanding, no international bodyhas the power to actually legislate. if an international conflict is to bedealt with by legal rules, these rules must be implemented through eachof the sovereign member states, whose parliaments are usually unwillingor constitutionally unable to delegate any part of their jurisdiction to aninternational body. but the step from international decision to nationalimplementation is a precarious one, as much a matter of politics as legallinkage.a third weakness of the international political arena is the balkanizednature of its institutions. the jurisdiction of each rulemaking body is verynarrow, and coordination among them is, for all practical purposes, ineffectual. therefore the possibilities for linking issues in the giveandtakeof packaging political compromises is difficult to achieve. for example,balkanization of authority means that it is hard to link trade and nontradeissues, environment and technology transfer, or programming restrictionsand intellectualproperty protection. furthermore, such powers as compensatory tax relief, commonplace within the nationstate, are also unavailable to international bodies.finally, it is important to consider the class of conflicts that can arisewhen old values and traditions are challenged by new ideas.19 this is thepluralizing, or modernizing, effect of global networks.20 the user of global networks can be exposed to very different cultures, not merely as anobjective abstraction but as an inherent component of the broad range ofactivities and information exchanges that occur through the net. to agreat extent, the foreign cultures are experienced rather than merely observed. one does not need to accept these new values or outlooks in theirentirety, but it becomes more difficult to reject them entirely; thus absolute conviction may give way to a more nuanced and relative perspective.in turn, relativism may present a challenge to oneõs personal (or group)system of control and accountability. it is conceivable, and often suggested,that a response to this challenge will be to force people into narrowly defined epistemic communities, aided by the technology of networks. individuals, for example, might customize their own electronic newspapers toreceive only information of specific interest to them, avoiding serendipitous exposure to information that might challenge their beliefs.such a response may be feasible from a technical point of view, but itis difficult to conceive of it as a successful coping strategy for the future.19sherry turkle. 1995. life on the screen: identity in the age of the internet, new york: simonand schuster.20wolfgang kersting. 2000. òglobal networks and local values. some philosophical remarks from an individualist point of view,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds.,understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, 927,14 and 21.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92global networks and local valuesin a world in which the separation of the local from the global is increasingly difficult, and the commingling of values and cultures is becomingincreasingly evident in the most local of activities, a successful copingstrategy necessarily puts a much higher premium on tolerance. thiswould be not so much because tolerance is a normative value (although itwould clearly qualify as one), but because it is a practical strategy forcoping politically and even economically with the challenges of a modernworld. managing the transition to this new òmodernityó in societies withvastly different structures may become one of the greatest challenges topolitical systems.4.2.7cognitive frameworks, normative beliefs, and integrationnormative values allow individuals to give meaning to social reality.moreover, society organizes itself around shared values. common values, in other words, are a key ingredient in integration.21 and integrationreflects how society and the state are tied together.social cohesion and integration are unlikely to be deeply affected if asingle local value is challenged or eroded, since a societyõs set of valueshas never been totally stable over time. traditional values have been challenged whenever a sufficiently large stratum of society has been exposedto different cultures. but society is an adaptive organism; it adjusts to thenew values, rebalances the old ones, and bends without breaking.but global networks can challenge the adaptive capacity of the system. all societies have certain values that are so fundamental for theirselfdefinition that, if challenged, they can weaken group cohesion. andwhen several such values are challenged simultaneously, the rapid adaptation thus required can be highly threatening. this provides an analytical yardstick against which to measure the threat that global networksmight present to a given society.global networks also affect social and political integration becausethey introduce virtual communities and global market opportunities thatcan compete with nationstates or local communities for the attention andloyalty of individuals. as a result, the nation stateõs tools for problemsolving become more limited and its power to redistribute wealth diminishes. it no longer has a monopoly on its audienceõs attention, either psychologically or economically.2221klaus g. gruner. 1994. òcognition and economic psychology,óin hermann brandst−tteressays on economic psychology, 91108.22kahler (supra note 18) 147.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions93given this weakened identification with the state, those who are calledon to pay the bills to provide a social safety net may not be as easily convinced that it is their moral obligation to do so. moreover, the legitimacyof formal political institutions within the nationstate is subject to greaterskepticism as competing loyalties arise. on the other hand, it is possiblethat the easier sharing of information and opportunities for participationin governance may strengthen the nationstate in time. and governmentcan avail itself of the new technological possibilities and try to use them toreach, even to manipulate, the citizenry. as with so many other questionsconcerning the effects of global networks, the possibilities are clearer thanthe actual outcome.4.2.8global networks as a cohesive forceglobal networks do not always threaten values. indeed, they can reinforce them by providing links to likeminded people who are widelydispersedñcommunity without propinquity. networks can also providea mechanism for highly local or specialized groups to organize aroundhighly nonglobal values.23 consider, for example, a neighborhood association that organizes itself via the internet to block the establishment of asolidwaste incinerator. not only are political conflicts easier to handle ina local setting, under the umbrella of wellestablished political structures,but the networks empower local constituencies by putting global voicesand global information resources at their disposal.in such a case, global networks may well strengthen local values tothe point that they challenge national values, an ironic reversal in the assumption usually made about the threat of global networks. box 4.1 andbox 4.7 provide illustrations of how global networks are promoting andbuilding a geographical community.4.2.9pressures for changebecause political systems differ, the pressure on any given politicalsystem to adapt in the face of issues raised by global networks differsgreatly from one system to another. this is obvious if one compares totalitarian regimes or fundamentalist states with modern democracies, butit also holds true among industrialized and democratic countries. in particular, germany has a tradition of fencing political decisions off frompublic control and influence to a much greater extent than is the case inthe united states.23saskia sassen. 1998. globalization and its discontents. essays on the new mobility of peopleand money.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94global networks and local valuesfor example, germany ordinarily makes little effort to provide freedom of access to government information, apart from information relating to environmental issues. the german political process affords veryfew opportunities for public referenda. and in developing new policies,the german government negotiates with only a small number of stronglybox 4.7 project bosnia and operation kosovoover the last 5 years several dozen law students, engineering students,law professors, and practicing lawyers in the united states and europehave used the internet to promote human rights, advance the rule of law,facilitate freedom of the press and open media, and encourage economicdevelopment in the balkans. launched at villanova university school oflaw in january 1996, the project continues under the direction of deanhenry h. perritt, jr., assistant dean charles s. rudnick, and director ofspecial projects harry e. ashton iv of chicagokent college of law at theillinois institute of technology in chicago. students and others associatedwith project bosnia have connected the bosnian constitutional court andombudsman to the internet, developed a prototype database system forthe bosnian ministry of justice, and established an independent media center connected to the internet in banja luka in bosnia.chicagokentõs operation kosovo established an internetconnected database system for registering refugees and tracking refugee relief before andduring the nato bombing of yugoslavia. it has now extended the database to keep track of warcrimes evidence provided by refugees in interviews, making use of digital audio recording, encryption, and geographicinformation modeling technologies. operation kosovo participants haveused distancelearning technologies to make lectures on judicial procedure available to law students, law professors, and judges in kosovo. mostrecently, operation kosovo participants worked with the interim government of kosovo to use webbased and ecommerce technologies to facilitate foreign investment in startup enterprises in kosovo. the project illustrates the power of the internet to promote democracy, develop commerce,and improve the transparency of legal institutions, while also protectingindividualsõ privacy.the low cost of the technologies involved made it possible for a handfulof committed people, with only modest funding, to make a difference in adaunting international crisis. and they have been working on their own,albeit in consultation with formal international institutions such as theunited nations, the organization for security and cooperation in europe,and the world bank.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions95organized private actors. all of these german political practices havecome under pressure from global networks. by contrast, the united stateshas a much stronger tradition of freedom of information, makes moreextensive use of public referenda, and negotiates policy with a wide variety of interest groups. thus the pressures on the u.s. political system forchange are, in this respect, considerably less.the willingness of nations to respond to pressures created by increasing internationalization also varies. germany, under these kinds of pressures, has had some success in moving beyond its traditional commandandcontrol regulation. the united states, on the other hand, is moreresistant to international pressures generally; its unwillingness to adaptto global standards when, for example, its social and religious values areinvolved may prove to be problematical. the dispute between the unitedstates and the european union over privacy regulations, now resolved inprinciple, is a case in point. (see chapter 6 in this report for more detaileddiscussion.)all democracies balance individualism, hierarchy, and egalitarianbeliefs in some fashion.24 normally, political actors take these compromises as a given; indeed, they are embedded in political institutions thatrestrict the strategy space for political action. the stronger these institutions are, the more difficult it is to challenge the underlying compromises.when global networks do challenge them, the reaction is a confrontationalrather than an adaptive process.how fast change occurs depends on how well the political system isprepared to accommodate it. neither the united states nor germany hasa formal parliamentary system. in the united states, the president andhis administration, and in germany, the ministerial administration (aswell as powerful social actors like the unions), have either de jure or defacto veto power. this makes it somewhat more difficult to coalescearound a strategy for change.on the other hand, both are federations (germany, in fact, has threelevels of governance, if one includes the european union), which hasgiven them some experience in coordinating governance across politicalarenas. both countries also have powerful and independent constitutionalcourts, which can enable change by preventing a tyranny of the majorityand protecting diverse views and life styles. the courts can also breakpolitical deadlocks in which a legislative body is unwilling or unable toact when action is needed.24michael thompson, richard ellis, and aaron wildavsky. 1990. basic cultural theory.boulder, colo.: westview press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96global networks and local values4.2.10degree of international conflict over democratic valuesthe significant differences in the structure of democracy among countries may lead to differences in the reactions of these nations to the pressures for change posed by global networks. for example, nations havedifferent perspectives on how best to ensure order and propriety on theinternet (box 4.8). however, in contrast to the reaction where issues suchas pornography, hate speech, or religious tolerance are concerned,25 thedifferent forms that democracy takes are not, in themselves, a source ofconflict as long as there is little or no overlap in political constituencies.box 4.8 trust in politics: who should control the internet?the assessment of who can best control misuse of the internet displaysstrikingly different national perspectives. americans clearly look to theusers themselves, followed by the online service providers and organizations specializing in child protection or with a special moral authority ofsome other kind.in contrast, the german population places trust in politics and lawenforcement authorities to a noticeably greater extent, while it only gives asmall amount of responsibility and latitude to the internet users themselves.whereas 36 percent of the american population consider the individualinternet user as the best guarantor of an effective control of inappropriatecontent, barely onefifth of the german population shares this opinion. incontrast, 28 percent of the german population places trust in politicians,but only 2 percent of the american population does so.source: bertelsmann foundation: risk assessment and opinions concerning thecontrol of misuse on the internet. results of representative surveys conducted in theunited states, australia, and the federal republic of germany. a project by thebertelsmann foundation, germany, in conjunction with the australian broadcastingauthority (aba), allensbach archives, ifdsurvey 3296. available online at<http://www.stiftung.bertelsmann.de/internetcontent/english/frameset.htm?content/c2000.htm>.25grewlich (supra note 9) 241246.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions97those differences result from the fact that nationstates are sovereignand therefore free to choose their own political institutions; inevitably,they will make different choices in implementing democratic values. because there is little or no overlap in political constituencies, most peopledo not find their own form of democracy threatened merely because itdiffers from that of another nationstate.transnational political arenas would seem to represent a very different case. here there is very clearly an overlap of constituencies and apossibility for conflict among competing political systems. fortunately,at least for the issues of concern here, international institutions and governance structures are generally so weak, and so limited in their capacity tocompel actions in the member states, that confrontation between nationalsystems seldom occurs.more serious conflicts arise, however, when political systems becomeòmissionary.ó for example, those concerned about human rights want tosee human rights protected everywhere. in order to join the council ofeurope or the european community, eastern european countries have toprove that their constitutions conform to democratic standards in protecting individual rights. for many nations, such an evangelical perspectiveraises the concern that hegemonic intentions rather than humanitarianconsiderations may be the real driving force. some observers question,for instance, the u.s. governmentõs position that the internet should notbe regulated. they wonder whether it is less a manifestation of a firstamendment principle than it is covert industrial policy, aimed at ensuring unconditional access by american ebusiness to other countries.26this leads to a final concern. although different national concepts ofdemocracy can, in principle, coexist relatively easily in the era of theinternet, the internet itself is a global phenomenon. thus if one nationstate attempts to protect or foster its particular national form of democracy by attempting to shape the internet in a certain way, the normativedifferences between states may give rise to a significant international conflict over policy regarding the internet. box 4.9 provides an illustration.4.3constitutional policyglobal networks have great potential to induce change. they can enhance the effectiveness of some political arenas to the detriment of others,give some political actors power and take it away from others, and26jacques arlandis. 2000. òthe clerk, the merchant and the politician,ó in christoph engeland kenneth keller, eds., governance of global networks in the light of differing local values,105117, 109.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98global networks and local valuesbox 4.9 the french yahoo! caseon november 20th, 2000, in licra & french union of jewish studentsv. yahoo! inc., the county court of paris ordered yahoo! to comply within3 months of notification with a may 22 order under which yahoo! wasrequired to (1) take all necessary measures to òmake impossibleó access tonazi merchandise or any other site or service that may be construed òas(apologizing) for nazism or contesting the reality of nazi crimesó; (2) warnall internet surfers before they proceed with searches on yahoo.com of therisks involved in continuing to view such sites; and (3) submit, for deliberation by all the interested parties, the measures it proposes to take to òput anend to the trouble and damage suffered and to prevent any further trouble.óif yahoo! failed to comply, it would be subject to a penalty of 100,000francs per day of delay following the expiration of the 3month period.furthermore, yahoo! was ordered to make payment of 10,000 francs toeach of the plaintiffs.the court reasoned that even though the òyahoo! auctionsó site thatbrought this issue before the court generally targets surfers based in theunited states, auctions involving symbols of nazi ideology òmay be ofinterest to any person.ó furthermore, yahoo!õs claim in the litigation that itwas technologically infeasible to identify french users of its site was undercut by its practice of identifying such users so that it could present themwith frenchlanguage advertising banners. this practice is a clear exampleof òtargeting,ó which itself is emerging as an acceptable object of transnational jurisdiction.the court stated that the act of displaying objects of nazi ideology infrance is a violation of article r6451 of the penal code and thus is aòthreat to internal public order.ó the court also stated that the technicalmeasures and the initiatives at its disposal give yahoo! an opportunity tosatisfy the injunctions of the may 22 order. the two technical proceduresidentified by the courtñgeographical identification and user declaration ofnationalityñwould allow yahoo! to filter out french ip addresses at a success rate of 90 percent.in december 2000, yahoo! filed a declaratory relief action in the unitedstates district court for the northern district of california (san jose), seeking to block enforcement of the french order on the grounds that the frenchcourt lacked jurisdiction. on november 7, 2001, the court grantedyahoo!õs request for summary judgment (yahoo!, inc. v. la ligue contrele racisme et lõantisemitisme, f.supp.2d, 2001 wl 1381157 (n.d. cal.2001)), finding that french enforcement of french laws in the united stateswould chill yahooõs first amendment rights in the united states.the court decision can be found at <http://www.cdt.org/jurisdiction/011107judgement.pdf>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions99strengthen some governance tools and weaken others. they can alter political processes, the character of political conflicts, or cognitive frameworks and normative beliefs. they can even change the relationship between the society and the state. it would be naive to expect those whocurrently hold political power to just let all this happen. this sets thestage for the debates, conflicts, and structural adjustments that are part ofthe evolution of what might be called òconstitutional policy,ó to which wenow turn our attention.4.3.1accommodating constitutional policy to global networkspolitical actors are likely to try to encourage or block a particular effect of global networks on political structures, depending on their assessment of its consequences. but as a practical matter it is really quite difficult to anticipate either the precise way in which the networks will affecteach part of the system or all of the consequences that may result fromtrying to intervene. given the complex interactions that occur betweenpolitical and social subsystems,27 any interventionñwhether in the formof new regulations, political cooptation of networks, or even changes inthe structure of political institutionsñcan lead to reactions by each subgroup to preserve the status quo or to maintain the momentum of change.this seems particularly likely when players from the firstgenerationinternet communities, who tend to blend egalitarian with anarchic elements, are involved.although it is beyond the scope of this study to deal with the questionof whether there is any compelling reason to encourage one form of democracy over another, the question of how a constitutional change cancome about under the influence of global networks is quite appropriate.democracies deliberately make such change difficult in order to reducethe likelihood that wellorganized political interest groups can effect fundamental structural alterations merely to suit their agendas.the u.s. supreme court and the german constitutional court playkey roles in guarding their respective constitutions against such politicalmanipulation. but global networks can, in a de facto sense, alter constitutional protections or frustrate constitutional goals even without any formal change in the constitution. given that possibility, a failure to modifythe written constitution, or a failure to adjust the informal mechanismsand interpretations that supplement the written provisions of the consti27for the internet as a subsystem the argument is made in dirk baecker, 2000, ònetworking the web,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., understanding the impact ofglobal networks on local social, political and cultural values, 93111, 96.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100global networks and local valuestution, may sometimes lead to undesirable changes in a nationõs fundamental political structure.the german constitution might be somewhat better prepared to parrysuch a challenge. both countries have constitutionally protected fundamental freedoms, and both empower their respective constitutional courtsto interpret them. but the united statesõs interpretation relies on rightsthat are explicitly mentioned in or at least implied by the u.s. constitution, and the u.s. supreme court tends to narrow the constitutional issues before it as much as possible, at least by comparison to the germanconstitutional court. the german constitutional court, on the otherhand, has greater leeway for adaptation, thus allowing it to act on thebasis of broader considerations. for example, although german basic lawrequires that any governmental interference with freedom or propertyneeds a justification, almost any reasonable policy is accepted as a justification, provided that the proposed restrictions can be shown to be necessary to achieve the desired end.4.3.2internet policygiven the reluctance of policymakers to undertake constitutionalchanges to adjust to the new circumstances presented by global networks,they are likely to focus on policy instruments that would allow control,regulation, or even exclusion of the internet for the purpose of dealingwith the tensions it generates. but none of those approaches is easy toimplement. only two countries in the world have opted for a policy ofcompletely forbidding access to the internet: north korea and myanmar.singapore and vietnam have tried to force all internet traffic in and out oftheir countries through a few tightly controlled conduits, but they pay ahigh price for such control: access by their citizens to worldwide information sources is sharply reduced. for countries such as the united states orgermany, such draconian action has never been proposed.short of actually blocking access to the internet, countries find themselves with options of widely different effectiveness, as illustrated by germany and the united states. because of u.s. dominance in the globalinformation technology industry and among largescale internet serviceproviders, u.s. policy actions that force change in the internetrelatedproducts and services offered by u.s. companies are likely to affect thedevelopment path of the internet globally. on the other hand, eventhough german authorities may occasionally sanction a global network(as they did in the compuserve cases), their influence is limited and canhardly be expected to have a significant effect on the shape of the internet.because of the interconnectedness of the internet infrastructure (e.g.,standards and protocols), if one nation actually effects some change in theglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions101structure or operation of the internet, that change will affect operationseverywhereñbut not necessarily in the same way or with the same consequences. for example, if the united states forced a technological changeto implement its national policy of limiting the distribution of undesirablematerial, it might well build into the system the technical means for anauthoritarian regime to extend its censorship control (a point discussedfurther in chapter 5).it would be simplistic to view internet policy as entirely a question ofregulation or control aimed at preserving traditional political structures,given that global networks offer a new tool for achieving important andvery broad political goals. both the united states and germany are committed to a political structure that can provide for a range of views to beheard and considered and, at the same time, encourage integration ofthose views and the people who hold them into a coherent society.to satisfy the first goal, ideological, political, and ethnic minoritiesneed to have access to the public forum, providing for a kind of culturalbiodiversity that introduces fresh insights and makes political innovationpossible. this goal has not been easy to meet through traditional electronic media. the radiofrequency spectrum is limited and crowded, andcable channels are expensive, as are broadcasting facilities of significantpower. constitutional courts have tried to overcome these inherent limitations by instituting fairness doctrines, with mixed results.28 by contrast,the internet and its related technologies make the goal of access mucheasier to attain. the spectrum is virtually unlimited, the costs are low,and public policies can easily be put in place to promote internet literacy,wide availability of terminals in schools and libraries, and help for anygroup interested in setting up a web page.the situation is reversed with respect to the goal of societal integration. with traditional electronic media, the small number of programoriginators, the high setup cost, the onetomany nature of broadcasting,and the typically passive role of the message recipients are all conduciveto societal integration. moreover, the small number of programmers alsomakes it easy to impose and enforce policy.the internet makes societal integration harder to achieve because individuals have much greater autonomy both as transmitters and recipients of messages. indeed, the technology allows societal atomization toan unprecedented degree. some technical approaches have been proposed to promote integration in the internet contextñfor example, òpushótechnologies that force users to open a publicly designed or prescribedwindow before they can get access to any other site. but there are obvious28for an account, see cass sunstein, 1995, democracy and the problem of free speech, thefree press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102global networks and local valuesobjections to such an imposition on personal freedom. for the time being,therefore, it appears more feasible to depend on networkbased technologies to serve the goals of access and diversity, and more traditional broadcast media to promote social and political integration.it should be noted, however, that technological convergence may require a reconsideration in the future of how best to achieve a balance ofdiversity and integration. technological developments are graduallyblurring the distinctions between various communication media. dsltechnology can increase the bandwidth of telephone lines so that they cansupport motionpicture transmission or other kinds of broadcasting;cabletelevision lines can now support internet communication and realtime voice communications; and various kinds of compression technologies are increasing broadcastchannel availability, thus allowing morecustomized programming. in time this may alter the view of broadcastmedia as passive and integrative, and internet media as active and diverse, but for the near and midterm future the distinction remains useful.4.3.3networks and representative versus direct democracydemocracy theorists have been attracted by one feature of global networks in particular: the fact that it is now technically and economicallypossible to let people decide political issues directly. this reopens thedebate over representative versus direct democracy and the desirabilityof a shift of lawmaking jurisdiction from a legislature to the electorate.29different countries have had different experiences with plebiscites. inswitzerland, plebiscites seem to work reasonably well. but many analystsbelieve that the demise of germanyõs weimar republic was accelerated byan overly broad use of that instrument. the òelectronic town halló wouldappear to increase input legitimacy, because it increases participation. onthe other hand, it is more difficult to ensure that voters are as fully informedabout complex issues as one might hope legislators are, and so output legitimacy may suffer. voters may be lured into the illusion that access toinformation through global networks is tantamount to complete understanding. moreover, legislation by referendum usually requires that theissue at hand be reduced to a simply phrased question. experience hasshown that the outcome of a referendum depends strongly on how the question is phrased,30 and most experts agree that it is all but impossible to keepa question simple and, at the same time, capture important nuances.29see jeffrey abramson. 2000. òdemocracy and global communications,ó in christophengel and kenneth keller, eds., governance of global networks in the light of differing localvalues, 119130.30see, for example, r. nisbett and l. ross, 1980, human inference, prenticehall.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions103of course, legislative decisions may not be fully informed either, andthe traditional political process does not necessarily lead to the most desirable outcome. for example, political actors may be motivated by concerns other than solving the policy problem at hand.31 the legislativeagenda can be shaped by the media, scandal, or a host of other factorsrather than by substantive priority, and logrolling or political influencemay determine outcomes as much as the needs of the polity.the fact is that neither popular nor legislative approaches to problemsolving are free from riskñor without merit. a larger role for direct democracy could serve three purposes. it could increase the participation ofthe public in decision making, resulting in a greater sense of ownershipand responsibility. it might be an important tool in promoting societalintegration. and it could make those in political power more accountableto the public. if the threat of plebiscites, formal or informal, exists, it ismore difficult to ignore the public will between elections. in that respect,some opportunities for direct democracy can be part of the system ofchecks and balances in the political structure.it may well be that the most important contribution of networks willnot be to replace representative democracies with referendum/plebiscitebased direct democracies, but to offer a rich range of intermediate possibilities. such options could enhance participation in governance, increasethe diversity of viewpoints in public debate, and place additional pressure on public officials to be responsive and accountable. the mere potential of global networks to redistribute political power forces decisionmakers to explain their actions more clearly and thoroughly.referenda can be used to express public views without actually shifting formal decisionmaking power. even without formal referenda, theease of network communication makes it possible for many differentvoices to be heard. and with broader freedomofinformation policies,the new technologies can allow the public to gain increased access to government files.32 by shedding brighter light on the processes of government, the ability of the public to hold its elected officials accountable fortheir actions may thus be enhanced.31daniel a. farber and philip p. frickey. 1991. law and public choice, 22.32as discussed in chapter 8, there are significant differences between the united statesand germany in this respect. freedom of information is already a much more broadly applied principle in the united states than in germany.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104global networks and local values4.3.4the impact of networks on theevolution of political landscapespolitical structures need to be open to change over time, both becausenew technologies introduce new issues and because the value judgementsof those governed may change. societyõs formal institutions and politicalculture need to be prepared for evolution, to be able to respond to freshideas and be attentive to new challenges. the healthy society developsmechanisms to adapt in much the same way an ecosystem does, encouraging processes of variation and selection. the analogy has limitations,however. both variation and selection have dangers for a society. theformer promotes fragmentation of the body politic, the latter encouragessingleissue politics. those are dangers that societies need to be aware ofbut cannot easily avoid.global networks affect variation and selection, but they do more forthe former than the latter. they provide a means for giving people withnew ideas wide distribution and a means for people seeking ideas to findthem. in doing so, they reshape political arenas, empower political actors, and reconfigure political processes. their effect on selection is lessclear. do they lead to a more thoughtful process of weighing and implementing ideas, or do they provide an opportunity for special interests orsingleissue groups to promote changes that do not serve the broad politywell? if the latter is the case, one might view an appropriate regulatorystrategy for global networks as one that promotes globalization and pluralization to increase the range of ideas available, but restricts the role ofthe networks in the actual process of lawmaking.central government policies undertaken to deal with social problemsalmost always have distributional consequences that affect one group differently than another. if a way cannot be found to compensate a constituency that is negatively affected, the government stands to alienate thatgroup. in the modern world, networking technologies provide opportunities for such groups to leave the polity, virtually or in reality. for singleissue constituencies, the opportunities for government to craft some kindof compensation are quite limited. thus, the very network that increasesa groupõs power to press its case also decreases its need or willingness toaccept a negative decision to serve the greater good.although the issues discussed in this section are exacerbated by global networks, they are really part and parcel of the modern world. even ifa country was prepared to cut its population off from global networks, itcould not avoid many other forms of globalization. the nationstate isinexorably losing its traditional role as a monopolistic provider of a highlyaggregated bundle of public goods. more and more, it is under competiglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.democracy and political institutions105tive pressure from other providersñother nationstates, and differentstructures of formal and informal political organization.33at the same time, national political systems continue to have significant power. the roles and services that governments provide, as well astheir authority and effectiveness, may be attenuated, but they will remainvital to their constituents. in that sense, the nationstate may be altered,but it is not threatened. states will still provide social services, education,physical protection, public health, and environmental stability and willfulfill the host of functions that are associated with place and identity.this will give a state the legitimacy and power to retain certain authorityand to negotiate with other nations to protect its rights and the rights ofits citizens. most international treaties are examples of the effectivenessof national systems to organize a global order, even in the modern world.one may view this as a practical and acceptable alternative to constitutionalizing the world order,34 and one that is perhaps more important than ever before precisely because of the advent of global networks.but given the ad hoc nature of this globalizing process, the future isquite openended, in both descriptive and prescriptive terms. nationstates and their constitutional orders will certainly continue to come under competitive pressure. those governed will have increasing leeway tomove away from a nationstateõs regulatory power and, clearly, the morecredible the threat to move, the more carefully nationstates will have tolisten to their demands. but because one cannot accurately predict whichinterest groups will mount the most credible threats at any particular time,it is difficult to know what the nature of the competitive pressures is mostlikely to be or how nations will respond. will democratic institutions beharmonized? if so, will we see òa race to the bottom,ó a òrace to the top,óor an entirely changed governance structure? and if we do see the emergence of a significantly changed structure, on what basis should we judgeit to be a good or a bad thing?33jeanmarie gu”henno. 1998. òfrom territorial communities to communities of choice:implications for democracy,ó in wolfgang streeck, ed., internationale wirtschaft, nationale34jochen a. frowein. 2000. òkonstitutionalisierung des vılkerrechts,ó berichte der39:427448.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1065free speech and the internet5.1introductionthe preceding chapters have sought to provide a framework for understanding how global networks influence local values, political institutions, and ways of doing business, as well as how those networks mightbe governed. this chapter and the next look more closely at some particular issuesñnamely, those related to free speech and to the tensionsbetween privacy and freedom of information.to a certain extent, the selection of these topics is arbitrary. in otherchapters, the report has touched on other topics that might reasonably beexamined more closely: consumer protection and copyright; the socialchanges inherent in a networked world; and the shifting boundaries between public and private spaces and the blurring of the line between consumer and producer. transnational issues could have been added as well:tax policy, customs and tariffs for internet traffic, and technical standardization are obvious examples.but free speech and privacy stand out in two respects: they have attracted considerable public interest, and they are characterized by conflictbetween the two nations that are the focus of this report. therefore, thischapter and the next will address these issues. the intention is to discussthem as examples of the tensions and challenges that global networks introduce in a societyõs values, but these are issues with such strong legalovertones that it is impractical to approach them without incorporatinglegal considerations into the discussion as well.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet1075.2the values involved in free speechfor both the united states and germany, freedom of speech is suchan important formal value that it is explicitly protected by the firstamendment to the u.s. constitution and by article 5 of the german basiclaw. because of this constitutional protection, legislatures have very littlelatitude to pass laws that restrict speech. if the legislature, or any othergovernmental body, moves too far in that direction, individuals in eachcountry can seek relief in the highest court.this constitutional protection of free speech obligates both government and private parties to tolerate many kinds of expression, regardlessof how much it may clash with individual values or with the traditions ofthe country. yet, restrictions on speech are common around the world,with many instances of censorship and criminal prosecution for the criticism of government policy. even in the united states and germany,policymakers have sought legislation from time to time that would placerestrictions on various kinds of speech. such legislation has usually beenstruck down as unconstitutional, but the continual efforts made, and therestrictions sometimes allowed, suggest that the right of free speech is notabsolute and that some substantive value is being explicitly or implicitlyapplied to distinguish protected from unprotected speech. this substantive value (or these values) may well be in tension with the formal valueof free speech.some of those competing values may also be formal ones. for example, the exercise of free speech might directly or almost directly causephysical harmñsuch as injuries and death resulting from the publicationof bombbuilding instructions or the psychic trauma of children that mightoccur as the result of exposure to certain kinds of sexually explicit material. similarly, one cannot (falsely) shout òfire!ó in a crowded theatre; asoliver wendell holmes noted, òyour freedom ends where my nose begins.ó where the connections among formal values are relatively clearand unambiguousñthey are not always soñit is relatively easy to makejudgments about which one should take precedence. the situation is notso straightforward when substantive values are involved.generally speaking, formal values such as free speech establish rightsand procedures that enable a society to function effectively and, it ishoped, fairly. but it takes substantive values to provide the glue, theshared outlook that makes a society more than a collection of individuals.if the values under which a society operated were composed exclusivelyof formal values, normative views of the world, such as the hierarchical,global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108global networks and local valuesthe egalitarian, or the fatalistic, which hold societies together and distinguish them from one another, would be denied any status whatsoever.1in fact, substantive values do come into play. for example, restrictions on free speech may be the result of seeking balanceñthe formalvalue of free speech weighed against the competing claims of certain substantive values. of course, the notion that a balance is involved suggeststhat the mere existence of a conflicting substantive value is not a sufficientreason to restrict free speech. the critical question is whether the exerciseof free speech violates a substantive value to an unacceptable degree; answering this question entails a value judgment that is not only contentious but often rendered differently in different societies, even those assimilar as the united states and germany. the treatment of two suchissuesñhate speech and protection of children and adolescentsñis discussed in the following sections.5.3common and different traditions andthe internetfree speech was an important right long before the advent of theinternet, but there were practical limitations on how well individualscould exercise it to influence their societies. people could find a soapboxin hyde park or union square, send a letter to the editor, or distributeleaflets.2 but if they wanted to have an impact on public policy or onsociety at large, they had to go through intermediaries. the internetbrings society much closer to the ideal of a free market of ideas, in thatsurfacing a wide range of ideas in a public forum, including those disparaged as fringe, is easier than it has ever been before. nevertheless, limitations clearly remain, and the availability of ideas on a web site does notassure that everyone will find them or require that everyone access them.5.3.1hate speechhate speech can be defined as the willful public expression of hatredtoward any segment of society distinguished by a characteristic such as1michael thompson, richard ellis, and aaron wildavsky, 1990, cultural theory, boulder,colo.: westview press; for an application to the topic of this report see michael thompson,2000, òglobal networks and local cultures: what are the mismatches and what can bedone about them?,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., understanding theimpact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, badenbaden: nomos113130.2computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1994.rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communities. washington, d.c.: national academy press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet109color, race, religion, ethnic origin, or sexual orientation. hate speech canbe particularly debilitating to a society because it attacks an entire group.thus it threatens the peaceful coexistence of different groups within thepopulation and, ultimately, the stability of the community.hate speech is more than merely hurtful; it creates a climate that canlead to depriving certain groups of their civil rights. the danger neednot be concrete and immediate; sad experience has shown that the verbal stigmatization of particular groups in a community can build upnegative attitudes in the population at large, which can lead to discrimination and may even erupt into violence against the group. despite thenearuniversal revulsion to hate speech among civilized peoples, thereare significant differences between the united states and germany inhow it is handled.two cases, widely reported in the media and described here in chapter 3, demonstrate the problems created by these differences: the onlinesale of mein kampf (august 1999) and the compuserve case (may 1998).the first arose from differences in the laws of the two countries concerning what can be distributed, and the second concerned the responsibilityof a service provider for the messages transferred through its network.the compuserve case attracted particular attention in the american press,with headlines like ògermanyõs internet angst,ó òa ôcybercoupõ forgermanyõs cybercops,ó ògerman net future questioned,ó and òefforts tocontrol the net abuse liberty.óthe united statesin terms of value balance, the united states gives the formal value offree speech more weight than essentially any substantive value and almost all other formal values. therefore, attempts to proscribe hate speechusing legal remedies such as the criminal code or municipal regulationshave invariably been struck down by the supreme court, based on theidea that such remedies violate the constitutional right to freedom of expression contained in the first amendment. indeed, because article 20 ofthe international covenant on civil and political rights3 required signatory states to agree that òany advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violenceshall be prohibited by law,ó the united states refused to ratify that part ofthe covenant. furthermore, in ratifying the genocide convention, the3the international covenant on civil and political rights was adopted and opened forsignature, ratification, and accession through u.n. general assembly resolution 2200a (xxi)of 16 december 1966. it entered into force on 23 march 1976.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110global networks and local valuesunited states made specific reservations to prevent any impact of the convention on first amendment rights in the united states.a measure of the primacy given to the right to freedom of expressionis that the first amendment does not specify any exceptions, and thesupreme court has been very cautious in allowing any. over the years,it has developed a strict set of criteria defining circumstances in whichsome state abridgement of free speech might reasonably be allowed inorder to serve other constitutional goals, but the exceptions have beenvery few.proposed government restrictions that are based on the content of anexpression have to be capable of standing up to an intense examinationcalled òstrict scrutiny.ó under this test, restrictions can be justified only ifthe state is able to show a compelling public interest in doing so. eventhen, it has to choose the least restrictive means for achieving the desiredaim. furthermore, if the proposed measures are too vague or too broad,in all likelihood they will be rejected as unconstitutional. in fact and inpractice, the strict scrutiny test is equivalent to the initial assumption thatany restriction on free speech is unconstitutional.government measures aimed at preventing the purely abstract dangers of hate speech, which would certainly encompass most substantivevalue concerns, have always been struck down by the supreme courtbecause they have not passed the strict scrutiny test. in 1952, the courtdid hold, in beauharnais v. illinois,4 that the defamation of a group shouldnot fall within the protection of the first amendment. but even that decision, though never officially reversed and overruled, has not guided subsequent court action, particularly following collin v. smith5 and r.a.v. v.city of st. paul6 (box 5.1).in brandenburg v. ohio, 395 u.s. 444 (1969) (per curiam), the supremecourt held that the first amendment even protects speech that encourages others to commit violence, unless the speech is capable of òproducing imminent lawless action.ó thus, arguing that òif the first amendmentprotects speech advocating violence, then it must also protect speech thatdoes not advocate violence but still makes it more likely,ó a threejudgepanel of the 9th circuit court of appeals held that a web site and posterscalling abortion doctors òbaby butchersó and criminals were protected bythe first amendment. the court stated that òpolitical speech may not be4343 u.s. 250 (1952).5578 f.2d 1197 (7th cir. 1978); cert. denied 439 u.s. 916 (1978).6505 u.s. 377 (1992).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet111punished just because it makes it more likely that someone will be harmedat some unknown time in the future by an unrelated third party.ó7box 5.1 selected decisions on hate speechcollin v. smith is based on the following facts: in 1977 the city of skokie,north of chicago, had about 70,000 inhabitants; 40,000 of them were jewish, including some 5,000 who were survivors of the holocaust. in marchinformed the municipal administration of skokie that his party was planning to organize a walk through the city and that party members wereintending to wear nazi uniforms. city officials tried to prevent the wearingof such uniforms and the distribution or display of material that couldòcause or promote hatred against people of jewish faith or jewish origin.óthe court of appeals for the seventh circuit decided that the march andthe wearing of uniforms were protected expressions of opinionñand thenecessary price of freedom in america. òthe result,ó it said, òis dictated bythe fundamental proposition that if these civil rights are to remain vital forall, they must protect not only those that society deems acceptable, butalso those whose ideas it quite justifiably rejects and despises.ó the supreme court rejected the appeal of the city of skokie and thus gave itspermission for the march. (see collin v. smith, 578 f.2d 1197 (7th cir.1978), cert. denied sub. nom. smith v. collin, 439 u.s. 916 (1978).)in r.a.v. v. city of st. paul (505 u.s. 377 (1992)), the accused, robertallen victoria (r.a.v.) had, together with others, burned a cross in the frontyard of a black family that had just moved to an allwhite area. theirpurpose was clearly and avowedly to intimidate the family. victoria wasfound guilty according to a municipal criminal statute that penalized asdisorderly conduct òthe placing on public or private grounds of a symbolor an object . . . including a burning cross . . . if one knows, or shouldknow, that this action causes anger, fright, or fear by making reference torace, skin color, religion, or sex of other people.ó the supreme court decided that the municipal statute was unconstitutional and therefore theverdict was overturned. the statute was deemed contrary to the protectionof expression of opinion protected by the first amendment, since òprotected expressions were only penalized on the basis of the choice of thetarget group of the speech.ó7244 f.3d 1007 (9th cir. 2001); reh. en banc granted, 268 f.3d 908 (9th cir, october 3, 2001).the latter citation refers to an order from the court that the case be reheard by the en banccourt, with the threejudge panel opinion not being cited as precedent by or to this court orany district court of the ninth circuit, except to the extent adopted by the en banc court.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112global networks and local valueson the other hand, the supreme court has allowed exceptions to firstamendment protection when the expression could likely lead to a hateengendered crime. in such cases, the court has applied the òclear andpresent danger test.ó expressions that give rise to a clear and presentdanger of criminal action, and thus infringe on the rights of some segmentof the population, can be forbidden. this exception is called òcommunications tending to incite lawlessnessó or òadvocacy of unlawful action.ógermanythe german legal system, in contrast to the american system, generally penalizes hate speech. given the experience under national socialism and the former german democratic republic, the federal republictakes the position that a democracy has to be able to defend itself as apolitical system. there is a particularly strong feeling that it must be ableto stop any attempt to reestablish a national socialist authority. interestingly, in addition to the resolve of the postwar german generation toresist national socialism, other countries that fought the nazi regime andcertain ethnic groups (such as those of jewish descent, who were victimized by the regime) expect this vigilance of germany. in addition to measures targeted against hate speech, there are also german laws that prohibit the defamation of victims of national socialist crimes, denial of theholocaust, wearing of the swastika, and distribution of national socialistpropaganda.the compatibility of these laws with the constitution has never seriously been questioned, even though in germany, as in the united states,freedom of expression is an important value. the bundesverfassungsgericht (the german equivalent of the u.s. supreme court) says that freedom of expression is simply an inherent aspect of democracy. however,the constitutional right of freedom of expression, as granted in article 5abs. 1 gg, is worded as follows:anybody has the right to freely express his opinion in words, writtenmaterials, and pictures and to distribute it and to draw information fromgenerally accessible sources without any interference. the freedom ofthe press and the freedom of broadcasting and film are guaranteed.there is no censorship.these rights will find their barriers in the provisions of the generallaws, the legal provisions for the protection of the youth and the right topersonal honor.the wording of this article is similar to guarantees in other westerneuropean constitutions (for example, article 10 of the european convention on human rights). there is a good deal of room for interpretation inglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet113the words and, particularly in view of the last sentence, a number of circumstances in which this constitutional right can be restricted. thus theprohibition against hate speech would fall under the category of a generallaw. its provisions are viewed as ònot directed against the expression ofan opinion as such, but that rather serve the protection of a worthy legalvalue, without consideration of any special opinion (italics added).ó8 forbidding holocaust denial has been justified by the bundesverfassungsgericht as necessary to protect the personal honor of theholocaustõs victims, who might otherwise be viewed as threatened andcompromised.9there are efforts, sometimes driven by actions and interpretations ofthe european court of human rights, to limit the extent to which theright of free speech can be abridged. for example, the bundesverfassungsgericht requires that the conflicting interests be balanced and thatthere be a consideration of whether there are any less restrictive meansavailable in order to achieve the intended goal. but, in the face ofgermanyõs recent history, it is not surprising that the prohibition of hatespeech is regarded as legitimate and appropriate.the contrasts between germany and the united states in regard to freespeech are relatively easy to understand. the generally high tolerance in theunited states for free speech is generally regarded as critical in a highly heterogeneous societyñone with a long history of absorbing wave after wave ofimmigrant groupsñto avoiding pressures that might otherwise arise to conform ideologically and culturally. indeed, guaranteed individual and political liberties have always been one of the attractions of the united states tothose forced to leave their homeland for reasons of political repression. recent history in germany, on the other hand, has provided a sad lesson in howfast political propaganda and incitement in a relatively homogeneous societycan lead to the separation and murder of whole segments of the population.it has led to a broad consensus on the need to place limits on freedom ofexpression in order to preserve freedom generally.this practical explanation raises the question of whether it is fair tocharacterize the american situation as one in which the formal value offree speech dominates any consideration of substantive values or whetherthe commitment to diversity, which free speech facilitates, is itself a substantive value. in the latter case, societal cohesion and individual libertyboth support the idea of free speech, giving added weight to its protection. in the german situation, there is warranted concern that the sharedsubstantive valuesñprotection of the rights of minorities and the dignity8bverfge 7, 198, 209 f.9bverfge 90, 241, 252.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114global networks and local valuesof individualsñmay be threatened by an unequivocal commitment to freespeech; so the balance between the two plays out differently.5.3.2the protection of children and adolescentsboth the united states and the federal republic are deeply concernedwith protecting children and adolescents, and both have established lawsin that spirit.10 those that deal with material in print, film, or electronicmedia are of two basic kinds. first, there are laws aimed at preventingabuse and maltreatment, which make it illegal to distribute, purchase, orpossess written materials, videos, and other items that depict child pornography. the argument is that such material is a stimulus to carryingout the acts depicted, and that it leads producers to abuse children in thecourse of its production.it is no surprise, then, that on both sides of the atlantic, legislatureshave proscribed child pornography in every format and venue. the distribution of child pornography through the internet, as well as its possession, is a criminal offense. even images that have been created by computer or drawn, where children are obviously not involved in production,may be illegal.11in neither country have constitutional concerns been seriously raisedabout these laws. in the united states, they meet the strict scrutiny test.in germany, although the contents of child pornography are, in principle,10in germany it is even at the constitutional level; see art. 6 abs. 2 gg or art. 5 abs. 2 gg.but in the united states as well, the supreme court found, in the decision of ginsberg v. newyork (390 u.s. 629 (1968)), that the state had a legitimate interest in protecting the physicaland psychological wellbeing of minors.11in the united states, the child pornography protection act of 1996 (cppa) expandedthe definition of child pornography to include any visual depictions of individuals that appear to be minors, or visual depictions presented in a manner to convey the impression of aminor, engaging in sexually explicit conduct. (as of this writing [november 2001], thisprovision of the cppa is pending before the supreme court. it was held unconstitutionalby the u.s. court of appeals for the ninth circuit (free speech coalition v. reno, 222 f.3d 1113(9th cir. 2001)), but was upheld by the first, fourth, fifth, and eleventh circuits (unitedstates v. fox, 248 f.3d 394 (5th cir. 2001)); united states v. mento, 231 f.3d 912, (4th cir.2000); united states v. acheson, 195 f. 3d 645 (11th cir. 1999); united states v. hilton, 167 f.3d61 (1st cir. 1999), cert. denied, 528 u.s. 844, 120 s. ct. 115, 145 l. ed. 2d 98 (2000)). under theu.s. criminal code, possession, distribution, and transportation of child pornography sodefined is a felony. in germany, section 184 of the german criminal code prohibits thedistribution of both òrealó and òfictiveó child pornography (real with real persons involved;fictive with drawings, computerproduced images, and even written or acoustic material).however, the german criminal code does not prohibit the possession of fictive child pornography.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet115protected by the constitution, child and adolescent protection has beenrecognized as a legitimate basis for outlawing it.the second area of law related to protecting minors aims at preventing them from being exposed to material that might be psychologicallytraumatic or might adversely affect their development. this is the moredifficult area of the two. much of the material is itself not consideredinnately harmful and, therefore, is not proscribed; the practical questionis how to specifically control only the inappropriate material, and how toaccomplish that without interfering with those who have a right to receive it. here the balancing of rights comes into play more directly, asdoes the determination of the appropriate roles of government, the private sector, and parents. how, then, have the united states and germanydealt with this set of issues?the united statesin february 1996, the congress adopted the communications decencyact (cda), a sweeping law that held content providers criminally liable ifa person under 18 years of age obtained òobscene,ó òindecent,ó or òpatently offensiveó material through any òtelecommunications device.óthere was a socalled òsafe harboró provision, which protected a provider who makes goodfaith efforts to deny access to individuals under18; such efforts would include the use of a credit card, a debit account, anadult access code, or an adult personalidentification number.12 the acttriggered immediate challenges and was quickly reviewed by the supreme court (reno v. american civil liberties union13).the court found (as had the lower courts) that the socalled section223 (47 usc 233) provisions of the cda were too broad and too vaguelyformulated. the vagueness of the expressions òindecentó and òpatentlyoffensiveó allowed for such a wide range of interpretations that they couldnot be reconciled with the courtõs strict criteria for allowing freedom ofspeech to be abridged. the chilling effect of the ambiguities in the lawwould lead producers to be so cautious that it would inhibit legitimate12in order to be able to consider technological innovations in this area without a statutorychange, every method that is feasible will be treated in the same way. the federal communications commission would have had the task of choosing suitable systems and to qualifythem as such. the safe harbor clause has as its aimñsimilar to the age restriction on youthendangering publications or visits to establishments in redlight districtsñthe denial of access to online offers to adolescents only, and not to adults. the complete criminalization ofthe contents is not intended with this socalled zoning approach.13521 u.s. 844 (1997).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116global networks and local valuesfreedom of expression and restrict the availability of content that adultsmight quite legally want to obtain.even the safeharbor clause was regarded as inadequate. it was notclear that the access control systems available would be judged sufficientto trigger the protections of the safeharbor clause. and even if effective,installing the controls would entail substantial costs beyond the capacityof most noncommercial providers. therefore the law would discriminateagainst them. finally, much of the objectionable content came fromabroad, where american law could not easily be enforced.in response to the courtõs action, congress took a different approach,passing the child online protection act (copa) at the end of 1998. copahad a narrower scope of application than cda, but its intention was similar and it has often been referred to as òcda ii.ó the intention of its sponsors was to deal with the supreme courtõs objections by dropping unacceptable terms like òobsceneó and òindecentó and substituting a narroweròharmful to minorsó standard. furthermore, copa dealt only with thecommercial distribution of material and only on the world wide web. itdid not try to regulate other internet services such as newsgroups. copaalso included a safeharbor provision that exempted from prosecutionparties that take goodfaith measuresñthrough any reasonable means feasible under available technology (e.g., the use of a credit card)ñto restrictaccess by minors to material that is harmful to them.still, many of the groups that objected to the cda also found the newstatute to be objectionable, and the american civil liberties union(aclu) and other groups challenged it in court. the united states district court for the eastern district of pennsylvania issued a preliminaryinjunction against copa, holding that the law was likely to be found incompatible with the first amendment for many of the same reasons thatthe cda had been rejected.14 content providers would be inhibited, byfear of liability as well as by the costs associated with installing accesscontrol software, in what they produced, with the net effect of adults being less able to receive legal material that they might want.the district court acknowledged that youth protection was a legitimate reason for restricting freedom of expression, but it argued not onlythat less restrictive means were available but that the prescribed accesscontrol systems would be of limited effectiveness anyway; they wouldnot apply to foreign web sites, noncommercial providers, or newsgroups.14american civil liberties union v. reno, 31 f. supp.2d 473 (e.d.pa. (1999). this decisioncan be seen online at <http://www.cdt.org/speech/copa/990201acluvsrenodecision.shtml>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet117less restrictive means, such as filtering software (discussed in chapter 3),might be simpler, cheaper, and no less effective. on april 2, 2000, the u.s.justice department appealed the district courtõs decision, and on june22, 2000, the third circuit court of appeals upheld the decision of thedistrict court. the u.s. supreme court has accepted a further appealfrom the u.s. government for its 20002001 term and is expected to hearthis case in november 2001.another attempt to protect youth was enacted on december 21, 2000ñthe childrenõs internet protection act (cipa).15 cipa requires publicschools and public libraries that receive discounted service for internetaccess through federal funds (òerateó) to enforce a policy of internetsafety for minors. such public institutions must use òtechnology protection measuresó that prevent access to visual depictions that are obscene,òharmful to minors,ó or contain child pornography. cipa further definesmaterial that is òharmful to minorsó as material that if òtaken as a wholeand with respect to minors, appeals to a prurient interest in nudity, sex, orexcretion; depicts, describes or represents, in a patently offensive way withrespect to what is suitable for minors, an actual or simulated normal orperverted sexual act, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals, and taken as awhole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value to minors.ó16 the american civil liberties union and the american libraryassociation have announced their intention to challenge cipa on firstamendment grounds.17germanyin 1997, a comprehensive internetspecific law for the protection ofminors was adopted in germany that prohibits young people from receiving certain kinds of material. as part of the lawõs implementation, alist was developed of materials that are inappropriate for minors and thatmay not be distributed by electronic means or, for that matter, made accessible in any other way. the list includes material that is òimmoral,[has] a brutalizing effect, [gives] incentive to violence, crimes, or racialhatred . . . [or glorifies] the waróñcategories that clearly go beyond theproposed laws in the united states.like the u.s. legislation, the german law places responsibility forlimiting access primarily on the provider. the law also has a safehar15p.l. 106554, ¤ 1(a)(4), 114 stat. 2763.1647 u.s.c. ¤ 254(h)(7)(g).17multnomah county library v. united states; no. 01cv1322; <www.aclu.org/features/fo02001a.html> (site visited april 26, 2001).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118global networks and local valuesbor provision, insulating providers from prosecution if they have madea goodfaith effort to prevent minors from accessing the inappropriatematerial. the law describes such an effort as making òtechnical provisions . . . to restrict the offer or its distribution within [germany] to adultusers.ó the kind and type of these òtechnical provisionsó have not yetbeen specified.of course, either the provider or the user can do the actual restricting.the german law allows for userinitiated controls when it is the user whoinitiates access to the inappropriate material. material is allowed to bedistributed this way only òif devices are supplied by the provider orother(s) that allow the user to block these offers.ó this leaves to parents orguardians the decision of whether or not to use the blocking device.again, in this case, the legislature didnõt say anything about what kindsof blocking devices would be suitableña notunreasonable stance giventhe dynamic nature of the technology.although all the arguments used to challenge the cda and the copaas unconstitutional in the united states would apply to the german law,no significant objection to the law has been raised in germany. it is another indication of the difference in attitude toward freedom of speech inthe two countries, discussed at length in the previous section. but it alsoindicates the fact that, in germany, the public is willing to give administrative authorities the latitude to administer a law that might threaten constitutional rights, on the assumption that those rights will be taken intoaccount in actually applying the lawõs provisions. this difference in attitude toward government appears to be an important distinction betweenthe two countries. the greater trust in government, evident in this as wellas other examples, leads german society to look more to government itself, rather than to tightly drawn laws, to protect and balance rights andvalues.the safeharbor provisions in u.s. and german law introduce an incentive for the development of appropriate screening technologies, but itis not clear at this point either how effective these new technologies arelikely to be or what new threats to constitutional rights they might introduce. for example, the u.s. courts have viewed filters as a reasonableapproach to controlling inappropriate transmissions. but many in europe (and the united states) worry that the use of these systems, even byprivate organizations, might amount to precensorship, particularly wherethe filtering is based on the identification of unacceptable sites rather thanspecific material.in europe, there is also the fear that political or religious zealots mightwield control over the siteassessment procedure and that the systemsmight become oriented too much toward american moral concepts. somehave favored systems that control which users have access to the site of aglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet119particular content provider. similar to age restrictions on the purchase ofwritten material considered harmful to young people, or a visit to an establishment in a redlight district, access to the online offers would bedenied to adolescents, but not to adults. unfortunately, this òzoning approachó also requires content evaluation. also, it is unclear whether digital ageverification systems or similar access controls can really work inthe highly decentralized world of the internet. thus, both the technicaluncertainties and the different political value judgments in the two societies continue to present serious challenges, which are discussed in greaterdepth in the following section.5.4operationalizing the regulatory goaleven if government policymakers decide under what circumstancesto restrict freedom of speech for the sake of a competing substantive value,many issues remain. what is the appropriate point of intervention? is itthe content provider, the recipient, or one of the intermediaries betweenthem, such as the internet service provider? here the question is notmerely one of where it is most practical to interdict inappropriate transmissions, but which party should be made responsible to act, althoughthe two facets of the question may well be related. furthermore, shouldthe potentially harmful content be prohibited, or is it sufficient to makeaccess more difficult or more costly? the latter approach is exemplifiedby the òwatershed rulesó that are typical for television broadcasting inmany countries, which restrict the airing of òoffensiveó material to thelateevening hours. these questions take on great importance becauseeven though an initial value balance may have been made in reaching thedecision to restrict free speech, the way it is implemented could profoundly alter the balance.given some of the practical difficulties in holding providers or recipients responsible for restricting access to potentially harmful content, a number of efforts have been made to hold intermediaries responsible. becauseintermediaries are relatively few in numberñat least compared to the number of content providers or recipientsñand they generally have a local presence in order to do business, they are an attractive target for regulation.yet regulation of intermediaries presents different kinds of difficulties. access providers connect content producers and users to each othervia the internet. once the connection to the network has been made, theyhave no influence either on what material moves through the wires orwhere it goes. they are much like the postal system in that they donõtknow the contents of the messages they deliver. in consequence, it isgenerally agreed in both the united states and europe that the accessglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120global networks and local valuesprovider should not be held responsible for the contents of messages. ineurope, this has been codified in the ecommerce directive of the european union18 as well as the german teleservices act.19 in the unitedstates, socalled òcommon carrieró provisions allow certain carriers ofcommunications to carry all manner of traffic without liability (e.g., telephone service providers), and more recently, congress granted limitedimmunity to access providers for violations of copyright law in the digital millennium copyright act.20host providers, however, are a different story. a host provider maybe a portal or a proprietary service that gathers in one place a largeamount of thirdparty content for user access. being closer to a virtualforum site or bazaar than to a postal system, it provides web space,helps its subscribers find material more easily, and establishes òbulletinboardsó and email services. generally, the host provider does not haveanything to do with the contents placed on the server, but a good deal todo with its organization in the òmarketplace.óbecause the host provider offers more than a connection service, thequestion of liability is more complicated. legal systems have to determine when the value added by the host providerõs services begins tomake it look less like an access provider and more like a content provider. the task is made all the more difficult as the ground keeps shifting: new technologies create new business opportunities for inventiveentrepreneurs, and the services offered by host providers change. it isunlikely that a simple or permanent resolution to this question, or thatthe resolution of differences in this area between the united states andeurope, is in the offing.access providers and host providers are not the only importantinternet intermediaries. searchengine operators, mirror sites, and localhosts all play a role in connecting producers and users. technologicalchanges that begin to blur the distinction between broadcast and network media will add to this groupñand to the problems of sorting outliability. each will add to the challenge of harmonizing u.s. and euro18directive 2000/31/ec of the european parliament and of the council on certain legalaspects of informationsociety services, in particular electronic commerce, in the internalmarket (directive on electronic commerce), official journal of the european communitiesl 178/1 (july 17, 2000); available online at <http://europa.eu.int/ispo/ecommerce/legal/documents/200031ec/200031ecen.pdf>.19the german teleservices act is part of the information and communication servicesact of july 7th 1997, bgbl. i, s. 1870; available online at <http://www.iid.de/iukdg/gesetz/engindex.html>.2017 u.s.c ¤ 512 (limiting liability for persons who transmit, route, provide connections,or provide intermediate and transient storage of material infringing copyright).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet121pean approaches to these issues, which are already difficult, as the discussion below demonstrates.5.4.1the united statesalthough the provisions of 47 usc 223 of the cda, described earlier,quite clearly made providers liable if inappropriate material got into thehands of minors through the internet, 47 usc 230 of the act declared thatthird partiesñthat is, intermediariesñwere not responsible for materialthey transmitted and were not liable for refusing to transmit material theyviewed as òquestionable.ó21 congressõs position was probably influencedto some degree by contradictory court decisions that had been handeddown on the question of hostprovider liability.22 however, the actõs language suggests that congress was also guided by the belief that interactive computer services should be given strong protection because theyòprovide a forum for the real variety of political discussion, unique possibilities for cultural development, and a multitude of ways in which intellectual activity can develop.ó these services had already developed, helping the united states to establish its leadership in the networked world,and the actõs preamble stated that it is the òpolicy of the united states tokeep the lively and competitionshaped open market that now exists forthe internet and other interactive computer services as free as possiblefrom federal or state regulations.óin the court tests thus far, 47 usc 230 has fared very well, with intermediaries held harmless from liability whether or not they have knownwhat they were transmitting, known that it was illegal, or even if theypaid the provider for it.23 the supreme court has not yet handed downany rulings on this section, but all indications are that the strong commitment to freedom of expression in the united states will continue to resultin support for 47 usc 230. furthermore, the wording of the act and theactions of the lower courts are consistent with the american belief thatselfregulation is preferable to governmental controls.21through these provisions, referred to as ògood samaritanó clauses, it should be madeclear that no provider is liable because it, in good faith, attempts by the use of computerprograms to remove questionable contents from its servers, that is, to block access to thesecontents.22cubby v. compuserve, 776 f. supp. 135 (s.d.n.y. 1991); stratton oakmont, inc. v. prodigyservs. co., 1995 wl 323710 (n.y. sup. ct. may 24, 1995).23a description of cases involving 47 u.s.c ¤ 230 can be found online at <http://www.techlawjournal.com/courts/zeran/47usc230.htm#cases>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122global networks and local values5.4.2germanythe laws of the federal republic place much greater responsibility onhost providers, although they do not regulate other intermediaries suchas searchengine operators or providers of hyperlinks. in germany, hostproviders are òresponsible for foreign contents that they provide for use ifthey had knowledge of these contents and it is technically possible, andalso reasonable, to prevent their use.ó this is called ònotice liabilityó; thatis, if one knows about the material, one is liable if no action is taken toremove it. furthermore, under german law, a provider cannot defenditself by arguing that it didnõt consider the questionable contents to beillegal. article 14 of the eu commissionõs directive on electronic commerce takes the same approach.there have been no explicit constitutional objections to this law raisedin germany. it obviously goes in a very different direction from u.s. law.however, many argue that the host providerõs liability is actually morelimited than it may appear because the provider need only act if it is òtechnically possible . . . and . . . reasonableó to prevent the distribution of theobjectionable material. this allows for some judgment and balancing bythe prosecutors and courts in deciding, for example, whether a small provider could òreasonablyó be expected to install blocking software so expensive that it might put the company out of business. moreover, the lawdoes not require that the host provider make an active effort to root outillegal material.with these factors softening the impact of the liability provisions,there appears to be a broad consensus throughout europe that the german law and the ecommerce directive of the eu commission representan appropriate middle path. in the view of most europeans, these regulations balance the protection of minors with the right to freedom of expression and the economic interests of host providers.with the laws in the united states and germany as different as theyare in this case, and with the strong consensus and deep, principled conviction that exists in each country for its own law, it is difficult to see howa practical compromise can be achieved and easy to see how the differences will inevitably lead to conflicts. the bavaria v. compuserve case,mentioned earlier in chapter 3, certainly demonstrates the problem.american criticism of the german action in the compuserve case wasbased on the strong objection in the united states to any action that would(1) have a chilling effect on freedom of speech and (2) unreasonably orunnecessarily burden a private company with economically debilitatingregulations. germans, for their part, are generally much less concernedthan americans that government regulations might burden industry, ifthose regulations appear otherwise warranted. furthermore, most gerglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet123mans would attach more importance to the protection of minors than tothe protection of free speech and would have no compunction about forever blocking a transgressing newsgroupñor even 282 of themñif it werenecessary to prevent the distribution of child pornography.but another source of the tension that arose in this case was the frustration of the german prosecutors, who had very little leverage to takeaction against compuserve usa. because the company is headquarteredin the united states and its executives live there, german law could notreach them. the united states would not cooperate in extradition proceedings because the companyõs actions were not violations of u.s. law.the munich prosecutor, anxious to enforce the german law on childpornography, instead charged the executive director of compuserve germany, the local affiliate, with violation of the law. the problem, of course,was that the local affiliate had no way of blocking the offendingnewsgroups. thus the prosecutorõs actions were criticized in germany aswell as in the united states; but the german criticism arose not because ofany objection to hostprovider liability but because the person chargedwas not the person responsible. in fact, though the executive director wasinitially found guilty, the conviction was overturned in november 1999precisely because the court recognized that he was neither responsible forsponsoring the newsgroups nor able to remove them from the network.5.5internet content regulation as achallenge to governancethe difficulties in regulating internet content epitomize the challengesthat global networks present for governance. it therefore does not comeas a surprise that almost all the elements discussed in chapter 9 (on governance) in abstracto have a bearing on content regulation.5.5.1the limited power of traditional national regulationit is useful to keep in mind that the internet contributes to globalization in two ways. first, it is a global entity that brings together culturaland political influences from many countries and gives rise to a burgeoning new field of commerce. second, the internet makes it possible forestablished businesses to coordinate activities across the globe throughvarious commercial arrangements, freeing them to a certain extent fromthe constraints of geography and national boundaries.globalized business activities are much more difficult for governments to regulate and control, both because they may not be physicallylocated within a countryõs boundaries and because nations compete toglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124global networks and local valuesattract businesses.24 this reduces the feasibility of strong, unilateral commandandcontrol as well as the reach of penal law. the change is one ofdegree, and national governments certainly do not lose all their options.25for example, a person residing in a country can be held liable for violationof its national law or regulation even if he or she is part of an internationalbusiness or the illegal action involves transmission of inappropriate material from another country.similarly, a nation could enforce its laws extraterritorially by attaching a foreign companyõs assets that happened to be located within itsboundaries or even arresting a visiting company official.26 under german law, prosecutors not only would be allowed to take these actions, butare actually required to do so. with respect to internet sites, some havesuggested that nationstates could actually go further. they might attackforeign web sites that contravene their laws, using such technical meansas denialofservice attacks similar to those mounted by hackers againstyahoo! and amazon.com.27 there seems little question that such tacticswould violate public international law28 but, perhaps more to the point,they illustrate how the initial value balance involved in a decision to restrict transmission of certain content can be distorted by the means employed to implement the decision.the ideal situation, of course, would be one in which national lawspertaining to the internet and other global activities were harmonized.that does not seem to be a realistic expectation for the foreseeable future,however. so the most reasonable hope is for cooperation among governments to help providers and hosts understand the laws and regulations ineach jurisdiction. over time, this kind of transparency might lead towardcreative harmonization and compromise.the practical question is how far one nation can go in imposing lawsand regulations in a global economy in which firms have the ability to24on the governance of the internet in greater detail, see christoph engel, 2000, òtheinternet and the nation state,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values (law and economics of international telecommunications 42), badenbaden: nomos, 201260.25this point has been stressed repeatedly by jack goldsmith. in the context of this reportsee in particular jack goldsmith, 2000, òthe internet, conflicts of regulation, and international harmonization,ó in christoph engel and kenneth h. keller, eds., 2000, governance ofglobal networks in the light of differing local values, nomos: badenbaden, 197207. 26for greater detail, see werner meng, 1994, extraterritoriale jurisdiktion im ıffentlichenwirtschaftsrecht, berlin.27cable news network, òcyberattacks batter web heavyweights,ó february 9, 2000. see<http://www6.cnn.com/2000/tech/computing/02/09/cyber.attacks.01/index.html>.28cf., jamie frederic, 1997, òrwandan genocide and the international law of radio jamming,ó american journal of international law 91:628.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet125withdraw their activities from the nationõs territory. some observers believe that this threat is overstatedñthat firms are unlikely to abandon alarge national market that would be difficult to maintain without somepresence in the country. there may also be other reasons for keeping apresence in a country, including the preference of investors or the availability of researchanddevelopment capacity. however, although theseconsiderations may make it impractical for a firm to avoid a nationõs lawson illegal web content or its intellectualproperty regulations, it is certainly possible for the firm to move large parts of its operation offshore, tothe detriment of the nationõs economy.5.5.2international legal harmonizationinternational treaties provide one way of creating global order in aworld where there is no supranational government. they work reasonably well when there is a common view on the values to be protected,general agreement about what needs to be done, and an obvious advantage in dealing with the issues on a global basis. a number of treaties arein existence today that appear, at least nominally, to deal with mattersclosely related to some of the content issues that have arisen with regardto the internet.for example, the convention on the prevention and punishment ofgenocide, dating from 1948,29 requires the parties to make criminal theòdirect and public incitement to commit genocide.ó the 1966 international convention on the avoidance of all forms of racial discrimination30 proscribes words and acts of racial discrimination. the unitednationsõ human rights pact of the same year31not only deals with human rights, but also bans war propaganda and òevery encouragement ofnationalistic, racial, or religious hatred [that] incites discrimination, animosity, or violence.ó in addition, there is a un international conventionon the international right of correction from the year 195332 (althoughneither the federal republic nor the united states has adopted it).one promising approach to internationalizing some aspects ofinternet regulation would be to extend existing treaties to the new context. that would require a willingness on the part of each signatory coun29convention of 09.12.1948, bgbl. 1954 ii. 729.30convention of 07.04.1966, bgbl. 1969 ii 961; compare also btdrs. 13/1883.31international pact on civil and political rights of 09.12.1966, bgbl. 1973 ii 1533.32convention on the international right of correction from 31.03.1953, unts 435, 192.the òright of correctionó refers to the right of a nation òdirectly affectedó by a private orpublic report that it considers òfalse or distortedó to secure òcommensurate publicityó forthe òcorrectionsó that the nation wishes to publicize.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126global networks and local valuestry to interpret or extrapolate the treatyõs provisions to the new environment of the internet and to amend its own national laws to reflect the newinterpretations. thus far, that has not happened.for these and other reasons, there continues to be a push for newtreaties to achieve international harmonization. of course, they are easierto negotiate when nations largely agree on the issues. that requires eitherfinding issues on which there is essential unanimity to begin with or defining a set of countries or a region with largely shared values. whatshould be evident from the discussion in this chapter is that the valueagreement must pertain not only to the problem giving rise to the challenge but also to the appropriateness of government roles and regulatorytools for implementing a solution.at the moment, the one area in which it appears likely that some international harmonization will be achieved, at least in europe, is the regulation of child pornography. in june 2001, the european committee oncrime problems (cdpc) of the council of europe approved the draftconvention on cybercrime, which was submitted to the full committeeof ministers for adoption in september 2001. article 9 of the draft convention commits signatories òto adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offenses under its domestic law, when committed intentionally and without right,ó acts thatrelate to child pornography.33 in addition, a supplement to the europolagreement is being prepared that gives the european police authoritieswider jurisdiction to deal with the production, sale, and distribution ofchild pornography.however, the inclusion of contentrelated offenses other than thoserelated to child pornography (e.g., the òdistribution of racist propagandathrough computer systemsó) proved too controversial to include in thedraft convention. the european committee on crime problems mayconsider an additional protocol relating to these offenses, but it faces opposition from a number of civil liberties organizations.34the problem with harmonization is that if consensus requires drawing a toosmall circle of cooperating nations, violators can find a regulatory haven fairly easily in a nationstate not party to the convention. there33these acts include producing child pornography for the purpose of its distributionthrough a computer system; offering or making available child pornography through a computer system; distributing or transmitting child pornography through a computer system;procuring child pornography through a computer system for oneself or for another; andpossessing child pornography in a computer system or on a computerdata storage medium. see <http://conventions.coe.int/treaty/en/projets/cybercrime27.htm>.34see <http://www.privacyinternational.org/issues/cybercrime/coe/ngoletter601.htm>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet127are, of course, political and economic pressures that can be brought tobear on nonsignatory states to bring them into compliance. and for thatmatter there are carrots as well as sticks, as has been shown in certainaspects of global environmental protection.35there are dangers in this approach, however, where global networksare concerned. the uneven penetration of the internet (and its benefits)has already created a global sense of òhavesó and òhavenotsó that mightwell be exacerbated by unidirectional pressure from the united states or europe on other nations, regardless of the merit of their position. beyond that,there is the danger that harmonizing with a particular set of values, or adopting a universal approach to the structure of legal institutions, will reduce thevery diversity that the internet has the useful potential to promote.5.5.3commercial lawas pointed out elsewhere in this report, there are a number of circumstances in which commercial lawñrules that have been developed forresolving business conflicts by coordinating the laws of different nationsñcould be used to deal with harmful contents accessible through theinternet. consumer fraud, for example, does not change its legal character just because it is carried out with the aid of a web page.nevertheless, commercial law is a weak foundation for matters suchas child pornography and politically tainted hate speech. the majorproblem in such cases is that the potential harm is to people who are notlikely to bring a private legal action for redress, may well not have standing to sue, and might have a difficult time proving damage. who wouldsue and how would the case be made if easy access to child pornography increased the risk that more children might be abused? who wouldsue and what would be the proof if easy access to nazi propagandaincreased the risk that extreme rightwing political forces might gain onthe next election day? even if the law gave standing to the public atlarge, would enough people have the incentive and the wherewithal tobring such actions?5.5.4selfregulation without state interventiona number of groups, certainly among them the netizen and ecommerce communities, argue that in most instances the best approach tocontrolling the diffusion of offensive internetbased material is selfregu35nisms as viable means, berlin.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128global networks and local valueslation. the great attraction of this approach is the flexibility it provides;individuals can make their own judgments about what material theywant to avoid (or to access), and the need to force value consensus withina particular country or across the globe is removed. when one nationõsnudity is anotherõs pornography, broad consensus is next to impossible.on the other hand, accesscontrol systems, ageverification systems, andvarious kinds of filtering software can facilitate customized nonstateregulation.to understand filtering systems, it is important to distinguish betweena siteõs content and the judgment one makes about it. for example, thougha site might have an image of a naked woman or a swastika, there may bemany judgments about whether or not such content is offensiveñone person might think so; another might not.many filtering systems are designed by vendors who act both aslabeler and judgeñthey describe the content and also make a judgmentabout appropriateness (though they may or may not provide the user withan option to override their judgment). a second approach is to separatethe functions of labeler and judge. to facilitate content labeling, the worldwide web consortium designed the platform for internet content selection (box 5.2), which provides a standardized vocabulary and format forlabeling content. once labels have been associated with specific content,the user can deploy a filter that examines the labels associated with incoming content, and based on those labels, makes judgments aboutwhether content with certain labels should or should not be displayed.note that that different filters can behave differently with regard tothe same content. that is, filter a may allow content that is labeled ascontaining ònudityó and reject content that is labeled as containing òswastikas,ó while filter b may do exactly the opposite.a second issue is that the scope and granularity of the labeling arecritical. if the labeling vocabulary does not include a category for òswastikas,ó a filter based on this approach cannot block content containingswastikas. at least one particular vocabularyñof the internet contentrating associationñallows labeling of sites that contain certain kinds oflanguage, nudity or sexual content, violence, and information related togambling, drugs, and alcohol. however, there is no reason in principlethat a party concerned about other categories of possible offensivenesscannot create vocabularies that cover them (though in practice, obtaininga broad scope of coverage for such alternatives is difficult).though filtering systems can be created by anyone, the required effort may be large. in principle, the organizations responsible for filteringsystems must stand behind the judgments they make about offensiveness(and perhaps about content labeling as well), and users of filtering sysglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet129box 5.2 the platform for internet content selectionthe platform for internet content selection (pics) is technologythat is intended to give users of interactive media, such as the internet,control over the kinds of material to which they and their childrenhave access. pics is intended to enable òselfðratingó (the ability ofcontent providers to voluntarily label the content they create anddistribute) and òthirdparty ratingó (the ability of multiple, independent labeling services to assign additional labels to content createdand distributed by others) in an easytouse manner that allows individuals to use ratings and labels from a diversity of sources to controlthe information that they and those under their supervision receive.using the capability for thirdparty rating, services may each devisetheir own labeling systems, and the same content may receive different labels from different services.the philosophy underlying pics is one of voluntary use. however, picsbased technology can be installed anywhereñat the enduserõs client, at the proxy servers of the userõs employer, school, orlibrary, at the servers of the internet service provider to whom he orshe subscribes, or even at the points of internet entry to a country.thus, concerns have been widely expressed that pics is a technologythat can greatly facilitate government censorship. furthermore, tothe extent that pics is used by private parties other than the end useras a tool for censorship, it is not subject to the political processes thatcan be used in democratic countries to forge compromise and consensus.source: description of pics adapted from <http://www.w3.org/pics/principles.html>.articles critical of pics include:¥ simson garfinkel. 1997. ògood clean pics: the most effective censorshiptechnology the net has ever seen may already be installed on your desktop.ó see <http://hotwired.lycos.com/packet/garfinkel/97/05/index2a.html>.¥ lawrence lessig. 1997. òtyranny in the infrastructure,ó wired 5.07 (july).available online at <http://www.wired.com/wired/5.07/cyberrights.html>.¥ jonathan weinberg. 1997. òrating the net,ó hastings comm./ent. l.j.19:453.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130global networks and local valuestems may make their own judgments about the attractiveness of productsfrom different vendors based on how well their own values about offensiveness are reflected in the vendorsõ judgments. thus, users not wishingto see proracist material might use filters developed by civilrights organizations, or users not wishing to see antireligious material might usefilters developed by their church.36one of the attractive features of a labeling system is that it is inherently selfpolicing. the value of the label depends on the reputation itdevelops for reliability. each site that receives the labelõs endorsementhas a stake in giving it meaning. the user community itself has an interest in the quality of the label and can also be part of the enforcementprocess.as movie and videorating organizations in the united states havelearned, making judgments about offensiveness is fraught with difficulties. such groups must tread a fine line between being overly rigid andprescriptive in their classifications and being so ambiguous that no realinformation is conveyed to the user. generally speaking, categories orrules that have some flexibility are more likely to be suitable for a rapidlychanging world like the internet.an important technical issue is the extent to which computerexecutable rules for distinguishing between appropriate and inappropriate content can be formulated. some of the filtering software with which peoplehave experimented thus far has shown how difficult this can be, sometimes leading to absurd results, as when some particular words are codedas unacceptable. moreover, filtering systems are usually designed withsome particular point of view to take advantage of a market, pursue anideological agenda, or avoid liability on the part of the software provider.this means that, at least until now, there has been little incentive for transparency in how the filters are created37 and little attempt to take opposing interests or values into account, as one might hope would be the casein a legislative approach to regulation.38 in that sense, filter systems can36a fuller discussion of the advantages, disadvantages, and other realities of filters is contained in cstb, national research council, youth, pornography, and the internet: can we provide sound choices in a safe environment?, washington, d.c.: national academy press, forthcoming.37this is not to say that it is impossible or even difficult to increase transparency of filtersby making available the lists of web sites that are blocked or the lists of keywords that mightbe objectionable. however, vendors of filter products often argue that the creation of theirblocked lists or òbad wordsó is their intellectual property, and that publication of such listswould deprive them of the benefits of their work if others took their work as a starting pointto develop other lists.38this has been recently pointed out by lawrence lessig, 1999, code and other laws incyberspace, new york: basic books.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.free speech and the internet131work against certain free speech values of a community and, indeed, helpto deintegrate the community.host providers have a different problem in undertaking selfregulation; the control systems available to content providers or content usersare not applicable to them. first, the material that host providers carry isan aggregate from a huge spectrum of content providers; and second, theyare not end users, so that filtration software would be inappropriate.many host providers have adopted their own codes of ethics. they maycommit themselves, for example, to checking complaints about sites thatcome from users or to working cooperatively with legal authorities of particular nationstates to take action against sites involved in illegal activity.critics of selfregulation point out that because such codes of ethicsare unenforceable, they are primarily symbolic. however, it may be possible to develop a legal framework that would make codes enforceable,even if the host providers themselves determined the details of the code.a more serious criticism is the possible curtailment of free speech; thecodes may deprive content providers who are sanctioned or excluded bya host provider of the due process they would have under a more formallegal structure. such points have not been thoroughly discussed at thisearly stage in the development of these selfregulatory instruments.the role of hosts as intermediary between user and content providersuggests that it may be inappropriate to think of them as engaged in regulation per se. their role in a nongovernmental regulation scheme is toprovide a service to users who would like to be shielded from harmful orotherwise unwanted contents. users could do this for themselves by simply not accessing certain sites or by installing filters on their computers(or using other technologies that may be available in the future), or theycould access the internet via a service provider with a declared accesspolicy. whether users want to pay for the hostõs service is something tobe determined by the market. in fact, it would appear that, in the future,host providers will compete with each other and with companies producing selfhelp tools like filters, and users may choose on the basis of convenience, comprehensiveness, and selectivity.5.5.5hybrid regulationselfregulation and intermediation have many attractive features, butif governments do not intervene, the market alone will shape the array ofmechanisms actually used to control the distribution of harmful content.these mechanisms, in turn, will largely determine what material is electronically available to whom. obviously, the outcome may not alwaysconform to the values of the society. it might therefore be useful to consider hybrid forms of regulation, combining public and private controls.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132global networks and local valuesgovernments can use both sticks and carrots to influence the operation of selfregulatory schemes.39 as pointed out earlier, commandandcontrol regulation of content providers doesnõt work very well in the networked world. the compuserve case indicates that an alternative forgovernments is to threaten action against host providers. but there aresofter options.governments can insist on an organizational framework for selfregulation that gives outside interests a voice and ensures that the process ofdeveloping and applying a rating system or excluding a provider from ahost network is transparent. they can give industry limited antitrust orliability protection to encourage joint rulemaking and vigorous joint action. or they can set up an authority to check on how well selfregulationis working (a role played by the u.s. federal trade commission withrespect to certain privacy issues and other aspects of consumer protection). it is even possible to envision governments supporting or encouraging education and training programs to improve the media competenceof users so that they are better able to use the selfhelp tools that becomemore and more available as technological advances occur.it does seem likely that a hybrid regulatory approach will finallyemerge, but it is difficult to predict what particular balance of mechanisms will actually obtain in each country. the experimentation now going on appears to be healthy, and if there is a bottleneck, it is the legalsystemõs difficulty in understanding the technical possibilities and reacting quickly and flexibly to them. it may well be that in an area as technologically dynamic as this one and as capable of bringing about major social changes, expert panels similar to those developed under the aegis ofthe intergovernmental panel on climate change could play an importantrole. they might be especially useful in advising governments on thestate of the technology and the feasibility of various regulatory approaches.39for the theoretical framework, see fritz w. scharpf, 1997, games real actors play: actorcentered institutionalism in policy research, boulder, colo.: westview press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1336privacy and freedom of information6.1introductionchapter 5 discussed how the united states and germany differed intheir approaches to resolving the tensions between formal and substantive values.1 both countries subordinated the formal value of free speechto certain substantive values, but in the case of the united states, thetrumping substantive value was an aversion to pornography, while forgermany it was an aversion to hate speech and its nazi overtones.this chapter examines potential tensions between another substantive value (privacy) and a formal value (transparency in government, asexemplified by notions of òfreedom of information,ó or foi). the situation is not quite the same as that in the earlier chapter, however. freespeech is more or less understood in the same way in both nations and itenjoys explicit constitutional protection, which can be abridged only invery limited circumstances. privacy, on the other hand, is not interpretedin the same way in the two countries and, at least in the united states,arguments continue as to whether it enjoys constitutional protection.freedom of information is also interpreted in different ways in theunited states and germany, and is not explicitly protected in either constitution. how privacy and freedom of information are actually inter1recall (chapter 3) that formal values can be regarded as general principles by whichindividuals choose to live, while substantive values relate to specific aspects of oneõs environment and behavior.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134global networks and local valuespreted in the two countries determines when and how they are in tensionas values. what kinds of information are explicitly designated as public inthe pertinent statutes, and, at least in the united states, what protection ofprivacy is provided for in statute, determine when and how they are intension as a legal matter.although neither nation protects privacy or freedom of informationas strongly as it does free speech, to the extent that they do provide protection germany puts greater emphasis on privacy and the united statesfavors transparency. germany, and europe more generally, have comprehensive systems of law and regulation in place to protect privacy. theunited states, by contrast, has a patchwork of incomplete protections.with respect to freedom of information, the situation is reversed. theunited states has a comprehensive system that provides the public withaccess to an enormous range of information and data, while germany hasa patchwork system.with respect to freedom of information, both countries rely on ordinary legislation rather than constitutional law to specify which documentsshould be accessible to the public and under what terms. the situationwith respect to privacy is somewhat different, in that german constitutional jurisprudence does recognize the right explicitly and many american scholars argue that privacy protection is implicit in a number of constitutional provisions. nevertheless, here too legislation plays the moreimportant role in defining the meaning of the right.a further distinction between the tensions described in this chapterand the one addressed in the preceding chapter is that the threat to privacy does not necessarily come about because of information made available by the government; it often derives from information collected byand/or shared between private parties.2privacy and freedom of information are not always in tension; in someinstances, societyõs commitment to freedom of information is the key tomaintaining a personõs privacy. that is, if an individual can invoke foirights to learn what personal information the government holds abouthim or her and how it has used the information, the government can beheld accountable for any misuse. thus, the person can effectively exercisesome control over abuse of the information, which is one of the importantdimensions of privacy.in many other cases, rights to privacy and foi rights do not intersectat allñfor instance, data on the performance of the economy, on land use,2the distinction is not always clearcut. for example, personal data in a companyõs possession may enter government records (e.g., through a bankruptcy or other court proceeding). in such a case, information may be subject to foi disclosure.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information135or on a host of other issues of importance to governments are not obviously relevant to privacy.3 in other words, to the extent that privacy refers to keeping personal information private and under the control of theindividual with whom it is associated, privacy rights need not conflictwith the free disclosure of information relevant to the workings of government. even in these cases, however, the formal value of transparencyof state activities is not necessarily viewed by governments as an unalloyed good. that is, a question arises concerning the extent to which governments need to be able to deliberate in private or to control the releaseof raw data to prevent public panic (one end of the spectrum) or providea desired spin (perhaps the other end).but despite these caveats, privacy rights and foi rights do, in manyinstances, come into conflict. in these cases, privacy is in conflict not onlywith the formal value of transparency of state activities, but also with thepublic interest (e.g., in the prevention and prosecution of criminal offenses) or commercial interests (e.g., in the collection and exploitation ofdata).global networks such as the internet have raised the stakes significantly for both privacy and freedom of information. clearly, they facilitate dissemination of information held by both public and private institutions. but perhaps even more significantly, the capabilities of computersand software to mine, sort, and reorganize data have increased the abilityof many institutions to exploit that information. they can more readilyput it into useful formats and tease out of disparate databases comprehensive and accessible profiles on private individuals and the actions ofgovernmental bodies.6.2privacy6.2.1the values involvedprivacy is the epitome of a substantive value. it encompasses ideas ofautonomy, dignity, and personal freedom and control, and it providesprotection for the individual. box 6.1 describes examples of what mightbe regarded as violations of privacy.privacy is different from secrecy and confidentiality. secrecy is a functional concept, requiring an agreement on the part of those who are party3the development of new technologies make statements of this kind always subject tocaveats. for example, the increasing capacity to mine nominally òanonymousó data to backout information about individuals is often acknowledged. further, even when data aregathered remotely, loworbit photoreconnaissance satellites with high resolution (or evenphotoreconnaissance aircraft) might yield data on the behavior of individuals.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136global networks and local valuesto some information to not share it with others. it generally does notrequire (or seek) the sanction of society, merely the commitment of thosewho share the information. confidentiality is a more formal and socialconcept, a set of rules that govern the use of information held by institutions about individuals and the conditions under which that informationcan be shared. privacy is quite distinct from both of these concepts; itrefers to the right of individuals to control information about themselvesñto keep it secret or to share it with others only as they see fit.although privacy in essence serves individuals by protecting andempowering them, it also serves society and government. when a personbelieves that his or her privacy is threatened, that individual may becomedefensive, minimizing personal exposure by being cautious about expressing views and disengaging from society as much as possible. butbecause democratic societies rely on full participation and free expressionbox 6.1 examples of privacy violationa drugstore chain sold customersõ medical information to a marketingcompany that sent consumers coupons for drugs related to their disorders.an outcry over privacy concerns halted the practice.veteran u.s. sailor timothy r. mcveigh (not the oklahoma citybomber) faced expulsion for homosexuality based on evidence the navygathered from america online. mcveigh, since reinstated, had cited hissexual orientation in an online profile that he thought was confidential. ajudge ruled that the navy violated the law by obtaining confidential information about mcveigh from aol without a warrant or court order.retail salesman bronti kelly, 34, couldnõt land a job for years and hadno idea why. the reason was that a police record sent across the internetto employers had wrongly labeled him a shoplifter. the company thatfailed to correct the report was ordered to pay more than $73,000 to kelly.state motor vehicle departments in florida, south carolina, and colorado sold driversõ photographs in digital form to a private firm that developed a system to enable clerks at points of sale to verify a customerõs identity. once the public learned about the sale of photos, the reaction in allthree states was highly negative, causing the effort to collapse.sources: robert gellman, òprivacy and harmonization: a discussion paper for asymposium on global networks and local values,ó national academy of sciences,woods hole, massachusetts, june 35, 1999.david e. kalish, ònet privacy victims lash back at thefts,ó the detroit news, april19, 1998.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information137by its citizens, the threat that gives rise to the individualõs defensivenessbecomes a threat to society as well.obviously, privacy is not an absolute right. for example, commitments to maintain privacy may conflict with free expression (if, for example, that free expression might divulge private information). societieshave asserted a need (and therefore a right) to gather and use informationabout individuals for such purposes as taxation, census, and health; tohold people to their obligations as citizens; to serve them in accordancewith their entitlements; and to support law enforcement efforts. suchsocietal assertions must be balanced against the desirability of the personal right of individuals to know what information about them is beinggathered and used; in that way, they can monitor the conformity of suchuse to law, and control any uses beyond those sanctioned purposes.private institutions or other individuals do not have a constitutionalright to violate an individualõs privacy, although they may gain the privilege of using someoneõs personal information in certain ways under acontractual arrangement with that person. (on the web, personal information is often collected under a theory of òimplied consent,ó in whichuse of a web site grants the site operator the right to collect certain personal information automatically through òcookiesó and the like (box 6.2).to illustrate the conflicting pressures, it is instructive to compare disclosure policies for health records with policies for pizzadelivery records.there are many users who can legitimately argue for access to patienthealth records without the specific authorization of the patient. in orderto meet a number of social, economic, and health needs, a society mayallow access to some parts of health records by public health authorities,health researchers, fraud and abuse investigators, accreditation firms, andeven lawenforcement agencies under some circumstances. actually, electronic databases may provide for greater privacy protection in these instances than traditional paper records because it is easier to limit access toonly certain parts of the patient record. for pizzadelivery records, on theother hand, it may never be appropriate to allow for any nonconsensualdisclosures because there are no overriding societal needs that justify it.the privacy interests of individuals are likely to be greater in theirmedical records, however, than in their pizzadelivery records. and, thepublic uproar over unauthorized release of medical records is inevitablymuch larger than in the case for pizza delivery records. confidentiality ofmedical information has also been regarded as a prerequisite for free andcandid discussions between healthcare professionals and their patients.for these reasons, a culture of resistance to unauthorized disclosure ofmedical records is common in the health profession.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138global networks and local values6.2.2german and american perspectivesin 1983 the german constitutional court summarized the underlyingvalue balance as follows:the individual . . . has the right to know and to decide on the informationbeing processed about him. at the same time, as a social being the individual cannot avoid becoming the object of information processing.however, limitations to his basic right have only to be accepted whenthere is an overriding general interest and if that interest is molded intoa law that follows the basic requirements of clarity and proportionality.to protect these principles a number of safeguards are required; thesesafeguards consist of data processing principles (correctness, timeliness,purpose limitation, fairly and lawfully obtained), derived rights (access,correction), and organizational safeguards (independent institutions).4in the united states, the development of privacy policy has been slowand uneven, with the privacy of information collected and held by government receiving much more attention than information collected andheld by private companies and organizations. for example, the privacyact of 1974 (p.l. 93579) and the subsequent privacy protection studycommission both focused on information collected and held by the government as the potential misuser of personal information. the privacybox 6.2 òcookiesó facilitate collection of personalinformation regarding information retrieved from web sitesa web server typically cannot link one userõs visit to a given site to anyother visit by that same user. this limitation is overcome by causing a webclient (i.e., the userõs workstation ) to submit an identifier with each requestfor information. the identifier, called a òcookie,ó can be associated withpersonal data obtained from the requester on his or her first visit to a particular web site. because the individualõs cookie is resubmitted with eachsubsequent visit, the server knows all the information that interested aparticular requester before. the server can thus create a profile of thecustomer. and by combining profiles from multiple web sites, cooperating providers of information can construct even richer profiles.4bverfge 65,1 (41 ff).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information139act in particular provides a broad policy framework for privacy relevantto such information.some specialized privacy protections applicable to nongovernmentalentities emerged in the 1970s and 1980s, including the fair credit reporting act of 1970, the family educational rights and privacy act of 1974,the cable communications policy act of 1984, the electronic communications privacy act of 1986, and the video privacy protection act of 1988.the privacy of health information was addressed in the health insuranceportability and accountability act of 1998 and the childrenõs online privacy protection act of 1999. however, u.s. privacy policy remains unsettled, in part because of concerns about the costs (and other burdens) ofcompliance, ambiguity about the appropriate application of underlyingphilosophical principles (property and free speech, for example), and unresolved political clashes between those who collect and process data andthose who advocate for broad privacy protection.as the above paragraphs illustrate, the united states and germany(which is much like the rest of europe in this respect) approach privacyfrom very different political and legal traditions. the german approachis rooted in its experience with totalitarian regimes and military occupation, which has given rise in europe to a strong antipathy toward, even ananxiety about, invasions of privacy or illegal surveillance. on the otherhand, europeans, and germans in particular, tend to trust their government more than americans do and turn to it to protect their interests.thus the first dataprotection law in the world, the hesse data protectionact, was passed in germany in 1970, and it established an enforcementstructure that became the model for data protection all over europe. theact created a governmental structure to preserve each individualõs privacy rights, and it stipulated that the dataprotection officer establishedunder this act, though formally a public official, would be independentfrom all other branches of government.5as importantly, the willingness to trust government has made it acceptable for german privacy law to take a comprehensive approach. allrecord keepers, public and private, have to comply with fair informationpractices (box 6.3). although earlier laws imposed different rules on public and private record keepers, more recent legislation dealing with theinternet largely removes that distinction. the 1997 teleservices data protection act6 implementing the european union directive on the protec5the federal data protection commissionerõs independence is laid down in sect. 22 par. 4sent. 2 and 3 of the federal data protection act. he is independent in the performance ofhis duties and subject to the law only. according to art. 28 par. 1 subpar. 2 of the europeandirective the data protection authorities act with complete independence in exercising thefunctions entrusted in them.6bgbl. i 1997 s. 18711872global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140global networks and local valuestion of privacy in the telecommunications sector,7 and the 2001 amendments to the german federal data privacy act8 implementing the 1998european unionõs directive on data protection,9 apply to private companies and individuals as well as to public authorities. german law doesdistinguish between privacy (òschutz personenbezogener datenó) and business secrets, providing less protection for business secrets on the argument that the individual rights at stake are not of the same order.box 6.3 fair information practices1.openness. existence of recordkeeping systems and databanks containing data about individuals should be publicly known, along with a description of the main purpose and uses of the data.2.individual participation. each individual should have the right to seeany data about himself or herself and to correct or remove any data thatis not timely, accurate, relevant, or complete.3.collection limitation. there should be limits to the extent of personaldata collection, those data should be collected by lawful and fair means,and they should be collected, where appropriate, with the knowledgeor consent of the subject.4.data quality. personal data should be relevant to the purposes for whichthey are to be used, and should be accurate, complete, and timely.5.finality. there must be limits to the uses and disclosure of personaldata. the data should be used only for purposes specified at the time ofcollection, and it should not be otherwise disclosed without the consentof the data subject or other legal authority.6.security. reasonable security safeguards against such risks as loss, unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, or disclosure shouldprotect personal data.7.accountability. record keepers should be accountable for complyingwith fair information practices.7directive 97/66/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 15 december 1997concerning the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the telecommunications sector: official journal l 024 , 30/01/1998, p. 00010008. available online at <http://europa.eu.int/eurlex/en/lif/dat/1997/en397l0066.html>.8federal data protection act of december 20, 1990 (bgbl.i 1990 s.2954) as amended bylaw of may 23, 2001 (bgbl i s. 904).9council directive 95/46/ec of 24 october 1995 on the protection of individuals withregard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, art. 32,1995 o.j. (l 281) 31, 49 (requiring member states to adopt legislation conforming to terms ofdirective) [hereafter european privacy directive]. available online at <http://europa.eu.int/eurlex/en/lif/dat/1995/en395l0046.html>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information141by contrast, the united states has a populist mistrust of governmentalinstitutions and a strong tradition of relying on market forces not only toregulate the economy but to serve many social needs as well. thus whilethe u.s. congress has adopted legislation to protect personal privacy fromencroachment by federal agencies,10 the regulation of private industryhas moved more slowly and in a piecemeal manner. in practice, the u.s.norm is a patchwork of legislation and court decisions arising from episodic scandals and political pressures from both industry and privacyadvocates. thus, highly specialized solutions have been crafted for different technologies (e.g., statutory regimes specific to the protection ofpostal mail, telephone communications, email, and other internet communications) and for different subject areas (box 6.4).finally, in u.s. law, privacyñthat is, the control of oneõs personaldatañis basically understood as a property right. individuals can transfer or sell their property rights to a firm interested in its use or even togovernment, provided that the transfer is voluntary and the terms andconditions are fair. but the traditional european approach treats individualsõ interests in data about themselves as an inalienable liberty rightñthat is, a right that cannot be given up, even voluntarily.box 6.4 a patchwork of privacy legislationcredit reports are protected by the fair credit reporting act.1medical records have historically been protected by state legislation.however, in late 2000, federal regulations to protect medical records werepromulgated by the clinton administration under the provisions of thehealth insurance portability and accountability act of 1996. these regulations granted individuals new rights with respect to medical privacy.bank records are protected by (among other things) 15 usc 6801 (titlev of the grammleachbliley act of 1999), which requires disclosure offinancial institution policies on the sharing of nonpublic personal information. this affords individuals the opportunity in certain cases to decline toallow such sharing.records pertaining to videotape rentals are protected by 18 usc 2710(the video privacy protection act of 1988), which provides for civil damages against unauthorized disclosure of such records.115 u.s.c. ¤ 1681a.10federal privacy act, 5 u.s.c. ¤ 552a.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142global networks and local valuesyet despite the differences in legal traditions, both germany and theunited states over the last 25 years have developed what have becomeknown as òfair information principlesó that reflect substantial agreementon basic issues. this common ground is summarized in box 6.3. the question is whether these commonaltiesñcoupled with the strong linking forcesintroduced by global networks in general as well as the more specific desireto exploit them for commercial usesñwill ultimately lead to harmonization, in which the united states moves toward the more comprehensiveand integrated approach to privacy that is prevalent in europe.if privacy is to be protected by direct legal enforcement, then there aretwo possible approaches (regardless of whether privacy rights are characterized as property or liberty interests). the first approach is to establishindependent governmental dataprotection authorities responsible formonitoring and enforcing fair information principles, as is done in the german system. this approach avoids the high transaction costs, and the difficulty of proving cause and establishing injury, that may make individualenforcement illusory. however, as a practical matter, it is difficult for publicly funded enforcement authorities to handle all individual complaints.the second approach is to allow individuals to bring lawsuits to protect their privacy rights and to recover damages for injuries resulting fromviolation of those rights. this approach decentralizes enforcement of privacy rights, but it may not be efficacious because it is difficult to provecause, and the stakes involved in any particular invasion of personal privacy may be so small that individuals are unwilling to pay the costs oflitigation (though efficiency can be increased when numerous injury casesare grouped into class actions).6.2.3technology and privacyindividuals have many good reasons to want information about themselves to be stored electronically and to be made available over communications networks. the rapid and accurate transfer of electronically storedmedical records can improve a personõs medical care and might even savea life; stored credit card and address information makes internet shopping convenient; and userfriendly online banking transactions have attracted millions of customers.yet advances in information technology can also threaten privacy. avisitor to a web site may involuntarily leave behind personal informationthat the web site owner can later use for commercial purposes. seemingly harmless fragments of information left at different sites can be combined into a potentially harmful aggregate. even easier, cookies can beset in a userõs hard drive, creating a builtin history of sites visited, material browsed, and purchases made. such data can be used for marketingglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information143purposesñtargeting an individual with ads that are customized to his orher tastesñwhich may represent a convenience to some and little morethan an annoyance to others. however, it is the absence of control overthe collection or the use of the information that is the quintessential violation of privacy, and it is not difficult to construct scenarios in which thatviolation can be harmful to individuals.of course, personal information can be collected by internet serviceproviders as well as by web site hosts. isps can and do record information on user actions for internal purposes or to comply with court orders,and this might include sites visited, the amount of information downloaded, and when such visits occurred.databases containing òpublicó information are another source of privacy concern. much of such informationñe.g., records pertaining toproperty tax, motor vehicles, driversõ licenses, convictionsñwas heretofore not public because it was hard to access or extract from voluminousdatabases.11 making such information easily available to the general public through the internet may well be viewed as a violation of anindividualõs privacy rights because this allows it to be used for purposesother than those for which it was originally collected (together with theindividualõs implied or explicit consent). in the united states, for example, these databases have been a valuable source of information fortelephonesolicitation operations.other methods of data collection are possible as well, includingrecords of cellulartelephone location, records of building ingress andegress (created when magnetic cards are used to gain access), and recordsof creditcard and telephone usage. and the world wide web itself is asource of information about individuals. commercial transactions andpolitical dialogues posted in forums create opportunities to collect information about personal interests and activities.today, different structures exist for regulating personal data collection and use in each of these areas of activity from local exchange to longdistance telephone companies to cable television companies and internetservice providers. that is certainly a source of confusion and chaos. technological convergence, however, is leading companies to strive to becomesolesource information providers and handlers, and the differing regulatory traditions and customs that characterize each domain may well cometo overlap, leading, at least initially, to greater turmoil even within national borders. the technical convergence can also create the opportunityfor a kind of regulatory arbitrage that can work to the detriment of pri11in germany, thirdparty access to all these kinds of information is severely controlled bylaw, so that the term òpublicó in this discussion is even more properly put in quotationmarks.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144global networks and local valuesvacy rights. on the other hand, the turmoil and the obvious regulatoryinequities may serve as a stimulus to rationalize the present cacophony ofregulatory regimes. in so doing, it could reinforce the fundamental concepts of privacy sometimes lost or distorted in the past as individual sectors developed rules that weighed particular political, commercial, andeven technical factors more heavily than privacy per se.information technology is not only a threat to privacy; it can also provide the technical means for increasing oneõs privacy. for example:¥encryption (box 6.5) is widely used to ensure privacy and to enable secure commerce. encryption (at the sending end) and decryption(at the receiving end) provide endtoend confidentiality when the interbox 6.5 secretkey and publickey encryptionclassic encryption requires both the sender and receiver to possess asecret keyñwhich is used to encode (encrypt) the message at one end andto decode (decrypt) it at the other. the most common secretkey cryptosystem in use today is the des, or data encryption standard, developed inthe mid1970s. it is in widespread use for highvolume commercial/financial transactions.of more relevant current interest is òpublickey encryption,ó whichmakes possible the secure transmission of messages without requiring thesender to have access to a secret key. publickey systems, also developedin the mid70s, use two different, but mathematically related, keysñtheòpublic keyó and the òprivate key.ó knowledge of the public key allowsanyone to encrypt a message, but not to derive from the encrypting key(without enormous computational effort) knowledge of the private, decrypting key. it can take a supercomputer weeks or months to òbreakó a privatekey; indeed, if the key is made long enough (e.g., 2048 bits), the task canbecome, in effect, impossible.1in practice, a personõs (or an organizationõs) public key is published ina trusted public directory. then, anyone wishing to send a confidentialmessage to that person encrypts the text using the personõs public key andtransmits it. the intended recipient uses his or her private key to decryptthe message, which, since it is encrypted, cannot be read by anyone else.1thus òkey lengthó and its effect on secure communications has become an important matter of publicpolicy debate. the question is what encryption softwareñthatis, what encryptionkey lengthñshould private parties be allowed to use or export toother countries? the balance sought is between the right of private parties to securetheir transmissions and the needñor rightñof governments, with appropriate judicial supervision, to monitor commercial traffic or to maintain an edge in its ability toprotect the security of its own messages.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information145box 6.6 anonymizersan anonymizing service dissociates the identity of a user from a message that he or she sends. anonymizing services fall into two categories:true anonymous remailers and pseudonym servers.a true anonymous remailer is based on a chain of remailers. the usersends a message to the first remailer, which passes it along to the secondremailer, and so on, using a protocol that provides anonymity with respectto mailers farther up the chain. thus, only the first remailer knows theidentity of the sender. and, if each remailer discards information about thesources of the messages it receives for forwarding, it is technically verydifficult to reconstruct the identity of the original sender. (note that undersuch circumstances, replying to a message sent through a true anonymizingremailer is quite difficult.)a pseudonym server provides a pseudonym for a user and more easilysupports replies to a message. the pseudonym owner sends a message tothe server, which substitutes an email address such as <johndoe@.alias.net>, and people can send mail to the user without knowing who heor she is. however, in order to route replies back to the user, the servermust keep local records that map real email addresses to pseudonyms.this leaves the server open to compromise (e.g., by lawenforcement authorities in that country acting under court order). to reduce the likelihoodof compromise, pseudonym servers can be an element in a chain ofremailers. in this scenario, the person who owns the pseudonym leaves aset of multiply encrypted instructions on how to route mail to him or her (aòreply blockó). typically, a reply block will contain the address of ananonymous remailer, and then an encrypted block that only the remailercan read. when the remailer decrypts the block, it will contain the addressof another remailer, and a block only that remailer can decrypt.typically, anonymous remailers in the chain are set up in different countries, with different legal traditions. thus in order to compromise the anonymity of a sender wishing replies, every single remailer would have to becompromisedña difficult and timeconsuming task.note also that replies can be effected in ways that do not depend onknowledge of a userõs return path. for example, a reply can be broadcastto a widely read newsgroup in an encrypted form, using a key known to thesender. anyone can view the encrypted message, but without the key itshows up as gibberish. however, the sender can read it easily, because heor she knows the decryption key. another possibility is to send the reply toa webbased email service such as hotmail, which the user can checkfrom any location. (and, using an anonymizer that enables anonymousweb surfing, the user can keep his or her identify private.)global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146global networks and local valuesmediate communications channels are either public or, if private, subjectto malicious intrusion.¥anonymization enables a user to send (and sometimes to receive)messages anonymously (box 6.6). anonymizing services make it verydifficult and sometimes impossible to trace the identity of a user.¥automated privacynegotiation protocols, such as the platform forprivacy preferences project (p3p), enable web site operators to expresstheir privacy policies in a standardized machinereadable format that canbe interpreted by clients linking to the web site. clients òrememberó theirusersõ own privacy preferences, which are automatically compared withthe policies of the visited web site. if the two match, the connection isallowed; otherwise, discrepancies are called to the userõs attention. thus,the human user need not read the privacy policies at every site he or shevisits, but rather can rely on his client for this task.reliance on technical approaches has two major drawbacks. first,technical approaches generally require explicit user actionñan individualwanting to protect privacy must take an action to do so (this may changein the future if defaults for encryption are widely built into email or othercommunications software). because many individuals do not know thatthe tools exist or do not have the skills to use them effectively, the privacyinterests of those individuals may be compromised.second, if privacy protection relies on software that both client andprovider must install, such as p3p, then it is viable as a privacyprotectionmechanism only if a large number of web site operators adopt the samesoftware and a critical mass of users install it in some relatively brief initial period. the issue of timing is important because the value of the system grows with numbers of users (an illustration of positive network externalities discussed further in chapter 7), so that the willingness ofoperators to invest in such a system depends strongly on how rapidlyusers can be recruited and a financial return generated.in any case, although technical tools can offer some degree of dataprotection, few in the united states or europe advocate relying on themexclusively. technical tools per se do not provide a framework for balancing competing values where privacy is involvedñor, for that matter,in any other case. the appropriate balance cannot and should not dependon the everchanging state of technology and the relative power it mayconfer at any particular moment on those who seek to protect their privacy or on those who seek to invade it. it is the role of communities tocome to agreement about the appropriate framework and to use institutional structures to regulate, guide, or stimulate the use of technical andother tools to achieve the desired value balance.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information1476.2.4privacy protection as a challenge to governancealthough, or perhaps because, european and american approachesto privacy differ, together they provide a rich array of tools to help anindividual maintain control over personal information. these include notonly mandatory legal regulations introduced through laws and enforcedby courts and government agencies, but also a variety of selfregulatoryprocedures and practices.the limited power of traditional national regulationthe globalization of information flows makes it much more difficultfor a single nationstate to unilaterally protect the privacy of its citizens.routine consumer transactions can involve players in five or even morecountries, given that consumers, merchants, manufacturers, web site operators, creditcard issuers, and other parties to a single transaction can allbe located in different political jurisdictions.in effect, a nationõs dataprotection laws are subject to a kind of competitive pressure. in many instances, strict privacy legislation in onenationstate can be circumvented by shifting the collection and use of thedata to another nationstate that has less restrictive laws. however, dataprotection differs from content regulation in the globalnetworked environment. the businesses collecting personal data during commercialtransactions often require a local presence in order to make money. if so,this feature makes an outofnation vendor vulnerable to the extraterritorial application of national rules. even if the actual storing or processingtakes place abroad, local dataprotection authorities can argue that thelocal entity representing the operator is subject to local law and, moreover, responsible for the parent companyõs actions. thus, the local authorities can take action against the local representative.neither the argument nor the threat is merely theoretical. in the wellpublicized conflict between the european union and the united statesconcerning ecommerce transactions, the european position embodied inthe european privacy directiveñwhich stated that personal data cannot,in most instances, be transferred out of the european union to countriesthat do not provide an òadequateó level of privacy protection12ñwas ef12article 26 of the european privacy directive provided several exceptions to this generalprohibition. in particular, transfers of personal data to third countries that do not ensure anadequate level of protection can take place anyway if (1) the data subject has given his or herconsent unambiguously to the proposed transfer, or (2) the transfer is necessary for theperformance of a contract between the data subject and the controller or for the implementation of precontractual measures taken in response to the data subjectõs request, or (3) theglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148global networks and local valuesfectively an extraterritorial applicability argument.13  the fact that u.s.corporations were vulnerable to prosecution through their local officesgave significant negotiating power to the european position, resulting inthe òsafe harboró compromise whereby american corporations undertooka contractually enforceable commitment to privacy protection (see discussion below).international legal harmonizationa straightforward solution to harmonizing data protection would bethe conclusion of an international treaty on the issue. within europe, thisis precisely what happened. the council of europe prepared its convention for the protection of individuals with regard to automated processing of personal data, and the european union used its power to legislatethe directive on data protection. these two legal instruments effectivelyharmonize the standards and, more to the point, spread and reinforce thesubstantive value.similar approaches have been tried in the broader international arenaas well. in september 1980 the organization for economic cooperationand develoment (oecd) adopted guidelines on the protection of privacyand transborder flows of personal data,14 and in december 1990 the general assembly of the united nations adopted guidelines concerningcomputerized personal data files.15 but neither instrument has the enforceability associated with domestic law. indeed, as noted elsewhere,substantive international treaties work only when there is such completetransfer is necessary for the conclusion or for the performance of a contract concluded in theinterest of the data subject between the controller and a third party, or (4) the transfer isnecessary or legally required on important public interest grounds, or for the establishment,exercise or defense of legal claims, or (5) the transfer is necessary in order to protect the vitalinterests of the data subject, or (6) the transfer is made from a register that according to lawsor regulations is intended to provide information to the public and that is open to consultation either by the public in general or by any person who can demonstrate legitimate interest, to the extent that the conditions laid down in law for consultation are fulfilled in theparticular case.13although prohibiting data transfers out of europe does not, in a formal sense, contravene internationallaw principles of prescriptive, adjudicative, and enforcement jurisdiction, the practical effect of such a prohibition is to disrupt international commerce. seehenry h. perritt, jr. and margaret g. stewart, 1999, òfalse alarm,ó fed. commun. l.j. 51:811.14oecd document c(80)58 (final). available online at <http://www.oecd.org/dsti/sti/it/secur/prod/priven.htm>.15resolution number a/res/45/95. available online at <http://www.un.org/documents/ga/res/45/a45r095.htm>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information149agreement on the values involved that domestic law is, or can easily bemade, consistent with the treatyõs provisions.there are in fact sufficient differences between the united states andeurope on defining what privacy does and does not mean with respect togovernment and commercial institutions that such agreement has provendifficult to obtain. moreover, both jurisdictions fundamentally differ intheir approach to structuring institutions of enforcement. while the europeans are willingñindeed, preferñto rely on commandandcontrolregulation and governmental enforcement authorities, the united statesprefers industrial selfregulation and litigation.16finally, it should be noted that the traditional international treaty process is slow and cumbersome, certainly more so than the process of reaching agreement within the european union. few who are familiar withthe international telecommunications union or the world trade organization would view a similar approach to privacy protection as practical,particularly within the context of the rapidly evolving technical environment of the internet.internationally coordinated private lawa second technique for resolving the u.s.ðeuropean conflict over dataprotection involves coordinating legislation with the help of each nationõsrules on the application of foreign commercial law to international cases.this technique, called the conflictoflaws approach, is available becausethe protection of data among private parties is generally covered by private rather than public law,17 and privacy issues on the internet ofteninvolve the use of data by private businesses rather than by government.one obstacle to this approach, however, arises from the distinct difference between the u.s. view of privacy (analogous to a property right)and the traditional european view (which deems individualsõ interests indata about themselves as an inalienable liberty right). in a case in whichthis difference was significant, it is quite possible that europeans mightnot regard the u.s. legal provisions as being functionally equivalent totheir european counterparts. under those circumstances, the nationalconflict rules might require that the european, rather than the u.s. rules,apply.16henry h. perritt, jr. 1997. òregulatory models for protecting privacy in the internet,ó inwilliam m. daley, ed., privacy and selfregulation in the information age, u.s. department ofcommerce, washington, d.c., chapter 3. available online at <http://www.ntia.doc.gov/reports/privacy/selfreg3.htm>.17reinhard ellger. 1990. rechtsvergleichende und kollisionsrechtliche untersuchung. badenbaden, 582 s.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150global networks and local valuesthere are other complications as well. if a private lawsuit is brought bya foreign customer in the country of origin of the supplier, will the courts beconvinced that an internet transaction between these two parties is properly viewed as having occurred in the home country of the customer (sothat the customerõs national laws apply)? furthermore, even though theprivatelaw rules can generally be applied where only private entities areconcerned, nationstates have generally been unwilling to apply foreignrules if they are perceived as a hidden regulatory tool. this is likely to bethe case with dataprotection rules, given the conceptual differences between nations about what should be protected and how.18 indeed, the factthat independent public officials have jurisdiction to intervene would signal the inherent publiclaw character of data protection laws. finally, froma pragmatic point of view, it seems doubtful that europeans would accept,for example, a dataprotection arrangement under which european nationals would have to sue u.s. firms before u.s. tribunals; nor would americans be comfortable with the opposite arrangement.selfregulation without direct state interventionmany data users in the united states have expressed a strong preference for selfregulation, and american industry has begun to move in thatdirection. whether motivated by the need to respond to consumer pressure or the desire to avoid legislation, american companies acknowledgethe pressures that lead to calls for regulation but assert that they can police their own actions. when the federal trade commission (ftc) undertook a series of investigations of online privacy in the mid1990s and began to develop guidelines for possible regulation, the direct marketingassociation responded by adopting a code of fair information practices.since 1998, industry representatives have worked with the federal tradecommission to develop credible and effective selfregulatory approachesand accompanying audit and enforcement mechanisms. there are limitsto how far the ftc can go. for example, the childrenõs online privacyprotection act, which was passed in 1999, makes the commission responsible for rulemaking and requires any web site or online service that isdirected to children to obtain parental consent before collecting personalinformation from children under the age of 13.selfregulatory approaches can be more decentralized and flexiblethan governmental regulation, and thus more responsive to particular circumstances. on the other hand, they are unlikely to have much credibil18for greater detail, see ellger (supra note 17) 597604.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information151ity if they comprise no more than broad guidelines. effective selfregulation needs substantive rules, as well as mechanisms to ensure that consumers know the rulesñe.g., a requirement that companies publish privacy policies. furthermore, there must be some sanction for failure tocomply with these rules. among the suggested approaches are the creation of certifying seals or logos, which can be withdrawn for noncompliance; publishing the names of noncompliant companies on a òbad actorólist; or making a company liable under fraud laws. other possibilities areaudits of compliance with established fair information practices or independent authorities with power to resolve complaints.none of these selfregulatory approaches, including the publicationof codes of good practice, are acceptable to most privacy advocates, whoview them as toothless and therefore not truly protective of individualinterests. however, some of these advocates are willing to agree to a system with òoptinó provisions, which requires individuals to agree explicitly to the collection or use of personal information. (industry usuallyargues for òoptoutó provisions that permit collection or use of personalinformation unless individuals explicitly object.)selfregulation has been strongly opposed on the european side formany of the same reasons advanced by the privacy advocates. many,perhaps even most, europeans do not trust the mechanism, suspectingthat selfregulation is merely a cover for lowering the standards of dataprotection, or ignoring them entirely.hybrid regulationthus there is a growing interest in new forms of governance, whichmight be characterized as òhybridó in character, that feature flexible international publiclaw frameworks within which private selfregulation isused to work out the details. private selfregulation within a public international law framework may not only provide solutions to the inherentlyinternational character of traffic in personal data; they also may avoidsome of the problems of the fragmented regulatory structures currently inplace. some precedent for such an approach can be found in a germanu.s. contract between the berlin data protection commissioner andcitibank (box 6.7).a more contemporary example, and one that has received a great dealof attention, is the hybrid regulatory scheme developed by the europeancommission and the united states government to avoid privacyrelateddisruptions of transborder data flows and international trade. in 2000,they exchanged letters that articulated a òsafe harboró for u.s. companiesand other organizations receiving personal data from the europeanglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152global networks and local valuesbox 6.7 the german railwaycard and citibankthe railwaycard (bahncard) is a popular discount card issued by thegerman railway company, deutsche bahn. in november 1994 deutschebahn announced a cobranding agreement with the german subsidiary ofcitibank to issue a railwaycard with a visa creditcard function as a noadditionalcost option for the customer. under the agreement, after july1995 the railwaycards were no longer produced in germany but in datacenters run by citibank subsidiaries in south dakota and nevada. hugequantities of sensitive personal data on the creditworthiness of customers ofdeutsche bahn were transmitted to and processed in the united states.although the eu directive on data protection was not officially in effectat that time, the berlin data protection commissioner (the german supervisory authority in this matter) demanded that no transborder data flow to theunited states take place unless the requirements of the directive were met.in february 1996 deutsche bahn and citibank signed a specific data protection agreement making the german data protection law applicable to theirhandling of cardholdersõ data on both sides of the atlantic. the citibanksubsidiaries in the united states agreed to onsite audits by the berlin dataprotection commissioner or designated agentsñe.g., an american consulting or auditing firm acting on the commissionerõs behalf.whereas the data protection commissioner of berlin, hansjrgengarstka, described the agreement as a useful tool, reactions in the unitedstates were rather skeptical. business week saw òeuropeõs privacy copstrek[king] from berlin all the way to sioux city, s.d., to citigroupõs giantprocessing center, where computers store financial information about millions of german creditcard holders.ó it went on to say that an òideologicalrift between europe and the united states exists with regard to the regulation of privacy. at the root of the battle is a philosophical chasm nearly aswide as the atlantic. europeans look to democratic regimes to protect theirprivacy. americans, meanwhile, tend at first to leave information flowsunregulated. later, they slap controls on objectionable areas, such as childpornography on the web.ó emanuel kohnstamm, a time warner inc. vicepresident in brussels, was quoted in the article as saying: òin europe, peopledonõt trust companies, they trust government. in the united states, itõs theother way around. citizens must be protected from actions of the government.ósources: (1) alexander dix, òcase study: north america and the european directive. the german railwaycardña model contractual solution of the ôadequatelevel of protectionõ issue?,ó speech at the 8th international privacy and data protection conference: òprivacy beyond borders,ó ottawa, canada, september 1820,1996; available online at <http://www.datenschutzberlin.de/sonstige/konferen/ottawa/alex3.htm> (03.03.00).(2) stephen baker, marsha johnston, and william echikson, 1998, òeuropeõs privacycops,ó business week 2 (november), 4951.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information153union.19 organizations receiving personal data transfers from the eu andcomplying with certain principles (box 6.8) would be regarded as meeting the òadequacyó requirements for data protection in accordance withthe european unionõs directive on data protection.in this instance, hybridization allowed the united states and europeto organize the coexistence of their diverging regulatory traditions andstyles. the europeans came to the negotiation table with their trust ingovernment, and with an existing framework of independent dataprotection officers. the united states, for its part, had neither a strong regulatory framework nor the inclination to impose one. the compromisewas selfregulation with public oversight via the federal trade commissionñi.e., a hybrid solution.20the actual implementation mechanism is complex, with roles established for both government and nongovernment organizations, the issuance of a òseal of compliance,ó and the creation of a disputeresolutionbody. noncompliance is penalized by a range of sanctions, includingpublicity for findings of noncompliance, the requirement to delete data incertain circumstances, suspension and removal of a seal, compensationfor individuals for losses incurred, and injunctive orders. in addition, theu.s. federal trade commission has committed itself to reviewing allegations of noncompliance with safeharbor principles made by privacy selfregulatory organizations; the commission will be looking to see whetherthe alleged actions amount to violations of the ftc act prohibiting unfairor deceptive acts or practices in commerce. in this context, all of the usualtools available to the ftc can be applied, including administrative ceaseanddesist orders prohibiting the challenged practices, as well as pursuing complaints in u.s. federal courts to obtain judicial remedies. persistent failure to comply can be punished by denying the violator the benefitsof the safe harbor.the success of these safeharbor negotiations between the europeanunion and the united states does not mean that the agreement is withoutcontroversy. for example, the trans atlantic consumer dialogue (tacd),representing a group of consumer and privacy groups, argued that thesafeharbor agreement ò. . . fails to provide adequate privacy protectionfor consumers in the united states and europe. it lacks an effective means19the u.s. letter can be found online at <http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/larussacovernote717.htm>. the european commission letter can be found at <http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/euletter27julyheader.htm>. other related documents can befound at <http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/shdocuments.html>.20henry farrell. 2000. ònegotiating privacy across arenasñthe euus ôsafe harborõ discussions,ó in adrienne heritier, ed., the provision of common goods: governance across multiple arenas, boulder, co: rowman and littlefield.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154global networks and local valuesbox 6.8 safe harbor privacy principlesissued by the u.s. department of commerce on july 21, 2000ònotice: an organization must inform individuals about the purposes forwhich it collects and uses information about them, how to contact theorganization with any inquiries or complaints, the types of third parties towhich it discloses the information, and the choices and means the organization offers individuals for limiting its use and disclosure. this noticemust be provided in clear and conspicuous language when individuals arefirst asked to provide personal information to the organization or as soonthereafter as is practicable, but in any event before the organization usessuch information for a purpose other than that for which it was originallycollected or processed by the transferring organization or discloses it forthe first time to a third party.òchoice: an organization must offer individuals the opportunity to choose(opt out) whether their personal information is (a) to be disclosed to a thirdparty or (b) to be used for a purpose that is incompatible with the purpose(s)for which it was originally collected or subsequently authorized by theindividual. individuals must be provided with clear and conspicuous,readily available, and affordable mechanisms to exercise choice.òfor sensitive information (i.e., personal information specifying medicalor health conditions, racial or ethnic origin, political opinions, religious orphilosophical beliefs, trade union membership or information specifyingthe sex life of the individual), they must be given affirmative or explicit(optin) choice if the information is to be disclosed to a third party or usedfor a purpose other than those for which it was originally collected or subsequently authorized by the individual through the exercise of optinchoice. in any case, an organization should treat as sensitive any information received from a third party where the third party treats and identifies itas sensitive.òonward transfer: to disclose information to a third party, organizations must apply the notice and choice principles. where an organizationwishes to transfer information to a third party that is acting as an agent,. . . , it may do so if it first either ascertains that the third party subscribes tothe principles or is subject to the directive or another adequacy finding orenters into a written agreement with such third party requiring that the thirdparty provide at least the same level of privacy protection as is required bythe relevant principles. if the organization complies with these requirements, it shall not be held responsible (unless the organization agrees otherwise) when a third party to which it transfers such information processesit in a way contrary to any restrictions or representations, unless the orgaglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information155nization knew or should have known the third party would process it insuch a contrary way and the organization has not taken reasonable steps toprevent or stop such processing.òsecurity: organizations creating, maintaining, using or disseminatingpersonal information must take reasonable precautions to protect it fromloss, misuse and unauthorized access, disclosure, alteration and destruction.òdata integrity: consistent with the principles, personal informationmust be relevant for the purposes for which it is to be used. an organization may not process personal information in a way that is incompatiblewith the purposes for which it has been collected or subsequently authorized by the individual. to the extent necessary for those purposes, anorganization should take reasonable steps to ensure that data is reliable forits intended use, accurate, complete, and current.òaccess: individuals must have access to personal information about themthat an organization holds and be able to correct, amend, or delete thatinformation where it is inaccurate, except where the burden or expense ofproviding access would be disproportionate to the risks to the individualõsprivacy in the case in question, or where the rights of persons other thanthe individual would be violated.òenforcement: effective privacy protection must include mechanismsfor assuring compliance with the principles, recourse for individuals towhom the data relate affected by noncompliance with the principles, andconsequences for the organization when the principles are not followed.at a minimum, such mechanisms must include (a) readily available andaffordable independent recourse mechanisms by which each individualõscomplaints and disputes are investigated and resolved by reference to theprinciples and damages awarded where the applicable law or private sector initiatives so provide; (b) followup procedures for verifying that theattestations and assertions businesses make about their privacy practicesare true and that privacy practices have been implemented as presented;and (c) obligations to remedy problems arising out of failure to complywith the principles by organizations announcing their adherence to themand consequences for such organizations. sanctions must be sufficientlyrigorous to ensure compliance by organizations.ósource: reprinted from <http://www.export.gov/safeharbor/shprinciplesfinal.htm>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156global networks and local valuesof enforcement and redress for privacy violations. it places unreasonableburdens on consumers and unfairly requires european citizens to sacrifice their legal right to pursue privacy complaints through their nationalauthorities. the proposal also fails to ensure that individual consumerswill be able to access personal information obtained by businesses.ó21the controversy illustrates what is bound to be a continuing debatebetween those who see hybrid regulation as the answer to the conflicting approaches and inconsistent regulations between one country andanother, and those who see it as a threat to the existing protections thatnational regulation provides in at least some countries. experiencegained in these next years with the safe harbor agreement may wellprovide important evidence for future decisions on whether or not touse this approach.6.3freedom of informationthe term òfreedom of information,ó as used in this report, is not onlya legal concept but also a social and political one. in the former sense, itrefers to the legally enforceable right of access to informationñan individual right. but in the social and political sense, it is a measure of theopenness of the society, as discussed below. it is in this context that wemay define what kinds of information ought to be accessible and, additionally, begin to understand the associated conflicts in public and privateinterests.6.3.1the value involvedas pointed out in the introduction to this chapter, freedom of information is a formal value. adherence to this value safeguards transparency and accountability of governmental action, and it is closely relatedto the western concept of democracy. access to information gives citizens a sense of ownership of their society, and it creates confidence in thelegitimacy and appropriateness of government administration. freedomof information is a tool for engaging citizens in the work of government,alerting them to any excesses of government, and providing them withthe basis to exercise their rights and obligations more knowledgeably. in21available online at <http://www.epic.org/privacy/intl/tacdsh1299.html>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information157thomas jeffersonõs words, òthe best protection of a democratic society isan informed public.ótechnological developments have affected the availability of information in at least two ways. first, the internet and the world wide webhave made it increasingly practical for enormous amounts of informationto be made availableñquickly, easily, and inexpensivelyñto the public.the complete texts of laws, court records, judicial findings, administrative rules and records, statements of public officials, transcripts or minutes of public meetings, and the like can all be put online for the public toaccess, copy, or search. this is an extraordinary new tool for implementing freedom of information in societies unambiguously committed to thatvalue. however, it is also a challenge to those who are less than enthusiastic about such total disclosure (and who, in the past, could be shieldedfrom the need to justify restrictions on the distribution of information bysimply citing its impracticality).second, new computer tools allow the manipulation and reorganization of data and records into much more useful and transparent forms.tools for searching, filtering, organizing, and analyzing data can produceintermediate products that, in a very practical sense, make the raw datasignificantly more accessible and, in so doing, make freedom of information as much a practical reality as a formal commitment or value. however, these new technical tools create two problems. first, the very capacity to manipulate and mine public data may expose private informationembedded within it; thus a formal balancing of interests is involved in thecollection and publication of data for public purposes. again, this is aproblem that did not need to be urgently confronted in the past because ofthe practical limitations on teasing the private information out of the public database.furthermore, because many intermediate data products serve a public purpose, it is in the public interest for government to encourage thegrowth of markets for these products. that means creating incentives forthe private sector to invest in their development. generally, these incentives have taken the form of intellectualproperty protection. conflict thenarises in determining what balance between the public nature of information and the private protection of intellectual property will maximize freedom of information as a practical reality.in the following sections, such conflicts and tensions are examinedin the context of specific kinds of public information and specific legalapproaches.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158global networks and local values6.3.2types of information subject to freedom of informationprimary legal informationòprimary legal informationóñinformation having the force of law,such as parliamentary enactments, judicial decisions,22 and comparableinstruments from administrative agencies such as rules and ordersñisthe raw material of democracy. most observers committed to freedom ofinformation would agree that making primary legal information widelyaccessible to the public is not only consistent with individual rights butalso important for effective governance. indeed, if the public doesnõtknow the law, it canõt follow it. in addition, if it doesnõt have completeaccess to information about the operations of government, it canõt exercise democratic oversight. thus there is an overriding public interest ineasy and inexpensive access to primary legal information.an important and ongoing controversy related to the publicõs right tolegal information is the issue of who may hold a copyright on informationsubject to disclosure under freedomofinformation laws. if private entities obtain information from public entities under such laws and then reorganize it, may they copyright the product thus created? if so, what doesthe copyright cover?in the united states, these controversial questions have been raised inconnection with the u.s. congressõs consideration of two databaseprotection bills23 modeled in part on the european databaseprotection directive.24 specifically, both of these proposed bills would have grantedcertain propertylike rights to database owners entirely apart from whatever copyright interest they did or did not hold; in general, these rightswould have forbidden other parties from extracting large quantities ofinformation from these databases in a way that caused financial harm tothe database owner.on the other hand, federal entities in the united states are precludedfrom copyrighting public information. in germany, the situation isslightly more complicated. according to article 5 of the copyright act,22germany is a civillaw country. court decisions thus do not, in and of themselves, havelegal force erga omnes, though the decisions of the upper courts have high persuasive authority. this does not, however, change the desirability of having easy and inexpensive access totheir texts.23h.r. 354 in the 106th congress, the collections of information antipiracy act, and h.r.1858 ih, the consumer and investor access to information act of 1999.24directive 96/9/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 11 march 1996 onthe legal protection of databases (o.j. 27/3/96 no l 77 p. 20).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information159òlaws, ordinances, official decrees and notices [and] also decisions andofficial grounds [for] decisionsó cannot be copyrighted. the same appliesto other official works published to satisfy the official goal of informingthe public. but information collected and maintained by public agenciescan be granted a private copyright when it is material actually written byprivate individuals.in the united states, some courts have held that certain state and locallaws can sometimes be copyrighted, and have forced third parties to refrain from reproducing or distributing primary legal information contained in such statutes and court decisions. for example, peter veeckposted on a private web site the municipal building code for denison,texas. the text of this building code is actually owned by the southernbuilding code congress international (sbcci), a private, notforprofitorganization whose primary mission is to develop and maintain a set ofmodel building codes. the sbcci has developed the building code andgives it free to municipalities as an incentive for adopting it. however,sales of the code to engineers and architects is a revenuegenerating enterprise for sbcci, and thus it sued veeck for copyright infringement. thecase is working its way through the u.s. court system; in february 2001, apanel of the fifth circuit court of appeals upheld by a vote of 21 thatsbcci had the right to force veeck to refrain from publishing these materials on the web.25it has been argued in the past that the private publication of government information is the only practical way to ensure its broad distribution, and that the incentive of copyright protection is necessary to encourage the involvement of the private sector. however, internet and pctechnologies have sharply reduced the costs and increased the ability ofgovernment agencies to publish their own material. as noted earlier,these same technologies have also created incentives for the private sectorto create valueadded products from the raw data produced by government agencies. the challenge is to develop appropriate criteria to protectprivatesector innovations that enhance the usability of original government data without depriving the public of its access to that data.2625the opinion of the panel can be found at <http://www.ca5.uscourts.gov/opinions/pub/99/9940632cv0.htm>. a press article on this controversy is in daniel fisher, 2001,òwe own that law,ó forbes, april 30, p. 60.26this is a topic of ongoing debate in the united states. the computer science and telecommunications board is participating in a national research council project that addressesthese issues for weatherrelated information.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160global networks and local valuespublic records containing personal informationpublic records that contain personal information create an obviousconflict between freedom of information and privacy rights. in principle,this is not a new concern, but advances in information technology havemade it a practical concern. in the past, the cost and effort of extractingpersonal data from public records was so great that few attempted it.however, as such records are computerized and become available underfreedomofinformation law, the threat to privacy becomes quite real.whether privacy or freedom of information takes precedence dependson the particular situation. if the invasion of an individualõs privacy islimited and noninjurious, one might argue that the cost is worth the benefit of retaining the publicõs access to government information. on theother hand, if the interest in access to public records is purely commercialand unrelated to the democratic and integrative functions of freedom ofinformation, then one might argue that protection of individual privacyshould be given greater weight.in addition to facilitating the mining of databases for personal information, technological advances affect the balance of rights in two otherways. first, information technology enables òprofilingóñthe linking ofdata from a number of different sources to create much more serious invasions of individual privacy than would be possible with any singlerecord. the possibilities for such profiling are thus an element in judgingthe harm to individuals that results from granting access to public records,though the number of actual instances in which an individual has beenharmed by profiling is apparently small. second, and on the other hand,information technology also facilitates the anonymization of data, a practice that can help to protect privacy without compromising the publicõsaccess to the aggregated database.27some have argued that anonymizing data can reduce its worth because the process essentially blocks certain information that might, in fact,be useful. but that raises the question of whether the competing principles of privacy and public interest have, in the past, been thoroughlyweighed in deciding what information on individuals it is appropriate forgovernments to collect. in the past, the government may have had noalternative but to gather more information than it had a right to gather, inorder to glean the information that it needed and to which it was entitled.the practice may not have been challenged because, as a practical matter,there were limitations on the misuse of the private data. however, the27such an outcome depends on the particulars of the data in question, because sometimeseven anonymized data can be assembled in such a way as to uniquely identify an individual.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information161mere fact that the government has collected or is in possession of the aggregated database does not mean that it is actually entitled to use all ofthe data or to use it for any purpose. because technology increases theability to link information, the potential for such misuse by governmentñand othersñincreases, and government agencies will have to revise theirpast approaches to collecting data and weigh the competing claims of privacy and public need more rigorously.notes, drafts, and intermediate documents of public officials and bodiesdocuments that shed light on the administrative aspects ofgovernmentõs decisionmaking process (e.g., preliminary or internaldrafts) present thorny problems, and how far a society should go in providing access to such documents is a matter requiring much further discussion.28 on the one hand, transparency in the political and administrative decisionmaking process is of major importance in a democracy andone of the strongest arguments for a freedomofinformation principle.on the other hand, disclosure of every conversation and recorded thoughtbetween administrators or judges and their advisors would have a chilling effect on candid deliberation that would, in fact, reduce the quality ofdecisions. government needs space and time in which to assess arguments and conduct internal debates with a certain degree of privacy of itsown.technology (though not necessarily as part of global networks) againcomplicates matters. in the past, a good deal of highly informal conversation might have taken place on the telephone or in facetoface meetings.it was possible to record these kinds of conversations, but not required.29when they were recorded, they might well have been subject to freedomofinformation requests (or subpoena, as richard nixon learned). theapplicability of freedomofinformation regulations in these instances wasoften debated, even litigated. but the participants had an option that allowed them to control the balance between privacy privilege and thepublicõs right to information; except where public meetings were involved(itself a question of definition), they could decide whether or not to recordthe conversation.28it was discussed in the united kingdom. see òyour right to know. the governmentõsproposals for a freedom of information act,ó presented to parliament by the chancellor ofthe duchy of lancaster by command of her majesty, december 1997. available online at<http://www.officialdocuments.co.uk/document/caboff/foi/foi.htm> (03.03.2000).29indeed, in many jurisdictions, it would be illegal to record such conversationsñfor example, if the recording were carried out by third parties or without appropriate notice.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162global networks and local valuesnow, many of these same interactions are conducted through vehiclessuch as email or bulletin board postings. electronic records of these exchanges exist and are frequently the subject of freedomofinformationrequests. in effect, technology has shifted the balance and the controlwithout any change in the substantive social and political facts. in this, asin other instances, each society must determine if the shift is consistentwith its balance of the values involved. the technology itself should notbe the determining factor.records associated with publicly funded researcha relatively new area of contention, particularly in the united states,is the public accessibility of research data produced with governmentgrants. although the principle of openness in research is, in and of itself,an important value in the scientific community, freedomofinformationrequests for scientific data in recent years seem to have been motivated bypolitical agendas outside that community. as scientists have becomemore engaged in issues with strong political overtonesñsuch as the healtheffects of tobacco, the environmental effects of industrial wastes, or therelative contributions of nature and nurture to i.q., lawyers, lobbyists,and other advocates have sought access to scientistsõ raw data. the reasons for such requests vary, and how they are viewed depends on the eyeof the beholder. what is seen by one party as a legitimate attempt tounderstand the basis of a scientistõs conclusions can be seen by another asan effort to discredit or harass.the matter has been further complicated by the heightened concernabout scientific fraud. public bodies, including congressional committees, have sought access to the notebooks of scientists in order to assessthe veracity of their published works. they have used forensic approachesto determine the time sequence of notebook entries, the actual (expected)randomness in raw data, the inclusion or exclusion of data in final reports, and the laboratory instruments actually used in measurements. inso doing, they have tried to assess not only the integrity of scientists, buttheir competence as well.in some respects, this is a rather new facet of the issue of privacy.that is, to what extent is the practice of oneõs professionñthe way onethinks, how one creates, what oneõs personal style is likeña public activity for which the researcher must be accountable? where should we drawthe line between legitimate access and inappropriate revelation of oneõspersonal information and idiosyncrasies? the balance to be struck mustensure accountability while respecting the intellectual process and avoiding the chilling effects of harassment or intimidation.the u.s. congress attempted to balance these considerations in a lawglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information163recently enacted30 that requires all recipients of federal research grants todisclose research data in accordance with the provisions of the freedomof information act. however, the law defines the term òresearch dataó asòthe recorded factual material commonly accepted in the scientific community as necessary to validate research findings, but notó such things astrade secrets, commercial information, personnel and medical information, and any òsimilar information which is protected under law.ó in addition, it limits the application of the new provision to òresearch data relating to published research findings,ó which it defines as eitherò[r]esearch findings [that] are published in a peerreviewed scientific ortechnical journaló or those that are òpublicly and officially cite[d] . . . insupport of an agency action that has the force and effect of law.ó it is tooearly to assess the effects of the law, because it is still being shaped asadministrators develop rules for its enforcement and requests for information lead to court cases that will provide further interpretation. certainly, the issue remains one of great concern to the scientific community.6.3.3global networks affecting freedom of informationas with privacy, global networks exert direct and indirect pressureon national disclosure policies. global networks are multiplying the options through which citizens can gain access to information and are making it more difficult for nations to maintain restrictive policies.new technical optionsin the past, even if the public was legally entitled to access governmental files, in practical terms it was not easy to exercise this right. in theearliest times, the citizen had to go to the appropriate office and transcribeexcerpts by hand. photocopiers significantly reduced the logistical burden on these efforts. but the digital representation of public documentsmeans that they can be searched, stored, and combined at will. moreover,if these files are available online, access becomes so comfortable that it canbecome a routine operation for citizens.there has been considerable progress in this direction. congressionallegislation is available online; all of the opinions of the u.s. federal appellate courts are available in fulltext form and in popular wordprocessingformats on the web, and a growing number of state courts and agencies30office of management and budgetõs appropriations act for fiscal year 1999, publiclaw no. 105227. see foia update, vol. xix. no. 4, available online at <http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/foiaupdates/volxix4/page2.htm> (03.03.2000).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164global networks and local valuesalso publish information on the web. german authorities are movinginto the same direction, albeit at a somewhat slower pace. all decisions ofthe bundesverfassungsgericht are already available online free of charge.other federal courts in germany are planning to follow, and the european commission has launched a similar initiative.the modest effect of globalizationalthough the internet has had a strong impact on national policiesconcerning free speech and privacy, its effect on foi policies is muchweaker because it is the disclosure of information held by local governments that is often at issue. global networks do not change the local character of the source. thus, even under changed technological conditions,each country can in principle pursue its own policy. however, for a number of reasons, this may be an unwise choice for nations where presentpolicy appears to limit freedom of information, or at least to not promoteit vigorously.first, global networks expose people to new ideas from other places.thus citizens in a more restrictive nation who see examples of governmental openness in other nations may demand more openness and accessat home.31 given the pronounced differences in regulatory traditions,there is a great potential for such policy diffusion. of course, it took hundreds of years for the legal structure providing for freedom of information to spread beyond the borders of sweden (where the first law on thesubject was enacted in 1766). but with the present high degree of connectedness between nations it is inconceivable that a concept such as freedomof information could long remain contained within the borders of one or afew nations. other hastening factors include the conceptõs inherently democracypromoting character, the united statesõ broad commitment to it,and its manifestation on the web.in the united states, freedomofinformation norms are expressed ina collection of federal and state statutes: the freedom of information actof 1966; 32 the paperwork reduction act of 1980 (revised subsequently in1995);33 the federal register act of 1935;34 and the electronic freedom of31of course, such change is possible only when the government of the more restrictivenation is responsive to the popular will. indeed, some governmentñin general, those of themore authoritarian nationsñmay impose restrictions on access to certain internet contentprecisely in order to prevent their citizens from seeing the openness of other nations.325 u.s.c. ¤ 552.33paperwork reduction act of 1980 (94 stat. 2825; 44 u.s.c. ¤ 3503 note) [set out as a noteunder ¤ 3503 of title 44, public printing and documents].3444 u.s.c. ¤ 1505.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information165information act of 1996.35 most american states also have freedomofinformation laws. these typically adopt the same norms as those of thefederal laws. there are, however, some differences. many states provideno deadlines for agency responses to private requests for information.others are vague about the availability of judicial review. still othersrequire the identification of a legitimate private interest in the information requested. and some distinguish between requests that are made forpersonal reasons, which are favored, and those made by commercial entities for a profitmaking purpose, which are not favored.36germany, on the other hand, has not yet established a freedom ofinformation act at the federal level. the only applicable provisions arethose of the german basic law art. 5, subsec. 137 and the federal law onadministrative procedure ¤¤ 29, 30.38 these legal instruments, however,actually express a principle of secrecy rather than openness, restrictingprovision of information on administrative procedures to persons whotake part in the procedures or who might be affected by their outcomes.this tradition obviously does not give rise to a general public right togovernment information, and no other specific law addresses such access.still, there is currently some movement away from government secrecy and toward greater transparency, both in germany and throughouteurope. the general approach is to build on the foundation of individualrights, beginning with the existing rights of participants in particular proceedings to obtain information pertinent to those proceedings. this israther different from the american approach, which links freedom of information to democratic oversight of governmental operations and thusgrants rights of access to all citizens. nonetheless, the strategy has already been successful in several cases. for example, in 1994, the germanfederal freedom of access to environmental information act wasadopted,39 implementing a european union directive granting access toenvironmental information held by public authorities.4035electronic foia amendments act of 1996, p.l. 104231, 110 stat. 3048 (oct. 2, 1996),amending 5 u.s.c. ¤ 552.36media requests, which obviously serve commercial, profitmaking purposes, have always been given exceptional status in the united states under the protection of the firstamendment of the constitution (see chapter 8).37amended up to and including gesetz zur •nderung des grundgesetzes of july 16, 1998(bgbl. i s. 1822).38verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz vom 25 mai 1976 (bgbl. i s. 1253), as amended up to andincluding gesetz of august 6, 1998 (bgbl i 1998, 2022).39bgbl. i, 1490.40council directive 90/313/eec of 7 june 1990 on the freedom of access to information onthe environment, official journal l 158, 23/06/1990, p. 00560058. see <http://europa.eu.int/eurlex/en/lif/dat/1990/en390l0313.html>. note that the directive allows a numberglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166global networks and local valuesof exemptions that specify environmental information that can be withheld from the public.specifically, it may be withheld if the release of the information affects the òconfidentialityof the proceedings of public authorities, international relations and national defence; publicsecurity; matters which are, or have been, sub judice, or under inquiry (including disciplinary inquiries), or which are the subject of preliminary investigation proceedings; commercial and industrial confidentiality, including intellectual property; the confidentiality of personal data and/or files; material supplied by a third party without that party being under alegal obligation to do so; material the disclosure of which would make it more likely that theenvironment to which such material related would be damaged.ó in addition, requests forinformation may be refused òwhere it would involve the supply of unfinished documents ordata or internal communications, or where the request is manifestly unreasonable or formulated in too general a manner.ó41akteneinsichts und informationszugangsgesetz (aig) vom 10. m−rz 1998 (gvbl. i s. 46).42berliner informationsfreiheitsgesetz vom 15. oktober 1999 (gvbl. i, s.561).43com (1998) 585 final.on the state level, the east german states of brandenburg andmecklenburgvorpommern provide a general right of access to information in their constitutions. general freedomofinformation acts were alsoenacted in brandenburg41 and berlin42 in 1998 and 1999, respectively.however, comprehensive nationwide or euwide legislation on freedomof information is not yet a reality, although it is becoming a goal. indeed,the present coalition government in germany has expressed its intentionto enact a general freedomofinformation law on the federal level. inaddition, directorate general 13 of the european commission has beenworking for more than 5 years on the development of a legal regime forfreedom of information, seeking to implement the transparency guarantee of the maastricht treaty. however, recently published drafts have beencriticized for being too tentative (box 6.9).second, the impact of global networks is not limited to disseminatinga normative yardstick. a restrictive national policy with respect to freedomofinformation principles can be undermined to a certain extent byuse of the internet. ironically, this became obvious recently as drafts ofthe european communityõs freedomofinformation regulation wereleaked and published on the internet.third, and perhaps most important, economic considerations in a globalized world may provide an even stronger motivation for adopting freedomofinformation principles in germany. as the european commissionõs ògreen paper on access to public informationó43 states,òwithout userfriendly and readily available administrative, legislative,financial, or other public information, economic actors cannot make fullyinformed decisions.ó therefore, the commission notes, òthe ready availability of public information is an absolute prerequisite for the competitiveness of european industry. in this respect, eu companies are at aserious competitive disadvantage compared to their american counterglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information167parts, which benefit from a highly developed, efficient publicinformation system at all levels of the administration.ó in addition, publicsectorinformation may itself be a vehicle for economic growth, as the publicsector is the biggest single producer of information in areas such as legislation, statistics, culture, finance, geography, transport, and research. box6.10 provides more discussion.because nations can determine their own foi policies that are, in theiressence, nonoverlapping, there is no particular need for internationalharmonization of freedomofinformation laws. it is important, howbox 6.9 no secrets about public access regulation?any citizen of the union . . . shall have a right of access to european parliament, council and commission documents subject to the principles and theconditions to be defined. (article 255 of the treaty establishing the europeancommunities [amsterdam treaty]).the european commission was charged with drawing up a draft regulation governing the publicõs òright of accessó to documents from the commission, council, and european parliament, according to article 255 of theamsterdam treaty. the commissionõs original intention was to publish aòcommunicationó (discussion paper) and then draft a regulation. drafts ofthis communication were leaked to statewatch, a nongovernmental organization (ngo) that monitors state and civil liberties in the europeanunion, in april 1999. the document was widely circulated and subject tostrong criticism by other ngos, members of parliament, and academics.in june 1999 the commission decided to withdraw the publication of thedraft communication from its agenda and proceeded instead straight to thedraft regulation of the european commissionõs òproposal for a regulationon public access to documents of the european parliament, the counciland the commission.ó statewatch again obtained òunpublishedó draftsand published them on its web site, criticizing the draft as òa new regulation which will completely undermine the intent and spirit of theamsterdam treaty to ôenshrineõ the citizenõs right of access to documents.ótony bunyan, statewatch editor, said, òwe have obtained a copy and weintend to ensure that it is ôreproducedõ as widely as possible so that civilsociety can register its anger that such a proposal could even be consideredin a democratic europe.ósource: see <http://www.statewatch.org> (04.03.00).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168global networks and local valuesever, to ensure that international treaties do not hamper national freedomofinformation policies. a case in point is internationally harmonized copyright law. so far, the pertinent international rules are silentwith respect to copyrighting governmental information; neither thetrips agreements under the wto treaty,44 the berne treaty,45 nor thebox 6.10 economic significance of access togovernmental informationò . . . [i]t is important that efforts made by the public sector to renderinformation accessible for commercial exploitation are recognized and rewarded. at the same time, if the private sector is to develop competitiveproducts from publicsector information, the [source] materials must beavailable to them at a reasonable price.òpricing is therefore a crucial issue for the exploitation of publicsectorinformation by the content industries. it largely determines whether theywill [have] an interest in investing in valueadded products and servicesbased on publicsector information. american companies benefit from thefact that they can obtain u.s. publicsector information [at no cost].òan american software firm is about to release a business mapping software product allowing users to find and illustrate points on the map, integrate maps in their documents, and identify the trends of their business onthe map. the objective is to make it easy for business users in organizations of any size to use maps to make betterinformed business decisions.over 15 million addressed streetlevel segments are included for all u.s.and worldwide countrylevel boundaries. the estimated retail price of theproduct is $109.òas an element of comparison, a german mapinformation company isoffering geodata for [a single] german state . . . for a total of 9,728 dm +vat 16%.ósource: excerpted from european commission, 1998, ògreen paper on access topublic information,ó com 585.44the trips agreement (agreement on traderelated aspects of intellectual propertyrights) is annex 1c of the marrakesh agreement establishing the world trade organization signed in morocco on 15 april 1994. it is available online at <http://www.wto.org/english/tratope/tripse/tagm0e.htm>.45berne convention for the protection of literary and artistic works of september 9, 1886,as amended on september 28, 1979, unts no. 11850, available online at <http://www.wipo.int/treaties/ip/index.html>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.privacy and freedom of information169world intellectual property organization (wipo) conventions46 dealwith the issue. if they were extended to such information, the potentialfor conflict between treaty obligation and foi for government data wouldbe obvious.note added in proofin the wake of the horrific events in new york city and washington,d.c., on september 11, 2001, the òuniting and strengthening america byproviding appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorismó (usa patriot) act was enacted into law (p.l. 10756). reflectingcongressional concern that the legislative tools available to law enforcement were inadequate in an advancedtechnology environment in whichterrorists can freely travel and operate relatively free of the constraintsimposed by national borders, the act expanded government authority tomonitor internet traffic, to compel disclosure of information contained inpublic and private records if approved by the judicial branch, and to shareinformation collected in grand jury investigations with òany federal lawenforcement, intelligence, protective, immigration, national defense, ornational security official in order to assist the official receiving that information in the performance of his official duties.ó47 this legislation hasimplications for privacy interests of individuals vis ‹ vis government, anda number of public interest groups have strongly criticized this legislationfor weakening protection for these interests.48in addition, in the freedom of information domain, the bush administration has promulgated a policy that òdiscretionary decision by [a federal]agency to disclose information protected under the foia should be madeonly after full and deliberate consideration of the institutional, commercial,and personal privacy interests that could be implicated by disclosure of theinformation. . . . when [an agency] carefully consider[s] foia requests anddecide[s] to withhold records, in whole or in part, [it] can be assured thatthe department of justice will defend [its] decisions unless they lack a soundlegal basis or present an unwarranted risk of adverse impact on the abilityof other agencies to protect other important records.ó4946wipo copyright treaty adopted by the diplomatic conference on certain copyrightand neighboring rights questions, geneva, on december 20, 1996 and wipo performancesand phonograms treaty adopted by the diplomatic conference on december 20, 1996.available online at <http://www.wipo.int/treaties/ip/index.html>.47see <http://thomas.loc.gov/cgibin/bdquery/z?d107:h.r.03162:>.48see, for example <http://www.cdt.org/press/011025press.shtml> and <http://www.epic.org>.49see <http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/foiapost/2001foiapost19.htm>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1707the impact of global ecommerce onlocal values7.1introductiongiven the great potential that the internet offers for commercial applications, it is hardly a surprise that ecommerce has become a subject ofintense interest. there is a growing literature on market opportunities,business strategies, transaction efficiency and security, electronic currency, intellectual property, tax policy, trade policy, and other regulatoryissues related to doing business electronically. indeed, the national research council has itself produced a number of reports relevant to severalaspects of ecommerce.this chapter does not aim to recover all this ground. what is of concern is the extent to which ecommerce affects the values of a society (andvice versa)ña more limited task, but still no small challenge. indeed, thereare at least three ways in which interactions between ecommerce andlocal or regional values might come about:¥to the extent that ecommerce encourages new business models,changes the relationship between seller and buyer, and challenges existing regulatory structures, it has the potential to alter certain traditionalcommercial values. those values are often locally, regionally, and nationally specific, so that the effect of ecommerce on commerce itself can alsobe local, regional, or national.¥the continued growth of ecommerce raises the possibility that,either directly or through the institutions developed to regulate (or stimulate) the commercial uses of the global network, ecommerce may alterglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values171the structure and/or operation of the internet. these changes may affectthe internetõs noncommercial uses as well. for example, the control ofportals, the organization of browsers, the legal protections afforded tooperatingsystem and application software, and even the control overurls can have significant implications for all users. indeed, the changescan alter the culture and values that characterized the ònetwork of networksó during its formative stages.¥to the extent that commerce itself has a role in defining a localsociety, the changes brought about by ecommerce may affect some of theother local political and social values discussed in this report.7.2commerce and valueseconomic activity is often assumed, particularly in neoclassical models, to be largely or entirely driven by individual profitmaximizing behavior. in this utilitarian view, commerce is essentially a valuefree activity. as long as institutions are properly designed to provide efficientmarkets with adequate property rights, freedom to enter into contracts,and strong protection against monopolies, competition and selfinterestwill do the rest.the utilitarian assumption is useful for many purposes, but most observers (including economists) recognize that it is an incomplete description. the individual and group values and attitudes that are the subject ofthis report manifest themselves in the rich network of informal social institutions in which a marketoriented economic system is embedded. atthe heart of these institutions is what might be called commercial values:personal motivation, the material dimensions of social status, andñperhaps most importantñvarious aspects of trust. buyers and sellers knowthe great value of trust and have developed ways of judging whom totrust. they understand that an untarnished reputation, credit rating, andreliability are essential to commercial success.although these fundamental values are, on the surface, much thesame in most successful market economies, they manifest themselves indifferent ways in different nationstates. for example, germany and theunited states have very different concepts of contract. when a germanfirm sells a complex piece of equipment or system to another, the contractis typically no more than a few pages in length. in the united states, thecontract for the same transaction might run to hundreds of pages. thisdifference arises, as a legal matter, out of the distinction between the civillaw rules in germany and the common law rules in the united states.the former tend to be broad and abstract, the latter quite specific as theyare derived from case analysis and precedent. however, the very prevalence of those two different traditions reflects a profound value differenceglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172global networks and local valuesin the two countries. germans appear more willing to trust the courts toòfill in the gapsó in a contractual relationship. americans may look to thecourts for redress, but expect the entire contractual relationship to be explicitly stated; whatõs written is what counts, and few would expect (ortrust) the courts to go beyond a strict reading of the language of the contract.another difference in the manifestation of values between the twocountries lies in how they define intellectual property. in the united states,patents and copyrights are property rights granted by the society. in germany, they are innate or moral rights earned by an individual as a rewardand recognition for his or her creation. moreover, because it views intellectual property rights primarily as an effective stimulus to economic activity, the united states has been more flexible in defining what kinds ofcreative ideas are worthy of protection and has tended to extend intellectualproperty protection to more and more activities, such as businessprocesses. german law has been more cautious in allowing such extensions, perhaps coupling the deeper respect and greater protection for individual innovation with a narrower definition of what constitutes a creative act. in effect, the german system may place somewhat less emphasison intellectualproperty protection as a stimulus to economic activity andapproach the issue primarily as a balance between individual rights andthe rights of the public to have access to new ideas.this governmental responsibility and concern for protecting the rightsof the public is also evident in german attitudes and law concerning competitive practices. germany places severe constraints on borderline marketing practices and exaggerated advertising claims, and competitors arequick to seek judicial relief when it appears that the line has been crossed.the consumer is assumed to be vulnerable and entitled to protection, andthere are a host of default and mandatory rules in commercial law to provide that protection. in the united states, there is much less interferencewith market transactions, per se, and the order of the day is caveat emptor. on the other hand, the united states has productliability laws thatare much more severe than in germany, and liability suits leading to verylarge jury awards are much more common in the united states.these examples illustrate the values of commerce that relate to commerce itself. but commerce also provides some of the glue for a society. itsform and dynamics shape a society as much as commerce is shaped by it.exchanging goods and services is a means by which people connect. thesuburban malls and chain restaurants of most u.s. cities build differentkinds of community relationships than the pedestrianoriented, city shopsand cafes of most european cities. and businesses are not only commercial but also social organizations. the ge employee who carries a laminated card enunciating the companyõs principles and commitments hasglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values173not merely entered a business relationship but has become part of a defining social system. the german worker who has built a relationship with aspecific corporation since his or her apprenticeship days has developed asocial structure as well as a stable employment situation.ecommerce enters the picture in two ways. first, networkrelatedcommercial values differ, at least in emphasis, from other commercial values. second, by competing with local commercial systems and wrestingmarket share from them, ecommerce can weaken their embedded values.7.3the impact of ecommerce on localcommercial values7.3.1the globalization of marketsbecause global networks reduce the distancerelated transaction costsof certain kinds of business, they may clearly increase the magnitude ofinternational commerce and change the cast of participants. electroniccommerce may be of several kinds. businesstoconsumer traffic encompasses the range of transactions between firms and end users, from purchase of goods to information and financial services. businesstobusinesstransactions offer opportunities to develop efficient auctionbased platforms for procurement and supplychain management systems that arevery attractive to large corporations. businesstogovernment exchangesmake it practical for many new and smaller players to enter the international market.commercial opportunities on the internet both arise from and are limited by the fact that only digitized information moves through the network. this makes it a natural medium for activities that depend on themovement or manipulation of informationñincluding words, numbers,symbols, and descriptors or digital representations of shape, color, andsound. databases and the tools for using them, as well as many otherkinds of software programs, obviously fit this description, and it is notsurprising that a large fraction of internet trade occurs in these òsoftgoods.ó but other kinds of digital content are fast catching up. financialservices are expanding and, as bandwidth increases, so is the flow of realtime audio and video files. search engines have pioneered new ways ofallowing interactive information retrieval. furthermore, customized advice and support are increasingly being provided through the internet.many kinds of tangible goods are also traded on the internet, thoughstill constituting a relatively small fraction of total activity. the advantages of the net for hard goods come into play in different phases of thevalue chain: pricesetting mechanisms, including auction formats, can beset up; procurement can be carried out electronically; and billing andglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174global networks and local valuesmaintenance services can be executed. these services are becoming moreattractive as technical and regulatory issues related to security and anonymity are resolved.the globalizing effect of networks on these types of commerce differsmarkedly. trade in hard goods is less likely to be globalized than softgoods because the merchandise needs to be physically transported and issubject to the same delays and border controls as nonetraded goods.even for soft goods, globalization can be hindered by bandwidth capacityin different parts of the world. in this latter case, however, technical improvements in physical networks and wireless communications, and political developments that increase the openness of certain societies, willmarkedly reduce the barriers to global ecommerce.one of those barriers is the difficulty of establishing the level of trustthat has always been an important part of commerce generally and thathas been built up in particular ways within local regions and nations.some have argued1 that the problem is exacerbated when informationproducts are involved because of the lack of òtransparencyó of information. that is, it is difficult to judge a priori how well the product will servethe purpose for which it was purchased. in that sense, information goodscan be categorized as òexperienceó or even òcredenceó goods. experiencegoods are those whose quality can be judged only by useñi.e., after thepurchase has become binding. with credence goods, the purchaser cannever really assess the quality of the good.2technical approaches to credit validation, seals of approval, and cooperation among national governments can help to develop new approaches to trust building. producers also spend a great deal on marketing, providing free information about the good, as well as samples ordemonstration versions. large firms in businesstobusiness transactionscan use initial facetoface meetings to establish the trust basis for an ongoing business relationship. firms marketing branded goods or servicesover a long period of time will also have little trouble. but small businesses will not necessarily have these and other mechanisms available forgenerating trust across large distances and national borders. intermediaries such as ebay, that solicit and publish the ratings of buyers and sellers,will undoubtedly have a greater role.1see bradford delong and michael froomkin, 2000, òspeculative microeconomics fortomorrowõs economy,ó in brian kahin and hal r. varian, eds., internet publishing and beyond, cambridge, ma: mit press.2these concepts have been developed by g.a. akerlof, 1970, òthe market for ôlemons.õquality uncertainty and the market mechanism,ó quarterly journal of economics 84:488500.they have been applied to information in m. kretschmer, g. klimis, and j.c. chong, 1999,òincreasing returns and social contagion in cultural industries,ó british journal of management 10:61 ff.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values1757.3.2business on the internetthere is an ongoing debate concerning the extent to which production and distribution decisions in the information economy differ fromthose in manufacturing industries.3 but the emerging consensus is that ecommerce leads to fundamentally different òbusiness models.ónetwork effectsthe spread of a hardware or software standard is accompanied by anexponential increase in the usefulness of that standard for its users, asmore and more elements can be connected to an interactive system. according to òmetcalfeõs law,ó the value of a network increases in approximate proportion to the square of its numbers of usersñor, to be moreprecise, the potential value, v, is proportional to n(nð1).4 while some maydisagree about the magnitude of the effect or the precise functional relationship between number of users and value, the benefit of communications technologies depends crucially on the number of those participatingin their use. this effect has been observed in many consumerproductmarkets. often, it leads to veritable òstandards wars,ó as in the case of thetwo video recorder standards vhs and betamax. it also applies in theproduction sector.in every case, we find a shift away from competitive equilibria, inwhich there are many suppliers, and toward singlefirm equilibria. thesemonopolists have a strong interest in locking customers into network relationships. concepts like trust, reputation, loyalty, and commitment playa key role in the business strategies of online companies.5 we also findnew strategies for price setting, from giving away products to complexschemes of price discrimination.6 although it can be argued that competition remains intactñbecause of a fierce contest for the maintenance andeventual replacement of such network monopoliesñthe recent evidence3among the two leading contributions, shapiro and varian take a more conservative view,whereas kelly foresees sweeping changes for fundamental concepts such as property andscarcity. see kevin kelly, 1998, new rules for the new economy. 10 radical strategies for aconnected world, harmondsworth: viking penguin; and carl shapiro and hal r. varian,1998, information rules: a strategic guide to the network economy, cambridge, ma: harvardbusiness school press.4for a survey of the literature, see shapiro and varian, 1998, p. 184.5aol, for instance, has launched a longterm campaign to increase customersõ trust in itsprovider services.6shapiro and varian offer the most detailed advice to the aspiring information entrepreneur, while at the same time demonstrating the economic logic behind the new strategies.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176global networks and local valuesfrom the microsoft case has shown that there is considerable potential forweakening the competitive process.production by copyin traditional markets, firm size is constrained by the ultimately increasing marginal cost of material resources. in markets for digital products, few material resources are needed for reproductionñwhich essentially consists of copying a file of binary digits. once initial hardware costsare paid, digital copying costs are next to nothing. the largest supplierwill have the lowest marginal cost and thus appear to be a ònatural monopoly.óobviously, the low cost of copying increases the incentive to command the largest share of a digital good market. it also poses problems forthe protection of information products. though the cost of assembling theoriginal good may be very high, as in the case of new operatingsystemsoftware or a movie, its digital reproduction involves a simple operationthat can be carried out with little technical skill and equipment. in consequence, there is an incentive to òtrespass.ó7properties of informationonly information can be transformed into the digital signals that travelthrough global networks. information makes its impact on users in a veryspecific manner: it does not change their physical state or modify theirphysical circumstances. instead, it affects the usersõ thoughts, knowledge,or feelings. users learn something new, or they gain pleasure, or they receive instructions to behave in ways that make them more successful.the receipt of such signals by individuals does not destroy or alterthe original message. in consequence, there is no rivalry in consuming aninformation good. this is the core reason why information is considered apublic rather than a private good. in many cases, it is still easy to excludethose who do not pay for the consumption of the good, either throughelectronic walls, legal sanctions against unauthorized copying, or technical copyrightmanagement systems (see below). such interventions maymeet the goals of an individual producer, but from a socialwelfare perspective, there are inevitable losses in potential utility associated withthem. that is the reason why patent and copyright statutes try to strike atenuous balance between the temporary protection of exclusive property7for a discussion of problems associated with a lack of excludability, see bradford delongand michael froomkin, òspeculative microeconomics for tomorrowõs economy,ó 2000.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values177rights and the subsequent free use of new inventions, be they technical orartistic in nature.the particular nature of information also accounts for its lack of transparency.8 the qualities or potential defects of material goods are sometimes immediately visible. in the case of information goods, nothing canbe gleaned from the appearance of a cdrom or a pdf file.producers react to this situation with a massive increase in the proportion of total expenses devoted to marketing. prospective buyers receive free information about the good, or samples, or even demo versionsin order to decrease their perceived risk. this amount of free publicityposes a problem in itselfñthe muchdiscussed òinformation overloadóñwhen the entire public is exposed to these messages. on the other hand,the basic lack of transparency of information goods provides incentives totry out various schemes in order to reduce the likelihood of fraud or thedelivery of inferiorquality products.7.4effects on local commercial valuesto the extent that global networks lead to significant increases in ecommerce, some local business ventures will clearly be subjected to competitive pressures, particularly where the transactions involve tangiblegoods. of greater concern for purposes of this report, however, is the valuecompetitionñthe degree to which internetbased business creates tensions with local commercial values.because business conducted through the internet has such differentcharacteristics from local commerce, it requires a somewhat different setof commercial values. this is as true of ecommerce conducted within asingle nation as it is of global ecommerce. in principle, individuals canadapt to operating with two sets of values, one for local commerce andanother for ecommerce. but the more that traditional values become aburden or disadvantage in ecommerce, the less likely the separation canbe rigidly maintained.globalization of ecommerce enters the picture in several ways. thedegree of tension between internetcommerce values and more traditionallocal ones is at least in part a function of the local value systemñwhich, ofcourse, differs from nation to nation. in effect, each nation faces a different challenge in resolving the discrepancies between local and internetvalues. moreover, if ecommerce transactions are globalñthat is, dobridge different nationsñthere must be some harmonization between theaccommodations adopted by each of the nations.8see delong and froomkin, òspeculative microeconomics for tomorrowõs economy,ó2000.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178global networks and local valuescommercial values, as noted earlier, are implicit in the design of thelaws and the formal and informal institutions that give meaning and shape(and a regulatory framework) to such concepts as intellectual property,contracts, and competition. it is useful to examine how each of these isaffected by ecommerce.7.4.1intellectual propertythe recognition of intellectual property provides a means for societies to grant monopoly rights to an individual (or corporate entity) forsome specified period of time. as pointed out earlier, these rights aregranted to recognize and reward the inventorõs creativity as well as tostimulate the creative process for the benefit of society at large. these twogoals are balanced differently in each society, as a function of laws, formaland informal institutions, and other practical factors.the legal institutions that have been developed to protect intellectualproperty include patents, copyrights, and trademarks.9 patents granttemporary rights to the inventor of a product or process that meets certaincriteria of originality, usefulness, and nonobviousness. copyrights granttemporary rights to the author or owner of a work of human expression.traditionally, works of art, music, and literature were protected by copyright. today, both copyright and, increasingly, patent protection has beenextended to software programs and databases. patents for software inparticular have been controversial, and the practice is also not followed inall countries. trademarks protect a visual symbol or label used as anidentifying mark.the growth of digital information and communications technologieshas created a number of knotty intellectualproperty problems, particularly with respect to copyright law.10 a comprehensive discussion of theissues is presented in a separate cstb report.11 the comments that followhere are therefore quite brief and intended only as a summary and totouch on some recent developments.information and communications technologies raise issues in copyright law for several reasons. the technological capacity to manipulate,organize, and transmit information allows the generation of a large num9for completeness, one should include trade secrets in this group, as companies can takelegal action against misappropriation of such secrets. but it is a category that is much lessdependent on a specific legal structure than the others, and therefore is not treated here.10in contrast, advances in molecular and cellular biology have had much greater impacton patent law.11computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.the digital dilemma. intellectual property in the information age. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values179ber of new information products whose producers need (and, in manycases, deserve) intellectualproperty protection. however, these productsdo not easily fit into one or another of the traditional intellectualpropertycategories. copyright is attractive to most producers because protectioncan be obtained much more quickly and easily than is the case with patenting, and this has been of great value to them in a rapidly changingenvironment. but copyright protects only the expression of an idea, notthe idea itself, leaving producers rather vulnerable to misappropriation.for example, copyrighting the lines of code in a software programstill leaves the program owner vulnerable; code can be altered to avoidcopyright infringement, while the underlying design of the program isexploited. as another example, the organization of a database into a format that is much more usable than the raw (often public) data on which itis based adds value worthy of protection. but again, if the protectioncomes through copyright, small reformations of the data would allow others to avoid copyright infringement.the problem is exacerbated in ebusiness because the same digitaltechnologies that offer so many opportunities to create new informationproducts and market them at very low marginal costs also make it extremely easy for others to copy those products. indeed, they could makecopies in such numbers that it might seriously reduce the size of the original producerõs market. the producerõs vulnerability is thus all the greater.there are technical countermeasures, however. copyright management systemsñtechnologies that enable copyright owners to regulate andautomatically charge for access to digital worksñare now available.12they make it considerably easier to control the distribution of information and to trace who uses it (as well as when and how often), who copiesit (legally or illegally), and who redistributes it.taken together, these factors are exerting pressure to change traditional attitudes toward copyright and traditional strategies for protectingit. although copyright is a wellestablished element in intellectualproperty protection, legal institutions have provided for òfairuse exceptions òand òfirstsale limitations.ó in adopting these provisions, society and thelaw have recognized the practical limitations on monitoring every possible copyright violation and the relatively small damage to the value ofintellectual property that limited and sporadic violations represent. inaddition, by making the barrier to the publicõs unfettered use of information covered by copyright slightly porous, the system has achieved asomewhat better balance between private and public interests.12see julie e. cohen, 1997, òsome reflections on copyright management systems andlaws designed to protect them,ó berkeley technology law journal 12.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180global networks and local valueswith the increased vulnerability that producers feel and the new toolsavailable to them, copyright owners have generally become much lesswilling to tolerate the porosity that has, up until now, indirectly acknowledged and accommodated the communal property aspects of information. for example, source codes for programs are much more closelyguarded than in the earlier days of information technology.13 in addition,although database producers may only own the form of the data theymarket, they make efforts to restrict the easy availability of the (often)public data on which their information product is based. major copyrightholders, particularly the u.s. film industry, initially invoked provisions ofinternational treaties in order to eliminate private copying, or fair use;these efforts were denounced as òcopyright grab.ó14 the issue is hardlysettled, however, as the recent napster controversy illustrates.15 it hasbecome clearer that illicit copying may not be as simple and inexpensiveto monitor as originally thought; when such copying involves networkswith several million usersñrepresenting a considerable potential marketfor property such as music filesñcopyright holders are aggressively seeking legal remedies. thus, whether the solution ultimately lies in law ortechnical architecture remains to be seen.16the suddenness of the changes has led to turbulence both in the diplomatic and judicial arenas. the copyright treaty adopted within theframework of the world intellectual property organization (wipo) bythe diplomatic conference on december 20, 1996, requires contractingparties to provide òadequate legal protection and effective legal remediesagainst the circumvention of effective technological measures that areused by authors in connection with the exercise of their rights.ó this hasgiven rise to a strong political reaction by groups committed to protecting13a significant exception is the rise and continued growth of òopen sourceó (os) softwaredevelopment. os development is a process in which many individual programmers collaborate to maintain, refine, and upgrade software. the primary example of os development islinux, an operating system that is widely regarded as a highly robust operating platform.see, for example, steve weber, 2000, the political economy of open source software, brieworking paper 140.14pamela samuelson. 1997. òconfab clips copyright cartel,ó wired 5.3, march.15the napster controversy concerned a service provided by napster that the music recording industry believed operated in violation of copyright law. napster did not copycopyrighted files; instead, it provided an index of titles, many of which were copyrighted,and enabled òmatchmakingó between a person wanting a particular title and another person who already had that title. the latter would provide the former with the requested title,usually without compensation. in february 2001, the u.s. court of appeals for the ninthcircuit upheld an injunction issued in the u.s. district court for the northern district ofcalifornia that effectively shut down napster. see a&m records, inc. v. napster, inc., 239f.3d 1004 (9th cir. 2001), available at <http://www.riaa.com/pdf/napsterdecision.pdf>.16lawrence lessig, 2000, òarchitecting for control,ó preprint, stanford university.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values181free access to ideas and preventing interference with the òflourishing ofcultural life.óthe arguments have been joined in the discussions and debates surrounding the u.s. and eu legislation implementing the wipo treaty (theu.s. congress has enacted the digital millennium copyright act(dmca),17 and the european union promulgated directive 2001/29/econ the harmonization of certain aspects of copyright and related rights inthe information society18). but these arguments have made clear that thereare some significant differences between the european union and theunited states on some of the values underlying the current conflicts. theeuropeans tend to emphasize the òmoral rightsó of the author. in contrastto pecuniary rights, moral rights are inalienable personal rights allowingan author to claim authorship and to prevent the mutilation or distortionof the work. moral rights are rooted in natural law principles recognizedby a number of european nations in civil law and in the berne treaty.19although the united states signed the berne treaty in 1989, it hasbeen quite reluctant to grant such sweeping moral rights to authors andartists.20 first (as the napster case has shown), many in the u.s. publicperceive that what is at issue is often the rights of owners rather than ofauthors or artists. second, the united states has focused on the publicvalue of information and the damage to research that excessive restrictions on òfair useó might cause.the conflict is an excellent illustration of the challenge to local valuesthat the new technologies represent. moral rights are a component of continental european law that, if compromised, would certainly be perceivedas the destruction of an important value. indeed, an artist or writerõs moralrights to a voice in all transactions involving a work of art have been introduced into the eu code. on the other hand, freedom of informationhas always been extremely important in the united states, and laws that17p.l. 105304, 112 stat. 2860 (october 28, 1998).18see <http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/internalmarket/en/intprop/docs/index.htm>, or official journal l 167, 22/06/2001 p. 00100019.19article 6 bis(1), berne convention for the protection of literary and artistic works, no.11850, 828 u.n.t.s. 221 (september 9, 1886) (revised 1908, 1928, 1948, 1967, 1971).20as howard b. abrams puts it: òthe fact of the matter is that the united states wasanxious to join the berne union; and the berne union, and its governing bodyñthe worldintellectual property organizationñwere quite anxious to have the united states as a member. thus both parties have been more than willing to accept the fiction that the unitedstates really has a right of respect, and the fact that the united states does not truly recognize moral rights will almost certainly be glossed over.ó see howard b. abrams, 1991, thelaw of copyright, new york, (looseleaf) vol. 2, ¤ 18.02 [c][2].global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182global networks and local valuesmight compromise it would also be perceived as the destruction of animportant value.still, it now appears that ecommerce is leading to modifications inthe underlying values of both the european union and the united states.where the final compromises will lead and what steps can be taken toameliorate the perceived losses, however, are difficult to predict.7.4.2contract and consumer protectionsuccessful market economies have always recognized the need to òlevelthe playing fieldó between seller and buyer, particularly where the buyer isan individual consumer at a great power disadvantage with respect to typical producers and sellers. governments have seen it as their role to providethis leveling by regulating advertising, contracts, and liability.in an online economy, the fundamental issue is much the sameñovercoming the power differential between seller and buyerñbut a number ofcircumstances make it a somewhat more challenging task. internet transactions will increasingly involve buyers and sellers in different nationswith different commerciallaw regimes. of course, international trade isnot, in itself, a new concept, and mechanisms for resolving jurisdictionaldisputes have long been in place. what renders the internet situation different is that many of the buyers (and sometimes the sellers) are relativelyunsophisticated, and they are not supported by the kind of legal structurethat has allowed large commercial ventures to deal with such issues in thepast. thus it is likely that governments will be pressed to improve thetransparency, efficiency, and reach of their mediation processes.more than process is at issue, however. as pointed out earlier in thischapter, there are considerable differences between the european unionand the united states regarding consumer protection and the role of contracts. europeans are more severe in restraining false advertising claimsthan are americans. for their part, americans are more literal in interpreting (and relying on) the specific wording of contracts to define andlimit the obligations of seller and buyer. yet americans give consumersmuch more latitude to seek judicial relief and are more likely to hold producers financially liable for mishaps involving their products.thus the resolution of the different contract and consumerprotectionapproaches is more than a procedural problem. it begins with the need toestablish the extent to which the parties have voluntarily consented to theterms of the contract. in the internet world, with hypertext or iconlinkedweb pages, contract terms may not be obviously and explicitly apparentto the buyer. moreover, certain actions far less conscious than an explicitsignature (box or button clicks online, opening a shrinkwrapped software package offline) may be taken as constituting acceptance of contracglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values183tual terms. in certain cases, these terms may create continuing obligationsrelated to the use of the product that contravene other laws in one of theconstituencies involved.21the problem continues with the need to resolve differences in viewsabout the appropriate role of government in enforcing or supplementingcontracts to protect consumers, which would appear to make the issuemore complicated than merely one of negotiating the proper applicationof commercial law. furthermore, which nationõs values should apply indetermining what is appropriate advertising? should one take into account that a consumer in a country where advertising has previously beenmore constrained might be more vulnerable to exaggerated claims? or,on the other hand, should a seller be expected to alter what amounts to acultural standard by exhibiting more restraint when operating in the international setting? and should a seller be considered as òoperating in aninternational settingó even before an actual transaction occurs? finally, towhat extent do competitors have standing to challenge, on the basis oflaws (and their underlying values), the practices of sellers who are not intheir country?the technology of the internet also enables a number of practices related to ecommerce that have no obvious equivalent in the noninternetworld. the practice of spamming, the use of cookies, the involuntaryopening of other web pages when one connects to a particular url address, are all far more intrusive than sales and advertising practices offline.therefore, each practice raises new challenges to governments in balancing the rights of sellers and consumers. although attempts can be made toextend present law to cover these new practices, they appear to be sufficiently different from existing situations that a deeper consideration ofthe underlying conflicting values should first take place.7.4.3competitionthe internet changes the competitive environment of commerce. because the information space is unlimited and the entry cost is low, smallentrepreneurs can enter the marketplace easily. and because direct communication between customer and entrepreneur is enhanced, transactioncosts are lower. for both these reasons, the internet appears to facilitategreater variation and diversity. most importantly, as new niches of promising business activity are identified, large numbers of (initially) smallbusiness entities may occupy them.21see margaret j. radin, 2000, òhumans, computers and binding agreements,ó indianalaw review 75:1125.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184global networks and local valueson the other hand, the internet especially facilitates enterprises whosesuccess depends on network effectsñòwinnertakesalló situations forcompanies with significant market shareñwhich further facilitate theirgrowth and market dominance.this effect leaves competition and antitrust policy in a quandary: canmarket domination continue to be viewed as a threat to competition ifgaining a (temporary) monopoly is the central strategic guideline for competitors in informationgoods markets? the only actions likely to continueto be viewed as violations will be òunacceptable practicesó by the temporarymonopoly holder to perpetuate that position. even then, it may bedifficult to agree on what is òunacceptable,ó given the long tradition ofpractices like tiein sales and product bundling.the obvious illustrative case for such violations, u.s. v. microsoft,22 is,of course, still not quite settled. however, it has already provided boththe legal and the economic fields with a wealth of new insights.among other issues, an important aspect of the case was microsoftõsbehavior during the market introduction of its web browser, internet explorer. the techniques it used to push the thenincumbent standardbrowser, netscapeõs navigator, out of the market led to the claim thatmicrosoft extended its operatingsystem monopoly by unfair means. thetrial proceedings have developed at length the arguments around òtemporal natural monopolies,ó and the case illustrates two major controversies: whether, and how much, the use of market power should be limited;and the extent to which antitrust law should be restraining.the network nature of global communication gives rise to anothermajor current issue. because the networks of competing firms are connected into larger nets, interconnection can be successively leveraged inways that effectively exclude specific competitors. of course, such measures can be billed (or even deliberately designed) as technical incompatibilities.23  exclusion can also be practiced at the basic hardware level. forexample, in the absence of regulation preventing the restriction of accessto lastmile telephone lines and cable networks, companies can preservemonopoly positions despite fierce price and service competition.2422united states court of appeals for the district of columbia circuit, june 28, 2001, unitedstates of america v. microsoft corporation; appeal on district court of columbia circuit, 97 f.supp. 2nd 59 (d.d.c. 2000)ñfinal judgment; see also 84 f. supp. 2nd 9 (d.d.c. 1999)ñfindings of fact and 87 f. supp. 2nd 30 (d.d.c. 2000)ñconclusions of law.23there is also an oecd report on various countriesõ responses to related questions:òcompetition issues in electronic commerce,ó daffe7clp (2000)32, january 2001.24see francois bar et al., 1999, òdefending the internet revolution in the broadband era:when doing nothing is doing harm,ó berkeley: brie working paper n. 0137, august.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values185in the united states, antitrust has in recent years focused on economicpolicy, and has been aimed at enhancing efficiency. germany has alwaysshared that goal, but influential politicians believed that antitrust policyshould also serve to protect the political process from excessive economicinfluence and power.25 in the united states, on the other hand, there hasbeen a great reticence to mix economic and political issues, as well as agreater willingness to let the market work. however, there are signs thatthe two systems may be converging, at least where the internet is concerned. still, given the track record on recent u.s.european controversiesñconcerning civilaviation subsidies, airlinesõ landingrights policies,and in the major differences between u.s. and european authorities on aproposed gehoneywell mergerñit would be a mistake to assume thatthe two systems are converging rapidly.7.5the impact of ecommerce on global networksthe second chapter of this report reviewed the history of the internetand emphasized how its growth and structure were influenced by theinterests and attitudes of its developers and by the ònetizenó culture,which influenced the form of this network of networks and, in turn, wassupported and reinforced by that network architecture. this history illustrates the nature of technology developmentñan interaction betweentechnologyõs òpushó and the òpulló exerted by its users and adapters of atechnology, an example of both òsoft determinismó and òpath dependence.óbut the evolution of a technology does not stop at some arbitrarypoint. as the user community changes, the òpulló factors change, and thearchitecture and operating systems continue to evolve. one importantcurrent question is the extent to which the explosion of ecommerce willso shift the makeup of the user community, and so influence the structureand operation of global networks, that network values will be substantially affected.the commercial opportunities offered by the internet are largely related to the privatization of digitized information and, to a lesser extent,the means for obtaining and using it. on the other hand, one of the greatstrengths of the internet is its ability to support and encourage public usesof information for a range of political, social, cultural, and personal purposesñobtaining it, using it, sharing it, and being able to accomplish thosefunctions quickly, unthreateningly, and inexpensively. these are not en25for a comparative view, see several articles by david gerber, chicagokent school oflaw.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186global networks and local valuestirely conflicting goals (and they together explain, in part, why there aremarkets for information products). however, it certainly seems prudentto be alert to ways in which ecommerce could drive alterationsñin architecture, hardware, software, and regulationñthat could inhibit otherinternet activities and their related values. some of these are outlined inthe following paragraphs.one of the more obvious areas of potential conflict concerns privacy,the subject of chapter 6. many of the commercial opportunities offered bynew technologies are based on obtaining and using more complete information about consumersñtheir needs, tastes, and patterns. having suchinformation allows sellers to locate individuals who may want their services and to customize those services; developing databases that aggregate such information helps companies to plan marketing strategies. themotivation to acquire such data stimulates development of the requisitetechnologiesñcookies, analysis of purchase records, data mining andmatchingñbut their availability increases the potential threat to privacy.it is important to keep in mind that this is not merely a conflict between the interests of informationproduct producers (or traders) and ofindividuals whose concern is protecting their own privacy. in fact, theindividual may well realize that having the benefit of products and services customized to his or her needs depends on some other person orcorporation gaining access to his or her personal information. for example, individuals may want the convenience of online booksellers calling certain new books to their attention, and they might appreciate thelifesaving potential of a hospitalõs emergency room having easy access torecords of their blood type and allergies.given the recognized usefulness of these new commercial servicesand their enabling technologies, the response has been not so much topreclude the gathering of information as to regulate its misuse (or its usewithout an individualõs permission). but there are those who argue thatin the long run we may actually see a devaluation of privacy per se; thatis, there may be an increased willingness to relinquish certain control overoneõs private data in return for the perceived value of services based onthe easy availability of that data.another area of potential conflict concerns freedom of information. itis, of course, the enormous growth in the availability of informationthrough the internet that has created many of the market opportunitiesfor new kinds of netbased intermediaries. the search engines, the derived databases, the rapid officialdocument publication services, and thenewsscanning services all help users to sort through the informationoverload in order to find what they actually want. these products trulyenhance the availability of information, and they reinforce one of the mostsignificant values offered by a networked world.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values187but these products can also compromise freedom of information intwo ways. first, there is a constant pressure on the system to protect andincrease the value of a product that uses an underlying data set or openinformation source by extending intellectualproperty protection to theunderlying information, thereby making it less available to the publicgenerally. the protests of many in the scientific community about thewipo copyright treaty and the digital millennium copyright actstemmed from this kind of concern about restrictions on the availabilityof scientific data for use in research.second, there is concern that the commercial availability of deriveddata products will reduce the incentive for public agencies to make thesame data available in convenient alternative forms. for example, if private entities mine the census data in various ways and sell the resultingproducts, the raw data may still be available to the public; but the incentive for government agencies to develop intermediate products (whichmight be inferior to the private products but still a lot more useful thanthe raw data) will be much reduced. and if the full, searchable text ofjudicial decisions or legislative actions is available from a commercial firmfor a fee, these texts may still be available to the public in hard copy, butthere will be less incentive for the government to provide this informationonline or as quickly.another area of potential conflict arises from the development of technologies to monitor the distribution and use of commercial informationproducts. the purpose of these technologies is to trace who accesses suchproducts, how often they do so, and what they do with them for purposesof billing (and subsequent marketing). these technologies can also limitaccess to paying subscribers, and filter information to serve clients or toconform to the requirements of law. but technologies developed for oneuse are, of course, available for other uses. filters used to block offensivematerial from reaching a userõs computer can be used by governments tofilter political information. systems for monitoring how and when peopleaccess commercial data can be deployed by governments to keep track ofwhom citizens communicate with and what information they receive.clearly, there are a number of countries in which these kinds of usesof the technology are common today. many argue that, even though technically feasible, it is unlikely that such practices will be politically sustainable over an extended period of time. nevertheless, it is clear that thecontinuing development of these and similar technologies has the potential to create a network architecture whose inherent properties no longerpromote the freedom and anonymity of the early days of the internet.a final example relates to the practicalities of accessing and transmitting information. one of the most important characteristics of the internetis the sheer volume of information that it permits users to access or comglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188global networks and local valuesmunicate. the continual improvement in chip performance and bandwidth leads to everexpanding capacity that, unlike the electromagneticspectrum, is almost without limit. in principle, this should all but eliminate competition for a share of the communication space, a major issue inbroadcasting and telecommunication.but in practice, the average user depends on intermediaries such assearch engines to sort through the information overload of the internet.at the very least, both users and providers need search engines to helpthem find each other. a smaller but still significant number of users relyon host providers. these intermediaries are commercial entities, and onerational business strategy for them is to offer information providersgreater prominence in the information universeña firstpage location inthe list of òhitsó for certain key words, for example, or more direct andconvenient linkages from user to favored providerñfor a price. in effect,market forces can tilt the playing field for information. whether or notthis occurs on a grand scale will depend on whether the market rewardsintermediaries more for the quality and breadth of their service to information users than for their service to information producers.7.6the impact of ecommerce on local, social, and political valuesthe impact of ecommerce on values is generally not separable fromits impact on local values. privacy, freedom of information, and the rightof free speech, as discussed in earlier chapters of this report, are localvalues, though their precise interpretation may differ from one locality toanother. therefore many of the issues raised in this chapter can be interpreted as potential impacts on local values.over and above those issues, however, is what may be labeled thedecoupling of commerce and community, which the expansion of ecommerce may well provoke. commerce, particularly local commerce, is asocial activity that promotes community connections, reinforces community values, establishes community identity, and supports communitydevelopment. some kinds of market activity, of course, must always belocalñfor example, the provision of food, housing, and much of healthcare. however, competition between local commerce and global ecommerce is not only possible but already evidenced in a number of businessarenas. online booksellers such as amazon.com compete with local bookstores, for example, and mailorder retailing, once primarily a phenomenon of rural areas, is now equally commonplace in large cities. as notedearlier, such activities are likely to remain a small part of the total value ofecommerce, but their local effects may be significant nonetheless.because the united states has already seen the replacement of manyglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of global ecommerce on local values189kinds of local businesses by large chains, the social change prompted byretail activity on the internet may be less obvious than in europe. on theother hand, the receptivity to online retailing in the united states may begreater than in europe precisely because it is the continuation of a patternthat has already been accepted.depending on how the tax consequences of ecommerce ultimatelyplay out, there may be additional, and significant, impact on local political and social life. it is not our intention in this report to offer a comprehensive analysis of internet taxation. however, it should be noted that inthe united states, with its many local tax authorities and its heavy dependence on sales tax to run local government, a significant shift from local tointernet commerce would have serious ramifications. on the face of it,this would put local businesses (which are taxed) at a competitive disadvantage, and it would certainly reduce the funds available for local socialservices. one interesting possibility is that the united states may respondto these pressures by moving toward a europeanstyle valueadded tax.it would be a mistake to think that ecommerce inevitably leads to aweakening of local social and political structures. many of the internetõsservice functions, which comprise a far larger fraction of ecommerce activity than does brickandmortar retailing, may serve to stabilize communities by reducing the tight coupling of job and residence location.in the united states, for example, small rural communities whose existences were threatened by the failure of family farms have been able toremain intact by creating employment in informationnetwork servicesñe.g., airlinereservation centers and creditcard processing centers. in addition, telecommuting has been growing in the united states, allowingfamilies more choices with respect to childrearing arrangements. indeed,the virtual mobility of labor permitted by global networks can have significant effects on policies, institutions, and social patternsñregional social infrastructure (e.g., housing, health care, and transportation), immigration law, dress standards, eating habits, and others.in all these examples, locality is important because it determineswhether the value set will be receptive or resistant to the opportunities ofecommerce. the attractiveness of telecommuting is likely to be relativelyhigh in the united states, where commuting distances are getting longerand longer and the dearth of efficient, inexpensive public transportationis a growing problem. as noted above, the issue of internet taxation maybe much less important in europe than in the united states. on the otherhand, the threat to the local nature of commerce may be more serious inthe european setting. what remains an interesting question is whetherthese various patterns of acceptance or tension will lead to changes inlocal values or to a pattern of ecommerce development that differs noticeably from the penetration pattern of global networks themselves.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1see oecd, 1997, internet domain names: allocation policies, oecd document gd(97)207,paris. see also chapter 7.8governance in cyberspace:multilevel and multiactorconstitutionalism8.1introductionthis report has identified a number of specific social, political, andeconomic values, and has explored the ways in which global networksmay challenge them or shift the traditional balances between them. thereport is by no means exhaustive, but it does illustrate the kinds of problems that may arise as global networks expand even further.the question is how to deal with these problems. when is it appropriate to intervene? which regulatory tools are likely to be most effectiveand which ones less so? should global networks be governed and, if so,in what way? that is, what are the appropriate goals and functions ofglobalnetwork governance? how should it be structured? and whichactors should be involved in its design and its operation?8.2governancein general, stable governance require commonly accepted operatingprinciples, structures, and responsibilities, and sometimes authorities oragencies. at the very least in an internet context, some authority (or authorities) must oversee certain technical operations such as address assignment and domainname administration.1 but for political, commercial, and social issues, what is the relevance of traditional means of190global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governance in cyberspace191regulation? what role might commercial law play in governing certainaspects of the internet? what new approaches to governance should beconsidered? note that the issue is not whether governance is relevant tothe internet, but rather how such governance should be conducted, withwhat scope, and at what cost.8.2.1is regulation necessary? technical solutions,intermediaries, and selfhelpprior chapters have pointed out that technical solutions can be foundto help deal with some of the problems created by global networks. forexample, filtering systems can help end users to separate desired fromundesired information. new methods for identification (e.g., electronicsignatures), electronic payments (e.g., digital cash), and privacy protection (e.g., encryption) can strengthen the safety and reliability of networkbased commercial transactions. regulations may be necessary to facilitatethe use of these tools or to monitor their effectiveness, but the regulationscan be designed to build on and enhance the technical tools rather than toreplace or impede them.in addition, the market creates incentives for intermediaries in theelectronic marketplace to offer services that protect the interests of its customersñboth content providers and users. users, for example, can choosean internet provider that offers a selection of web sites suiting the userõstastes while blocking sites the user would prefer not to see.2users can, of course, help themselves rather than depend on intermediaries. for example, an avalanche of organized email protests to aspammerõs address can effectively shut down the spammerõs email service.3 global networks themselves, as an efficient source of informationdistribution and of group organization, help likeminded individuals tofind and help one another. consumers can exchange opinions on products and services, warn others of unfair practices by merchants on thenet, and organize groups to take action to protect their interests.2for example, aol blocked its gateway for emails from a company calledòcyberpromotionsó because the majority of its users disliked getting the direct advertisingof that company via email.3spam is unsolicited and unwanted email. spammers are broadcasters of such messages,which are usually advertisements. for more information on organized technically basedapproaches to prevent spam, see <http://mailabuse.org/rbl/>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192global networks and local values8.2.2informal rulesin the world of global networks, informal sets of rules of behavior, suchas ònetiquette,ó are common. they can exist as an explicit code of conductin a certain community or as an implicit agreement about behavior.none of these rules, whether explicit or not, is binding in a legal sense,and they are weak tools for compelling behavior in a person unwilling tosubmit to them voluntarily. there are, of course, social means of enforcement that can be effective in relatively closed groups, where the threat ofexcluding the individual might be a significant one. such groups mightbe virtual communities of hackers, people who share special interests, andeven some internet businesses. but these are very special cases in a networked world with millions of users, which is expanding at a rapid rate.for most cases in which rules are necessary, legal tools of one sort or another will oftenñperhaps even usuallyñprove more effective.8.2.3the limited power of traditional national regulationthe internet and some other global networks allow anyone to transferinformationbased material, easily and at minimal cost, from one countryto another. they even allow a person to move in a virtual sense from onecountry to another without a passport, visa, or work permit. these newexit options reduce the regulatory power of the individual nationstatebecause its traditional tool for regulationñpublic lawñgenerally appliesonly within its own borders. although extraterritorial enforcement of national laws is possible in principle, this generally presupposes that thenationstate can exercise jurisdiction over some element of the transnational activityñe.g., by seizing local property or by restricting access toits market.but although the power of the nation state to regulate is reduced, it isnot eliminated, even in the internet world. the fact that the network isglobal does not mean that all communications and transactions on it arebetween people in different countries. the end points for many exchangesare within the same country. chat room users often wish to communicatewith partners in the same national community, especially for languagereasons and because of the increased likelihood of meeting in real life. ecommerce, especially retail purchases, largely takes place within onecountry. these kinds of activities can still be regulated by a single nationstate, even though the bits may travel anywhere in the world on the wayfrom sender to receiver.and even when one or more of the parties involved in an internetexchange is outside the territory of a particular state, the stateõs power isglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governance in cyberspace193not necessarily as limited as it may seem at first glance.4 the behavior ofthe party who is within the country can certainly be regulated; for example, such a person might be prosecuted for downloading illegal content from the net. more importantly, internet traffic usually goes throughthe hands of local intermediaries such as internet service providers orcreditcard agencies. these intermediaries are prime targets for nationalregulation. they can be required by law to block, or at least provide nosupport for, an activity in cyberspace that is illegal in the particular country. still, this is an imperfect and a costly solution. it is imperfect in thatthe creation of new uncontrolled intermediaries is often technically andeconomically easy. and it is costly in that disempowering the intermediaries risks slowing the national penetration rate of the internet, with all ofthe attendant economic and social consequences.8.2.4international legal harmonizationsome analysts regard the international harmonization of laws as theonly way to meet the challenges of global networks.5 international cooperation in implementing and enforcing rules can be accomplished throughagreements that assign responsibility for regulation, or through harmonization of the regulations themselves. the problem is that states tend tobalk at cooperating when their own laws and attitudes toward a particular issue differ from those of the state whose laws they are asked to enforce. therefore, only when there is consensus about an issue is international cooperation likely to be achieved quickly and effectively.that reality is illustrated by the fields in which the g8 states considercoordinated action. for example, the conference of the g8 ministers ofjustice and interior held in milan on february 2627, 2001, issued acommuniqu” in which pedophilia and sexual exploitation, money laundering, and corruption were identified as areas of common concern.6 inthese subjects, the underlying attitudes are similar in all industrializedcountries, and the need for regulation is obvious.but even when there is agreement in principle, regulation will not bea high priority for some nation states if there is no perceived potentialharm to their economic development. consequently, few nationstates4a more detailed discussion of these issues can be found in jack goldsmith, 2000, òtheinternet, conflicts of regulation, and international harmonization,ó understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, engel and keller, eds.5willem calkoen uses drastic imagery in his plea for harmonization: òthe issue is rapidlybecoming one of whether we choose to have laws or live in a lawless societyó (in òharmonization of laws and the internet,ó international business lawyer, april 1998, pp. 146 et seq.).6see <http://www.g8.gc.ca/2001/milanjusticeinteriore.asp>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194global networks and local valueswill invest any significant resources in cooperative enforcement, and somemay want to use cooperation as a lever to extract concessions from theinternational community on completely separate matters that are of political or economic importance to them. the problem is that even a singlenoncooperating state can be a serious challenge to a consistent international regulatory framework where the internet is concerned. that country can create a òregulation leakó that enables highly mobile content providers to evade international regulation; or, if the country includes asignificant enough group of network participants, it can, de facto, force itsown regulatory structure on the international community.8.2.5the use of internationally coordinated commercial lawsto what extent might commercial law, rather than public law, be usedto regulate global networks? the central actors in commercial law are private parties freely shaping their own legal relationships through contractsand, when necessary, suing each other in the courts. the state takes anauxiliary role by offering the legal protection of the courts, which interpret and judge the validity of contracts, protect peopleõs interests in thecontracting process, and help them in the enforcement of legal titles. buteven these limited roles provide the state with mechanisms that can beused to protect local values in a networked world.contracts have, in fact, become popular tools for the governance ofinternet transactions. access to a web site is often made conditional onclicking an òi agreeó button, which is taken to indicate that the site visitorhas agreed to, though has not necessarily read, a long list of terms andconditions to which the statement refers. if the participating computersare appropriately programmed, the actual agreement can even be concluded by the two machines without any explicit action by humans. moreover, the first contract can be made conditional on holding to these sameconditions any other parties to which the digital good is later sold.the private laws of the united states and germany both start fromthe principle that individuals should be free to conclude a contract withanyone they wish, and to decide on its terms. basically, the role of contract law is limited to giving these contracts legal validity. the normativeargument is that if the two parties have agreed to the contract, the law hasno reason to intervene. at most, it offers to fill in details, using òdefaultrulesó that supplement the wording of the contract, if the parties have notexplicitly or implicitly ruled them out.77german law is much more active in this respect, resulting in complex transactions beingcontracted on no more than a few pages, whereas similar u.s. contracts can have hundredsof pages.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governance in cyberspace195this restraint on the part of the legal system does not extend to situations in which the fact of consent is in doubt, or where systematic powerdifferences are likely to unbalance the outcome. this is why contract lawsin both countries also have mandatory rules, which contracting partiescannot waive. to the extent that those rules differ between countries, theyadd complexity to the enforcement of contracts in which the parties are indifferent jurisdictions, but many of those have been dealt with in the past.online transactions raise a number of additional questions that haveand will continue to challenge specific mandatory rules, as well as theircoordination across national boundaries. is a simple click enough for consent on unusual or highly burdensome contract provisions? must thesubstance of the provisions to which the click refers be controlled by thecourts? should some provisions, such as an antireverseengineeringclause, be prohibited when they are actually legal under patent law?default rules also offer a way in which contract law can insert localvalues into the governance of international commercial activity. althoughdefault rules, unlike mandatory rules, can be changed, both parties to thecontract must explicitly agree to do so. this has two governance effects:changing a default rule is costly, and it is revealing. a party who asks fora change signals the other that the change has some particular value. theother party will then wonder why such a change might be rational for thefirst party, leading to a more explicit focus on the underlying values (andvalue differences) that gave rise to the default rules in the first place.8last, but not least, there is tort law, which offers opportunities to regulate by establishing liability for damage caused by certain kinds of conduct.this allows the state to establish a financial incentive for a private entity torefrain from such conduct. the weakness in the approach, of course, is thatthe behavior is not proscribed but merely made costly, so that the personcontemplating some socially undesirable enterprise can decide whether ornot to proceed by first doing a costbenefit calculation. therefore tort lawcannot, in any absolute sense, protect vulnerable people.procedural law offers other opportunities to influence the legal relationship between private parties. in effect, the state can use this instrument to establish a right of action by a third party, or by a class or group;in fact, the state could authorize itself to act on behalf of a third party, as itoften does in protecting the rights of minors. procedural law can also beused effectively in a trial to establish rules on accessing information relevant to the trial, to ascertain facts, or to specify the burden of proof to beused in reaching judgments.8this idea plays a prominent role in what economists call mechanism design. see douglasg. baird, robert h. gertner, and randal c. picker, 1994, game theory and the law, cambridge, 147153 passim.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196global networks and local valuesthe central advantage of regulation by commercial law lies in the reality that national commercial legal systems are much better coordinatedinternationally than are systems of public law. in commercial internationallaw, there are conflictsoflaw rules that determine the applicable nationallaw. the rules of the international law of civil procedure regulate the authority to adjudicate on national jurisdiction, and they regulate the recognition and enforcement of foreign judgments as well. in contrast to publiclaws and regulations, which have essentially no effect beyond a stateõsborders, commercial lawõs role in accepting foreign legal action (e.g., inenforcing foreign judgments) is no peculiarity; rather, it is an everydayprocess in civil courts.9that is not to say that rules governing conflict of laws are neutral ortotally balanced in their effect. in fact, negotiation of those rules is anotherpoint at which the state can indirectly extend its regulatory intervention.jurisdictional rules can be established that give an advantage to eitherplaintiffs or defendants, that favor content providers over users (or viceversa), or that extend a stateõs regulatory power by giving its residents orcitizens no choice about jurisdictional venues. on the other hand, rulescan be constructed to give the greatest influence to states with the leastregulatory restrictions by allowing parties to a dispute to òforum shop.ósome of the commerciallaw conflict rules currently used in the offlineworld may not be suitable in their current form for a global virtual arenalike the internet, and some rethinking will be necessary. the process ofadaptation will require a certain flexibility in the application of existingconflict rules in order to fit the kinds of cases that are likely to arise in thecontext of the internet.10 for example, rules based on the location of theplaintiff or the defendant are much less meaningful in the internet world,119cf. wolf osthaus, 2000, òlocal values, global networks and the return of private law.on the function of civil law and private international law in cyberspace,ó in christophengel and kenneth h. keller, eds., governance of global networks in the light of differing localvalues, badenbaden, p. 209236.10this may be easier in the traditionally more flexible angloamerican system than in thefixedconnection system of continentaleuropean design. but the tendency to a more openapproach in the continental conflict of laws system can already be ascertained. a goodexample is provided by the rules of the rome convention on the legal order governingcontractual relations. according to art. 4 of the convention, as a rule, the law of the nationto which the contract has òthe strongest connectionó is to be applied. a list of assumptionsin par. 2 intends to fill out this term for the regular case. but if there is any closer connectionto the law of another state, the judge is free to apply this law (art. 4 par. 5).11see matthew burnstein, 1998, òa global network in a compartmentalized legal environment,ó in katharina boelewoelki and catherine kessedjian eds., internet, which courtdecides? which law applies? kluwer academic publishers, dordrecht, the netherlands, pp.23, 27 et seq.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governance in cyberspace197and a rigid adherence to notions of location would provide easy opportunities for people to evade the law by adjusting their virtual location.there may well be a temptation to find convenient but inappropriateanalogies to internet cases in existing commercial law, not least becauseparticular interpretations may serve perceived national interests.12 witheach nationstate making such interpretations in its own interest, the result could be an unraveling of the carefully developed commerciallawcoordination regime and an accumulation of inconsistent regulations,comparable to what exists in the area of public law. indeed, it could resultin a loss of international willingness to recognize and enforce foreign judgments in civillaw matters. it would be far better at the moment to consider internet cases individually and de novo, accumulating experiencethat might ultimately be used to identify valid abstract norms.as promising as it is, the potential of commercial international lawshould not be overestimated. regulation by commerciallaw systems canlead to practical problems in which the individual actors are not able todefend their rights. the most important restriction relates to money: thecommercial law system requires the parties to pay the costs of litigation, aserious financial burden to those involved. even if litigants ultimatelyobtain a favorable judgment and are reimbursed for the cost of litigationñno certainty in any eventñthe upfront costs can be enormous. 13 gathering evidence, prosecuting the case, and dealing with delays all take timeand money. furthermore, these costs multiply with every appeal and evenmore when judgments must be legitimized and executed in anotherstate.14 in many cases, the cost and uncertainty discourage a person fromever pursuing a legal remedy, though in the american system, classaction suits have been one answer to this problem.on the other hand, it is also true that defendants, particularly thosewithout òdeep pockets,ó are disadvantaged by a costly legal system and12here in particular, the u.s.wide ògovernmental interest approachó could undergo anundesired renaissance.13here, the national costs associated with litigation are important. the german solution,that all costs follow the event, is advantageous providing one wins. but a victory in court isnever sure. the american system, by which everyone bears their own costs, harbors thedanger that the party has to split an award with his or her lawyers. this is not alwayscompensated for by the high levels of compensation for pain and suffering, structured settlements, or punitive damages. therefore lawyers find themselves hunting cases and are content with being remunerated only with a share of the amount awarded (contingency fee).14according to an investigation carried out by the e.u. commission, the costs for lawyersand courts for the enforcement of a judgment worth 4,000 marks, even within the commonmarket, amounts to 5,000 marks. see enquete commission, òfuture of the media in theeconomy and society: germanyõs way in the information society: fifth report on consumer protection in the information societyó (bundestagsdrucksache 13/11003), p. 26 (withfurther references).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198global networks and local valuestherefore more likely to settle claims regardless of their merit. no equivalent to class action suits exists in this case, and an unfortunate consequenceof excessive dependence on commercial law may be that certain contentproviders or intermediaries will adopt a protective strategy to avoid liability, with a resultant chilling effect on freedom of expression. an additional interesting problem in the application of commercial law to theinternet is the difficulty of identifying a defendant with some certaintyand establishing his or her location. one cannot sue a domain name or anip address per se. (there is an exception, however, where trademark protection is concerned. the u.s. anticybersquatting consumer protectionact gives the trademark owner the option to sue òin rem.ó in practicalterms, this means that he or she can sue the domain name without evenknowing who has registered it.15)of course, even if a defendant has been identified, enforcing a judgment may be quite difficult because of the high mobility of persons andcapital.16 in the physical world, and where parties are subject to the jurisdiction of the same government, those who win judgments against clearlyidentifiable parties often have available such enforcement mechanisms asattaching a personõs property or garnishing wages. it may well be that theinternet world will require new mechanisms (for example, withdrawing adomain name, or striking the ip addresses from domain servers and routers) for enforcing judgments that relate to important assets in this newtechnological setting.178.2.6selfregulation without state interventionmany have argued that the state should refrain completely from attempting to regulate the internet and instead allow network participantsto regulate themselves. indeed, many claim that this kind of selfregulation is already occurring, and that there is a workable set of rules in placefor cyberspace, quite independent of national borders. variously calledòcyberlaw,ó òlex informatica,ó18 or òcommon law of the internet,ó its pro15in this regard, the eu directive on distance selling also is a (weaker) step in the rightdirection. it stipulates that a consumer, even before concluding a contract, needs to be informed about the (real) identity of his contracting partner (art. 4 i lit. a).16peter swire. 1998. òof elephants, mice, and privacy: international choice of law andthe internet,ó the international lawyer 32:991, 1024.17henry h. perritt, jr. 1998. òwill the judgementproof own cyberspace?,ó the international lawyer 32:1123, 1132 et seq., 1139 et seq.18joel reidenberg. 1996. ògoverning networks and rulemaking in cyberspace,ó emorylaw journal 45: 911929; aron mefford, 1997, òlex informatica: foundations of law on theinternetó available online at <http://www.law.indiana.edu/glsj/vol5/no1/mefford.html>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governance in cyberspace199ponents point to òlex mercatoriaó (the law of the marketplace in international business) as an example.19 although these are technically not laws,they are rules that have evolved through a process of selfregulation thatwas essential in the development of the internet precisely because its activities transcended national boundaries. the effectiveness of such selfregulation, what might be called òsoft law,ó depends on such social pressures to conform as the threat of exclusion from membership in a groupwhere membership confers benefits.as valuable as soft law can be in many areas, it does raise certainproblems. first, and obviously, private enforcement measures are not always effective. if the issue is sufficiently important or the inappropriatebehavior sufficiently disruptive, people whose rights are threatened maytry to call on formal statebased institutions to enforce the soft law. butstatesõ willingness to act may depend on whether the selfregulatory structure exists within the context of some legal framework. if not, the soft lawmay be seen as an ad hoc agreement among net participants that is not amatter for legal authorities.20some might argue that the nationstate should enforce the selfregulation rules as it would a contract. that may work in certain circumstances,but not if the òcontractó contains provisions that are inconsistent withmandatory rulesñi.e., nonwaivable rules of national law.21furthermore, there is a question as to whether all participants havecontractually accepted the pertinent rules of cyberlaw merely because theyare using the internet. in principle, one possible approach to giving contractual status to a given set of rulesñassociated, perhaps, with a particular web site or serviceñwould be to require all users, at the time of logging in,22 to declare their willingness to accept the rules. but it is highlyquestionable whether such a vague commitment concerning future, hypothetical actions could have legal validity.an even larger question in a selfregulatory scheme is how to avoid atyranny of the majority that violates the interests of the minority. howwould a party with much weaker bargaining power be protected againstrules imposed by a party with much greater power?23 how would due19cf. burnstein, 1998 (supra note 11); david johnson and david post, 1996, òlaw andborders: the rise of law in cyberspace,ó stanford law review 48:1367et seq. (especially pp.1387 et seq.).20in german law, for instance, art. 4 ii egbgb, which only refers to the choice of theòlawof a state,ó provides a clear answer: mandatory rules of national law that would be applicable according to the general conflict of laws rules cannot be avoided by reference tonongovernmental rules.21goldsmith (supra note 4) 1200.22burnstein (supra note 11), pp. 31 et seq., suggests such a negotiation. following theexpression shrinkwrap, he calls for òclickwrapcontracts.ó23goldsmith (supra note 4) 1200.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200global networks and local valuesprocess be ensured? the notion of selfregulation arose at a time wheninternet users were a relatively homogeneous group with strongly sharedideals. informal rules had as much, or even more, effect on behavior aslegally binding rules. such an òinternet communityó would be a mereillusion today, given not only the commercialization of the net but also itsburgeoning use for many social, political, and cultural purposes. the protection of local values quite often amounts to nothing more (or less) thanthe recognition and protection of the differing ideas of many small groupsthat are unable to have any significant influence on the rules in a selfregulatory regime.for europeans and others, the majoritarian nature of a selfregulatoryscheme raises the concern that american legal concepts and americancultural values will dominate the internet, and further, that american interests will be served by its orientation. this has been characterized asòamericanization by the back door.ó24 as people from other cultures seektheir own opportunities to participate in the internet, the concern aboutòamericanizationó may well be broadened to a concern about òwesternizationó or even the specter of òneocolonialism.óinterestingly, some proponents of selfregulation may find themselveshaving second thoughts if commercialization of the internet leads to thecreation of powerful economic interests that can exercise a very stronginfluence on the direction of the informal or de facto rules. where economic transactions take place between equally strong partners, selfregulation can be a usefully flexible and effective tool. but when stronger andweaker participants come together on the net, selfregulation cannot guarantee a desirable result. similarly, if selfregulation leads to greater influence for marketdriven processes, local values can lose out. in these cases,some participation by the state seems necessary.8.2.7hybrid regulationas noted in other chapters of this report, a number of experts havesuggested that the best approach to governing the internet is to combine anumber of different regulatory and policy tools, selecting those that workbest for particular purposes and in particular circumstances. obviously,this leads to a rather complex system of governance, but the fact is that theglobally networked world is itself complex, which is why no single regulatory approach seems adequate. this use of a panoply of tools and actors, formal and informal, governmental and nongovernmental, nationaland international, is labeled hybrid regulation.24very clear on that point is peter mankowski, 1999, òwider ein transnationals cyberlaw,ó, p. 138 (140).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governance in cyberspace201what does hybrid regulation mean?in a sense, hybrid regulation is a misleading term. it is not so muchregulation as a broader concept of governance, taken to mean the systemof institutions and processes used to influence the conduct of individualsand groups. governance, from this perspective, is about the allocation ofpowerñnot only in a public setting but within private associations aswellñand exercised by a multitude of actors at different levels of authority and operation.this system of governance involves a number of challenges: coordinating the legal and political actions of national governments; adding andintegrating new forms of transnational institutions such as the europeanunion; making use of diplomatic conferences or permanent internationalorganizations such as the itu or wto, when appropriate; and recognizing and facilitating voluntary selfregulatory mechanisms involving industry, labor, public interest, and other community interest groups.applied to cyberspace, with its multitude of activities and many constituencies, governance may basically serve an òumbrellaó function, asserting certain normative principles, explicitly recognizing the set ofagreements and arrangements that deal with the subjects of public international law, and providing some level of legitimacy to the principles andselfregulatory schemes that govern, respectively, business, civil societyand other nongovernmental entities. put differently, one can envision ahybrid regulatory regime in which government provides a framework forprivate selfordering that meets certain minimum requirements established by the framework.25 over time, this might well lead to an evenmore limited role for the nationstate, as new actors appear who assumeregulatory powers that have traditionally been state responsibilities.public institutions also share authority at the level of global governance. new nongovernmental actors with transborder reach, such as multinational or transnational enterprises,26 internationally organized publicinterest groups, and other nongovernmental organizations (ngos),increasingly exercise influence and assume responsibilities complementary to, or in cooperation with, established public actors in the international legal community.27 global networks, of course, play an important25see henry h. perritt, jr., 2000, òthe internet is changing the public international legalsystem,ó kentucky law journal, 88:885955.26klaus w. grewlich. 1988. transnational enterprises in a new international system, alphenaan den rijn.27james rosenau and ernstotto czempiel, eds. 1992. governance without government.cambridge.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202global networks and local valuesrole in helping these new entities evolve positions on various issues andin empowering them to act.developing a public internationallaw structure that enables the integration of binding public international law, òsoft law,ó selfregulatory arrangements, and nonbinding selfpolicing measures might, in the longrun, change the nature of international law itself. gradually, a scheme ofgovernance that was originally designed to achieve some sort of workablecoexistence among sovereign actors might develop its own normativedemands, along with procedures for new institutions to address them.interest in hybrid regulationhybrid regulation is not a new concept. indeed, governance in boththe united states and germany relies on several levels of federalism, including national, state, local, and district law and regulation. further,trade associations often make their own rules on competition and antitrust, and various interest groups such as ngos lobby, draft regulations,and get them approved by legislative or administrative bodies. againstthis background, hybrid regulation just adds anotherñinternationalñlevel.governments on both sides of the atlantic appear to be willing toconsider hybrid forms of governance in a number of domains, thoughthey generally speak in terms of opening markets and minimizing government interference. for instance, at the g7 conference in brussels infebruary 1995, the following policy principles were endorsed by the conferees: promoting dynamic competition; encouraging private investment;defining an adaptable regulatory framework; providing open access tonetworks; ensuring universal provision of, and access to, services; promoting equality of opportunity to the citizen; promoting diversity of content, including cultural and linguistic diversity; and recognizing the necessity of worldwide cooperation, with particular attention tolessdeveloped countries.these principles have been refined in statements and reports emerging from a number of international governmental meetings, such as the1997 ministerial conference on global information networks in bonn andthe 1998 organization for economic cooperation and development(oecd) ministerial conference, òa borderless world: realizing the potential of global electronic commerce,ó in ottawa. the ministerial declaration issued after the bonn conference, as well as a parallel òindustrialdeclarationó put forward by the private sector, asserted that if there wasto be further expansion in electronic commerce, a number of key strategies would have to be adopted. for example, regulation would have to beas lighthanded and flexible as possible; legal rules applicable to globalglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.governance in cyberspace203information networks would have to be consistent across borders; andtelecommunications markets would have to be opened up to effectivecompetition. it would also be necessary to allow market forces to drivethe development of open technical standards; to avoid discriminatorytaxes on the use of information networks; and to provide a high level ofintellectualpropertyrights protection for the creation, storage, and distribution of cybercontent.businesses also seem to be open to selfregulation under a governmental umbrella. for example, at the 1998 oecd ottawa conference,business spokespersons proposed a set of fundamental principles òtoshape the policies that govern electronic commerce, if the promises of electronic commerce are to be fulfilled.ó28 it included the following:¥the development of electronic commerce should be led primarilyby the private sector in response to market forces.¥government intervention, when required, should promote a stable,international legal environment, allow a rational allocation of scarce resources, and protect the general interest. such intervention should be nomore than is essential and should be clear, transparent, objective, nondiscriminatory, proportional, flexible, and technologyneutral.¥mechanisms for privatesector input and involvement in policymaking should be promoted and widely used in all countries.¥regulation of the underlying telecommunications infrastructure,where necessary, should reduce impediments to competition, enablingnew services and new entrants to compete globally in an open and fairmarket.¥a high level of trust should be pursued by mutual agreement, education, further technological innovations to enhance security and reliability, the adoption of adequate disputeresolution mechanisms, and privatesector selfregulation. business should make available to users the meansto exercise choice with respect to privacy, confidentiality, content control,and, under appropriate circumstances, anonymity.the apparent enthusiasm for new governance approaches should not,however, obscure two realities. first, the more important that telecommunications, information services, electronic commerce, and global information networks become to national societies and economies, the less likely28oecd ministerial conference. 1998. òa borderless world: realizing the potential ofglobal electronic commerce,ó a global action plan for electronic commerce prepared bybusiness, with recommendations from governments, 79 october 1998, ottawa, canada,oecd document sg/ec(98)11/rev2, 5 october 1998.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204global networks and local valuesit is that governments will relinquish all controls. second, on the flip side,withdrawal of controlsñi.e., liberalization and deregulationñwill onlywork if international cooperation becomes more stable and reliable andthe right balance is struck between subsidiarity, harmonization, and thetransfer of some authority to new entitiesñinternational or private.constitutionalizing public international law to facilitate hybrid regulationeffectively managing the changes inherent in the global evolution towards an information society is a challenge involving many constituencies and rules at once. it would appear more effective and appropriate toexplicitly engage all of these constituencies, rather than to rely on the traditional monolithic concept of national sovereignty. this approach wouldbe tantamount to òconstitutionalizingó public international law that inthe past has served little more than a coordinative function for sovereigngovernments. public authority would become the joint and separate responsibility of a multiplicity of coordinated authorities, with nation statesbeing but one of the elements of this system.29in addition to multilevel authority, the system would have a multiplicity of actors.30 in its umbrella function, this constitutionalized international legal system31 might establish normative principles, agreements,and procedures pertaining not only to subjects appropriate for public international law but also to selfregulatory schemes that would apply tobusiness, labor, civil society, and other nongovernmental entities. in themost optimistic scenario, this umbrella function, at first little more than acompilation of arrangements, might ultimately lead to integration of thepublic and private, the traditional and newly emerging, and regulation bylaw and the process of selfregulation.29see, in this context, ingolf pernice, 1999, òmultilevel constitutionalism and the treaty ofamsterdam: european constitutionmaking revisited?,ó common market law review 36 :703(709).30klaus w. grewlich, 1999, governance in cyberspaceñaccess and public interest in globalcommunications, den haag/london/boston (chapter ten).31ernst u. petersmann, 1999, òhow to constitutionalize international law and foreignpolicy for the benefit of civil society?,ó michigan journal of international law 20; hannes l.schloemann and stefan ohlhoff, 1999, òôconstitutionalizationõ and dispute settlement inthe wtoñnational security as an issue of competence,ó american journal of internationallaw 93:424.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9information networks and culture9.1introductionthe interaction between global networks and local cultures is clearlyan important dimension of the study of global networks and local valuesgenerally. both òcultureó and òvaluesó are terms with a number of meanings. culture and values are obviously not entirely independent of oneanother. values are embedded in cultures and, to a certain extent, derivefrom those cultures. at the same time, values are part of the glue thatgives the culture cohesion and identity. chapter 3 discusses the term òvaluesó in some depth; this chapter takes on the same task with respect toculture.other chapters in this report have dealt with local differences on such matters as privacy, pornography, and hate speechñsubjects that can properly beviewed as manifestations of local cultural differences. not only do differentcultures attach different weights or varying levels of importance to each ofthese issues, but they even give alternative meanings to the terms we use toidentify them. these differences then affect the social, political, and legal toolsthat each society is willing to employ in dealing with the issuesõ challenges.in this area perhaps more than any other, the limitation imposed byfocusing this study on two nations that are more alike than different becomes obvious. as the introduction to this report points out, althoughthere are a number of differences between american and german cultures, in the context of the worldõs overall cultural diversity they are quitesimilar. both are modern and wealthy nation states with strong, technologically based market economies and highly educated populations. each205global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206global networks and local valueshas been strongly influenced by western european history and tradition(a significant, though nowdecreasing, fraction of the u.s. populationtraces its family origin to germany) and they have comparable distributions of religious affiliations among their people. they also share an alphabet, and their languages are closely related.in contrast, most people elsewhere in the world live in cultural settings far different from those of the united states or germany. their differences make clear that the introduction of global networks in many ofthose settings challenges, and is challenged by, a variety of local culturalvalues that are not relevant to the american or german cases.the committee was thus faced with a dilemma: to ignore a topic ofobvious relevance to the study generally because it could not be exploredadequately within the limited framework of u.s. and german culture, or,at least for this chapter, to remove that geographical constraint in order toaddress the broader issues. the committee chose the latter course, arguing that in this, the penultimate chapter of the report, it is reasonable tohighlight some questions that might well be explored more comprehensively in a later study by a committee with a far broader range of regionalexpertise than the present one. thus, what follows should be viewed asan introduction to the range of issues that need to be considered in assessing the potential cultural impacts of global networks.òcultureó is a term with many meanings. it covers art, literature, andmusic; it refers to various dimensions of identity, including the linguistic,national, local, ethnic, and religious; it is sometimes described in terms ofsocial solidarities or epistemic connections, which run the gamut fromsingleissue interests to professional occupation; and it depends on levelof education, social and professional status, and age. culture is also amoving target, affected by economic, social, political, and technologicalchanges, even as it affects each of them. global networks are clearly oneof those changes, but it would be a major challenge to separate out thisone factor from the many others associated with globalization that arealso bringing about cultural evolution.anthropologists, sociologists, historians, and economists have written much about the dynamics of technological change, with most rejecting a rigid technological determinism. they instead emphasize that transformations over time result from interactions between new technologiesand the existing social and economic circumstances.1 to interpret theseinteractions, cultural theorists have given us a certain structure that cat1robert mcc. adams, 1996, paths of fire: an anthropoligistõs inquiry into western technology, princeton, nj: princeton university press; leo marx, 1964, the machine in the garden:technology and the pastoral ideal in america, oxford: oxford university press; nathanrosenberg, 1994, exploring the black box: technology, economics, and history, cambridge: cambridge university press.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture207egorizes cultural patterns according to òsocial solidarities.ó2 this providessome insight into not only the nature of the interactions between technologies and cultures, but also the limitations on how far the former cango in altering the latter. although such writings provide a framework foranalyzing the interaction of global networks and local cultures, they alsomake clear that the analysis must be approached comprehensively if it isto advance our understanding.looming large among these questions to be considered is the specterof cultural hegemonyñthe concern of many that the architecture and software of global networks so strongly reflect the language, values, and interests of the united states that other cultures will be either disadvantaged or displaced as these networks exert an everincreasing influencenot only on the language of commerce and discourse, but on communityhierarchy and organization, business style, education, and entertainmentprogramming as well.there are many other questions as well. some have suggested thatclass cultural differences within societies may be more significant thandifferences between societies in assessing the effects of global networks.on the other hand, age differences may be more telling than either classor nationality. or, perhaps, as others have suggested,3 the internet in andof itself may be giving rise to a new culture, relatively homogeneous in itsvalues, and quite distinct from the local cultures in which its members areotherwise embedded.from still another perspective, we need to be able to distinguish transient effects from longterm consequences. to what extent do culturalfactors merely have an effect in the short termñsay, in slowing the adoption of or accommodation to global networksñand to what extent do theyinfluence or entail permanent cultural changes? and of course, how muchare particular cultures economically or politically disadvantaged relativeto others in the short or long term?the sections that follow provide some amplification of these issues, based on discussions that took place during the committeeõs deliberations.2michael thompson. 1999. òglobal networks and local cultures: what are the mismatches and what can be done about them?,ó in understanding the impact of global networks on local social, political and cultural values, christoph engel and kenneth h. keller,eds., law and economics of international telecommunications, vol. 42. badenbaden:nomos.3see esther dyson, 1997, release 2.0. new york: broadway books, p. 52.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208global networks and local values9.2cultural hegemonythe very essence of global networks is the power they give individuals to participate actively, either as providers or recipients of information.low cost of entry, wide penetration of networks, and the transparency ofwebbrowsing software all contribute to this characteristic. in principle,any individual or group can easily distribute information to a seeminglyunlimited audience, and at minimal cost. also in principle, anyone canselectñor blockñinformation from the vast universe of sources availablethroughout the world.but the practical reality is somewhat different. networks provide aninfrastructure whose actual characteristics are determined as much bywhich people and groups use and design them as by their innate potential. when one group or nation constitutes a significant, even dominant,fraction of the users and providers, then the networkõs hardware and softwareñòthe code,ó to use lawrence lessigõs term4ñand the preponderance of its available information, are likely to reflect the culture of thatgroup or nation.the language used on web sites is clearly one measure of this kind ofdominance, and indeed, a very large fraction of all web sites use english.in a world of networked communication, language takes on an importance even greater than that in broadcast or entertainment media becauseit affects not only how well one can understand what is said or writtenbut how effectively one can communicate. language in that sense is aform of power, and thus the requirement that one communicate in anunfamiliar language is, effectively, a restriction on freedom of speech.those who raise the issue of cultural hegemony point out that theeffect could go even deeper. with native speakers of english being thesingle largest linguistic group of network users,5 market considerationsdictate that a large fraction of the software written for use in conjunctionwith networks will also be developed in english. at present, for example,it is estimated that american companies develop about 80 percent of packaged software. thus, english is the language not only of communicationbut also of programming. further, there is more impetus to focus on digital coding for the roman alphabet, and such programs are likely to bemore effective than coding for other alphabets. as a result, those techniques that increase the efficiency of web and document searches, transmission rates, and the like will be better developed for the roman alpha4lawrence lessig. 1999. code and other laws of cyberspace. new york: basic books.5native english speakers now represent approximately 45 percent of the online population. see united states internet council, 2001 state of the internet report, press releasenovember 12, 2001. available from <http://www.usinternetcouncil.org/>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture209bet and the english language than for other modes of written communication.with the disproportionate representation of one language and culture driving both the creation of and the market for operating systems,databases, other reference materials, digital music, advertising, ebusiness,and the range of services, the fear is that the content available on globalnetworks will primarily reflect that one culture. to the extent that theinternet, through its efficiency and ubiquity, begins to dominate the socialand intellectual life of a community or nation, this would be tantamountto cultural hegemony. if technological path dependence reinforces thispattern, the hegemony could be long lasting.how realistic are the fears? with respect to the western industrialnations, it appears that they are overdrawn. although a snapshot of thepresent situation does, indeed, reveal the overwhelming dominance ofthe english language and american content globally, there is little evidence that other languages and cultures are being displaced now or arelikely to be so in the future. in a de facto sense, language zones havealready been created in many parts of the developed world. most german, french, and japanese computer and internet users can conduct all oftheir daytoday activities in their native languages, as content providershave already translated information for local usage. furthermore, spacefor new, culturally localized content is virtually unlimited; it can and willbe added as the penetration of networks and computers continues in thecountries of the industrialized world. the growth in the flow of bits mayintroduce information traffic problems, but existing content will not necessarily have priority over new content.6similarly, there is no overwhelming technical barrier to the localization of software, even when it has not been written specifically for a givenregion.7 the major software firms separate the source code of programming languages, operating systems, and applications from linguistically6this is not to say that priorities cannot and will not be established that affect access tocertain kinds of material or its effective speed of transmission. internet service providersalready have the technical capacity to do that, using filtering or blocking technologies tocreate various degrees of transparency (a measure of the extent to which the network itselfexerts influence on the ability of individuals to access content). the point here is that, unlikebroadcasting, the earlier content and service providers gain no great advantage that wouldallow them to limit access to their services or exclude those who follow.7localization refers to the rewriting of software programs from the original language inwhich they were developed to the language of the locality in which they will be used. however, more than language is involved because cultural differences may well require thatcolors, numbers, box sizes, names, dates, and icons be changed for the program to work inthe new cultural setting.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210global networks and local valuesand culturally specific elements in order to allow them to be adapted tolocal circumstances.there is no reason to think that such adaptation will be difficult. thecultural barriers to applying information technology in a variety of everyday activities in developed nations appear to be modest. although neither computer hardware and software nor networks have, in fact, spreadthrough most other industrial societies to the extent that they have in theunited states,8 they appear to have been widely accepted. indeed, insome respects, other nations have led the united states in using information technology in everyday life.for example, in 1981 france deployed minitel, a national videotextsystem using telephone lines, to send text and graphics from mainframecomputers to home terminals. by the late 1990s, minitel had 15 millionusers, or about 25 percent of the french population. they use it for applications ranging from personal ads and pornography to online banking,travel services, and directory assistanceñall with online billing (chargesare added to a userõs phone bill). furthermore, because minitel is a òpaybytheminuteó service, some analysts argue that the transition fromminitel to the internet will be ògentleró for minitel users than the transition for most internet users from òfreeó content to òforpayó content.9thus it appears likely that the use of information networks will reflectlocal values rather than replace them wholesale with foreign ones. to besure, they will provide a quitenew medium for the expression of thosevalues, much as electronic òchat roomsó have replaced communitycentermeetings and electronic auctions have replaced weekend antiquehuntingexpeditions for some people in the united states. the new forms will notnecessarily look like the old ones but will clearly be influenced by them, andthe result will be new patterns of interaction and new cultural forms that areless indicative of cultural hegemony than of cultural evolution.the ecommerce approaches currently being adopted only reinforcethese conclusions. a key element in the strategy of most firms has beento attract prospective customers and to earn their loyalty by providingthem with free products and services of interest, and then to use theattentionñand potential loyaltyñthus garnered to market other products and services.10 clearly, this requires sensitivity and responsiveness8the scandinavian countries are an exception to this general statement, reflecting theirsmall size and economic and social homogeneity. the city state of singapore is anotherspecial case.9see john tagliabue, òonline cohabitation: internet and minitel; videotex system infrance proves unusually resilient,ó new york times, june 2, 2001, saturday.10the easy and wide availability of information on the internet has created an environment in which people are generally unwilling to pay for content except in very specific areasglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture211on the part of efirms to the cultures of the people whose attention the efirms are trying to attract.the situation is far more complex in the developing world, whichitself is hardly homogeneous. in the newly industrialized countries ofeast asia, economic globalization is considered a key to development;rather than being seen as a threat to local culture, global networks areconsidered a tool that will be advantageous for those societies. moreover,asian leaders have often argued that their hierarchical societal structuresfacilitate the kind of educational system and disciplined behavior thatmake rapid adaptation of new technology relatively easy, without leading to social disruption or undesired changes in cultural values.the citystate of singapore advertises itself as the most computerizedand networked nation in the world. the homogenizing influence of theinternet is of little concern because singapore is already an extremely homogeneous society that has served as a major regional financial centerand home to multinational corporations for years. its authoritarian government has apparently been successful in convincing its population thataccepting the imposition of tight discipline is the price of prosperity. insuch a society, heavyhanded measures can be used to control undesiredpublic manifestations of foreign cultural influences.china has undertaken the ambitious golden bridge project to provide broadband networks throughout the densely populated regions ofthe east and south of the country. fiberoptic backbones, microwave intermediate transmission, and local wired distribution systems are beingcomplemented by the development of multimedia software and the training of end users to build a networkbased economy. the official, centrallydefined standardizations of the written chinese languageñits ideographsñand the ways of entering them from a keyboard are making itpossible to rapidly adapt western software as well. (major u.s. softwarevendors are also seeking to customize their software for users whose firstwritten language is chinese.) indeed, the reinforcement of language standardization, which is a byproduct of information networks, is consistentwith chinaõs cultural agenda.both singapore and china have, of course, sought to exploit the use ofnetworks in support of their economies while, at the same time, preventing the distribution of other kinds of information and programming totheir people. their concern is a political rather than a cultural one: preventing information networks from being used to encourage and enableorganized opposition to government authority.such as pornography or current business information. therefore òbundlingó is a commonpractice, offering a good deal of free content in the hopes of attracting consumers to purchasable goods and services.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212global networks and local valuesin the long run, it is likely to be impossible to achieve that goal. thetechnical structure of the internet makes it relatively simple to track theflow of information from one node to another, but interdicting that flow isrelatively difficult. although it is possible to block certain web sites orgroups of web sitesñeven all of the material originating from a certaincountryñthe everchanging array of mirror sites, domain names, host service providers, and transmission routes makes for a constantly movingtarget and an increasingly challenging task, as chinese authorities havediscovered.11therefore, rather than being able to use the relatively benign (becauseessentially invisible) tool of preventing òundesirableó information distribution, governments must use the more heavyhanded approach of sanction and punishment after the fact to discourage further distributions. butas the density of network nodes and the bandwidth of transmission linesincreases, the likelihood of òleakageó becomes greater and the sanctionsnecessary to discourage it must be made increasingly severe. the practical problem, which seems all but impossible to surmount, has becomethat of preventing the severity of the sanctions from becoming the verydestabilizing force that the governments had sought to avoid through thecontrol of information flow. chapters 5 and 6, which deal with freedomof speech and privacy, respectively, explore these issues in greater detail.the more difficult question to answer is whether the political changesthat information technology is likely to bring about in these countries overthe long run will also give rise to significant cultural changes. it is a question related to the much larger issue of the connection between politicalstructure and cultural values. many east asian leaders have argued thatthe proclaimed political agenda of western nations, and of the unitedstates in particularñencouraging the spread of democracyñis in fact amanifestation of cultural hegemony. at issue is whether the selfproclaimed hierarchical nature of many east asian nations is a consequence or a determinant of their political structure (as well as their educational systems, research goals and productivity, legal structures, and thelike). would political democratization change culturally determinedstructures in the same way regardless of whether the stimulus for thechange were global networks (as might be the case in singapore or china)or economic failure and environmental degradation (as in the formerwarsaw pact) or the failure of a military venture (as in argentina)? theseare questions that future studies should examine.11see, for example, jennifer lee, òpunching holes in internet walls,ó new york times,april 26, 2001.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture213to the extent that cultural values do define political structures or arelinked to a societyõs position on a variety of other issues from humanrights to child labor to environmental protection or the protection of religious and ethnic minorities, they are not necessarily neutral. in that sense,the protection and preservation of historic cultures is not an absolute imperative. thus, labeling attempts to change certain cultural values,whether through global networks or by other means, as cultural hegemony may be accurate but not necessarily dispositive.india offers an example entirely different from the authoritarian regimes of east asia in several respects. as a democratic nation committedto preserving the many traditional cultures of its several states, india regards language diversity as an important cultural value. in contrast to thesituation in china, the monolinguistic nature of the internet works againstthat value. the problem is exacerbated by the fact that the internetõs language is largely english, which has played a special role in india as thelink language of the nation and the language of power and wealth. thus,rather than being a barrier to the penetration of internet culture, the language is a vehicle for bringing it into the society and skewing a delicatebalance.because english is so accessible to the educated classes in india, including the large cadre of technically trained software developers, there islittle motivation to localize software. indeed, the dominance of the unitedstates in computer hardware and software, as well as in network content,creates a ready market for the talents of indian software engineers precisely because of their familiarity with the english language. thus it appears that software as well as network content oriented toward the english language and american culture is likely to continue to be the normfor some time, setting the stage for possible longterm cultural hegemonyin indiañat least for internetrelated activities.are there factors that may ameliorate this trend? two suggest themselves. first, although english has functioned as the link language acrossthe many cultures of india, only about 5 percent of its people are fluent init. tradition and legal structures have promoted the use of vernacularlanguages in local commerce and even in government business. therefore it is possible that the internet will not penetrate the indian society toa significant extent. the cost would be a loss of the economic and socialgains that the internet promises; the gain would be the preservation ofcultural diversity.second, through its long and rather special colonial history, indianelites have learned to maintain a dual cultural identity, living in twoworlds simultaneously. they functioned effectively in the englishdominated governance structure and civil service of the country, while preserving their historical cultures within their own communities. if thisglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214global networks and local valuesduality can be maintained for long enough, the market (possibly u.s. companies but more likely indian ones) may awaken to the opportunity presented by a country the size of india, where the population of many of itscultural subgroups exceeds by far that of most other entire nations. wemay then see the kind of localization of software that would allow a positive social construction of global networks to fit local cultural needs anddesires.nevertheless, a major unanswered question that needs to be continually reasked is whether the cultural duality will actually continue. it ispossible, after all, that the very power of networks in shifting the modesof business, education, entertainment, and communication will changethe pattern.in many ways, india is an interesting testing ground for the limits ofsocial and cultural construction. precisely because its technical and business elites can function in either the hegemonic culture of the englishspeaking world or in the local and highly diverse cultures of the indiansubcontinent, networks can penetrate india without requiring or evenbringing about change. on the other hand, if the efficiencies and opportunities of networks encourage elites to shift more of their daily political,social, and economic activities into the networkdominated culture evenwithout any localization, the shift may disrupt the delicate cultural balance on which indian democracy is based. in effect, the elites may become the intermediaries that give electronic networks the leverage to alterthe culture of the society.there is still another scenario, different from the east asian and southasian examples. it is essentially a reactive and narrow nationalismñevena zealous isolationismñbrought about by the perceived fear of the threatto traditional cultures that economic globalization represents. in the viewof those who lead this reaction, globalization is a juggernaut that carrieswith it western social and cultural values that are anathema to the òinvadedó society. what adds to the fear is that globalization has been sosuccessful, both as an economic strategy and as a dominant cultural force.electronic networks play a role in this economic globalization, although the trend toward globalization was well under way before theinternet had achieved any significant penetration.12 nevertheless, theynot only play an important current role in globalization, they have cometo symbolize it. they also reinforce the influence of englishspeakingelites. localization is not a solution in the view of reactionary national12for example, international financial networks have been important to the global economyfor at least several decades. see walter b. wriston, 1992, the twilight of sovereignty, newyork: charles scribnerõs sons.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture215leaders because the essence of these networksñtheir egalitarian nature,tolerance of diversity, marketdriven character, and rhythms of social intercourseñare values that cannot be changed merely by localizing software. the network culture itselfñin which shared interests and attitudesrather than familial connections establish group linkages and where geography, history, and connection to the land mean almost nothingñisunacceptable.some have argued that the vigor of the reaction in these asian societies is driven by leadersõ concerns that their culture will be perceived asinferior because it cannot produce the same economic results as the invading networkdominated culture.13 challenged in this way, they seeknot to adapt the new technologies to their circumstances but to look inward; their hope is that a purer adherence to their own cultural values notonly will be a successful strategy but also will demonstrate its superiorityto western culture.this scenario, then, is not so much one in which cultural hegemony isat issue; instead, it is one of cultural conflict based on a clash of values.much has been written about this phenomenonñfor example, barberõsjihad vs. mcworld, huntingtonõs clash of civilizations, and friedmanõs lexusand the olive tree.14 these authors postulate that the clash of values arisesbecause of differences between western cultures, with their push towardglobalization, and more traditional middle eastern cultures. however,there is also the possibility that the incompatibility is between the localculture and the innate characteristics of the network. the question is,does the internet represent a technology that is just not sufficiently flexible to be òsocially constructedó to serve the values of these societies orare local political and religious forces preventing them from getting to thepoint where such a proposition could be tested?but certain realworld experiments now in progress could providesome preliminary answers to this question. the migration of people fromthe developing to the developed world is creating relatively cohesivediasporas of various ethnic and religious groups that have not had a significant presence in the western world until now. the ways in whichnetworks are adapted to the use of these communitiesñfor example, topreserve and transmit language and culture within and between thesecommunitiesñmay indicate whether òlocalizedó networks might ulti13bernard, lewis. 1999. òthe west and the middle east,ó foreign affairs 76(1):114130.14benjamin r. barber, 1996, jihad vs. mcworld, new york: ballantine books; samuel p.huntington, 1998, the clash of civilizations and the remaking of the world order, new york:touchstone books; thomas l. friedman, the lexus and the olive tree, new york: farrar,straus and giroux.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216global networks and local valuesmately be a positive force in the nations that are, at present, actively excluding them.9.3global networks and class issuesa rather different approach to examining the influence of electronicnetworks on cultural values is to consider their effects on different socialgroupings within a given society. the issue of education and level ofliteracy was raised above in connection with india. but it is hardly a situation unique to india. in a world in which more than half of all peoplehave never made a telephone call, it is clear that networks penetrate mostsocieties in a highly skewed way. the most benign consequence is thatglobal networks will be irrelevant to the groups not directly touched bythem, in much the same way that the formal economy and legal structureof a number of countries can be irrelevant to the everyday economic andcultural life of certain rural or ethnic groups within those countries.more worrisome, networks may give rise over time to increasing disparities between those with access to them and those without such accessñthe socalled òdigital divide.ó the most obvious potential effects have beendescribed: more economic activity mediated by networks means less activity in traditional markets and fewer linkages with traditional society. networks confer power to organize politically and to gain access to information, education, and even health care, thereby increasing the autonomy ofthe privileged relative to the less privileged and decreasing the interest ofthe privileged in the institutions that serve the less privileged.the educational system in latin america provides an interesting example of how the support of societal institutions can be skewed by theinterests of the privileged. it is often noted that higher education in latinamerica is better funded relative to primary and secondary educationthan in most parts of the world. indeed, in view of the inadequacy of thatregionõs primary and secondary education funding, many would argueits higher education is overfunded. the reason for the investment disparity is relatively clear. the middle and upper classes in most latin american countries usually receive their primary and secondary education inprivate schools but turn to public universities afterward. therefore theyhave little motivation for supporting the former and an obvious interestin supporting the latter.the educational system bears an obvious relationship to the preservation of a societyõs culture. so, too, do many other institutions whose influence may be less direct. will network databases available to elites cutdown on the perceived need for public libraries? will webdistributedmusic and film, available only to a subset of society, undercut support forlocal entertainment venues? will the intensity of telephoneline usage forglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture217data transmission actually reverse the slow gains that have occurred inmaking telephone service available to a wider cross section of society?whether the effects are transitory or long lasting is a question that needsstudy. the answer depends on the extent to which initial network developments in a given society òlock inó hardware and software, reducingfuture flexibility in introducing more appropriately localized structures.within western industrialized societies, some have cast the problemin different terms. jacques arlandis,15 for example, has argued that in thenetworked society the power and behavior of various professional groupsare being changed, thus shifting the relationships between them and altering the values, modes of discourse, and structure of the society. hisemphasis is on the interactive nature of the change. the networkõs potential resonates differently with each group in the society, revealing aspectsof the groupõs values. in turn, each group seeks to influence the networkõsdevelopment in different ways.examples of these effects on professional groups abound. in the practice of medicine, for example, the local physician is no longer the unquestioned expert for all patients. the availability on the internet of enormousamounts of data (of widely varying quality) on the treatment of diseasehas shifted the balance of power between patient and physician, diminishing the absolute authority that physicians long enjoyed in determiningwhat was best for a patient. telemedicineñthe ability of specialists todeliver treatment without being in the physical presence of the patientñpromises to offer patients a much higher degree of collaboration and consultation between general practitioners and specialists in deciding ontreatments. both of these changes represent significant shifts in the nature of a professional culture.still another example: networkstimulated changes in copyright protections and related fairuse exemptions have the potential to change longestablished patterns of sharing and using scientific datañthat is, the culture of the science community. whether this will shift the traditionalbalance between open, òprecompetitiveó scientific research and commercialization of scientific applications remains to be seen.the proximity of computers and networks to the everyday life of thesociety gives rise to a resurgence of power for experts, creating a new eliteand enormous rewards for technological innovation. and the ability ofmany technologically literate professionals to master the new systems15jacques arlandis, 2000, òthe clerk, the merchant and the politician,ó in governance ofglobal networks in the light of differing local values, christoph engel and kenneth h. keller,eds., badenbaden: nomos.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218global networks and local valuesgives them access to sources of useful knowledge not available to others,and confers the advantages that come with such knowledge. journalistsand other intermediaries lose legitimacy as more people are connecteddirectly to sources of information. at the same time, a new class of intermediaries may arise from among those experts who have the skills to create valueadded products within the world of electronic databases andservices.to the extent that the cyberworld facilitates the formation of epistemicgroups without regard to geographic boundaries, it provides a lifeline toindividuals who live within geographic boundaries; thus cultural diversity in real space is actually promoted by the anarchy of cyberspace. onthe other hand, the virtual society of the network can become a substitutefor the geographically bounded society, drawing individuals away fromthe real political and social world and leaving it even more homogeneous,if somewhat reduced in richness.for merchants, it is not the anarchy of cyberspace that is attractive butits efficacy as a marketplace. for this group, the value of the networkedworld is its sameness; commerce looks the same across the world. thusgrowth of global commerce shifts the relationship between merchants andpoliticians, requiring them to form a partnership that changes the balancein a society in which politicians had previously been the arbiters of competing interests, only one of which was that of the merchants. politicians,or at least governments, must now represent the interests of òtheiró merchants in such issues as copyright, privacy protection, standards development, and taxation, to cite just a few.arlandis suggests that many of these issues can be understood, or atleast analyzed, in terms of the technical, economic, and social forces thatmove a society. all three are influenced by the cyberworld and all three,in turn, influence the development of that world. but crucial to the argument, and important to framing future research questions, is the factthat these are not independent forces; they themselves interact, and local society as well as the networked society depends on their collectiveeffect.9.4public and private spacesnot all of the cultural phenomena affected by global networks relateto groups or classes. the shifting relationship between public and privatespaces, essentially an issue concerning individuals in the society, is one ofthe most interesting and complex brought about by the cyberworld. thatboundary, in both principle and practice, has been largely determined bycultural norms. which people know about us and what they know, whatglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture219they physically see of us, how we feel about it, and the extent to which wecontrol it differ widely from one culture to another.some aspects of this issueñin particular, those related to privacy,which refers rather specifically to the right to control the distribution anduse of information about oneselfñare discussed in chapter 6 of this report. it is noted there that even in cultures as closely similar as the unitedstates and germany, there are deep differences in perspective. in thewider world, the differences are much more profound. how and whereone entertains, the candor and directness with which one expresses ideas,and how publicly and under what circumstances one displays oneõs bodyparts are all related to the boundary between public and private spheresbut follow no obvious, logical, or consistent pattern.in japan, one is more likely to share a community bath with strangersthan to express an opinion directly to them. in the united states, the useof oneõs social security number merely for purposes of identification hasbecome a major public issue, but it is widely expected that just about everyone in a small community will know who has visited you in the pastmonth and what you ate.the public/private space boundary may not be rational, but in thephysical world it is more or less clear how to maintain it. if one does notwant a private conversation heard publicly, one does not carry it outloudly on a bus. if one wants to maintain a private living space, one doesnot entertain there. if one wants to discourage telephone calls, one doesnot allow the listing of oneõs telephone number in the directory.on the other hand, there are community norms that reject excessiveprotection of privacy. a covered face might be reflective of modesty in amuslim society, but it would generate great suspicion on a street in europe or the united states. an unsigned letter to the editor would not bepublished in most western countries (although anonymity in voting is abasic tenet of democracy). for public officials in the united states, there isalmost no element of their lives that the public or the media is willing toaccept as private.information networks present a challenge to these cultural norms in anumber of ways. first, the technologies themselves have the potential toshift the boundary between public and private space in either direction,depending on circumstance and the sophistication of the user. encryption technologies can increase the effective domain of private space; onthe other hand, connecting to the web can, in itself, expose the contents ofoneõs computer to inspection or alteration and thus provide a public incursion into previously private space. most discussions of this issue haveemphasized the latter point rather than the former, in large part becauseof the threat posed by the naivet” of web users and the surreptitious nature of informationgathering technologies.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220global networks and local valuestechnological sophistication and aggressiveness enter the picture because the actual shift is affected by the vigor of attempts to penetrate theboundary and the defenses mounted to prevent it. in certain circumstances, a code name may be sufficient to prevent a personõs identity frombeing known in a chat room; in other cases, a socalled secure encryptedmessage may be intercepted and decoded by a person or organizationwith sufficiently advanced decryption technology.but the larger cultural question concerns the effect of decoupling oneõsphysical presence and geographical location from the world of bits, inwhich ideas, opinions, and virtual intimacy can flourish disembodied. anoftenreferenced new yorker cartoon shows two dogs conversing in frontof a computer monitor with one saying, òyes, but on the internet, theydonõt know youõre a dog.ó16 this is a world in which òlocal spaceó is notequivalent to òprivate space,ó where the safe expression of candor inspeech or the embarrassmentfree expression of intimacy to strangers ispossible.a question for future study is whether the existence and experienceof such a world will shift behavior patterns within oneõs local setting ormerely provide an alternative space in which values and behavior candiffer from those of everyday life. if the former scenario prevails, globalnetworks will provide a means for relaxing culturally imposed conformity and for encouraging individuality. whether this is viewed as a goodor bad thing will, of course, depend on the local cultures in which the newbehavior patterns arise. if the latter scenario more accurately captures thereality, the question is whether those already inclined to seek such a dissociation of body from thought will selectively populate the world of bitsor whether the cyberworld will, in itself, create the motivation to changepatterns of behavior for those who choose to become ònetizens.óthe concept of netizens, of course, carries with it the idea that therereally is a distinct cyberculture composed of individuals, drawn frommany different local cultures, who share a number of characteristics andvalues. in this view, the significant divide is between this group and essentially all geographically centered (and hence locally centered) cultures.within the cyberworld, there is no requirement to meet anyoneõs physicalneeds, ideas are more easily dissociated from any specific individuals,and tangible consequences of ideas are limited. this leads to a culturethat places a great deal of value on removing any restriction to the flow of16cartoon by peter steiner, the new yorker, july 5, 1993, p. 61.17see, for example, john perry barlow, òa declaration on the independence ofcyberspace,ó available online at <http://www.eff.org/pub/publications/johnperrybarlow/barlow0296 .declaration>.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture221ideas, much less value on their critical assessment, and an absolute antipathy to any hierarchical structure that might be superimposed on aworld entirely defined by ideas.17this kind of cyberculture is, in many ways, a utopian anarchy; itclearly offers a strong contrast to locally centered cultures of almost anykind. but is it necessarily a threat to those local cultures? and is it anineluctable prototype of global networks? in the committeeõs view, thesetwo questions are related, and the answer to both is no. the rapidgrowth of the internet as a source of information and services, and as amedium for commerce, continues to increase the diversity of individuals who use it, as well as their purposes in using it and the extent towhich they use it. the netizens who pioneered these networks and created for a period of time a fairly welldefined epistemic group, nowconstitute a rather small minority of net users much as they constitutea rather small minority of each of the many societies from which theycome. these pioneers embraced an absence of structure, which hasmeant that the evolution of network culture has not been controllableby any group; the resulting culture is, and will continue to be, far fromhomogeneous.9.5generational phenomenato what extent are other cultural conflicts primarily issues of transition that will resolve themselves over time? edward mccracken, formerpresident and ceo of silicon graphics, inc., describes an intriguing generational phenomenon that is apparent even within his hightechnology,informationbased company.18members of the most senior generationñthose who trained and began their careers before digitized information technology had emergedñnever become completely comfortable with the gestalt of modern information technology: its opportunities and the altered ways of thinking andworking that it entails. for the middle generationñthose who grew upwith the new technologyñcomputers and networks are overwhelmingobjects of interest. many of these individuals are the computer ònerdsóand òhackers,ó the creative people who treat the optimization of hardware and software, and the development of new ways of doing old things,as fascinating and satisfying ends in themselves. they are also thenetizens discussed in the previous section.18edward mccracken, òinnovation and information technology in the 21st century,ókeynote speech, science and technology day, university of minnesota, april 3, 1997.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222global networks and local valuesfor the younger generation, information technology in all of its manifestations appears to be viewed primarily as a set of tools, taken almost asmuch for granted as hammers and screwdrivers. to be sure, the analogycan be overdrawn. information technology continues to develop at anextraordinary rate, while hammers and screwdrivers work much as theyhave for hundreds of years. therefore the improvement of these newtools remains a creative enterprise, a fact that makes them objects of continuing attention. but the trend seems clear: they are moving toward becoming transparent systems, simply the means for carrying out the activities of a society and achieving its goals.can this observation be generalized to the connection between globalnetworks and culture? cultural resistance may be a phenomenon of theòsenioró generation, cultural distortion a characteristic of the òmiddleógeneration, and social and cultural construction the final stage in the transition. that optimistic scenario would be constrained by two phenomena:òtechnological lockin,ó the phenomenon of path dependence in whichinitial technological choices limit future flexibility, and òtechnologicalunsuitability,ó the essential conflict between the structure and dynamicsof a new technology and the cultural/social system on which it is beingimposed.the concept of transition is important in another respect. some castthe issue of information technology and culture as a choice between thepreservation or loss of existing cultural values. this seems to the committee a false dichotomy in that it conveys the notion that cultural norms arestatic. in fact, it is difficult to conceive of a dynamic society in whichnatural and social history, demographics, and intersocietal intercourse donot alter cultural norms. technological change is clearly one, but onlyone, of the factors that bring about evolutionary change. these includelanguage, art, myths, and music, as well as political and economic structure, occupations, housing, food, educationñindeed, the totality of human activity.but the pathway of change is very much affected by existing culturaltraditions, and the outcome of change is largely defined by those traditions. a mcdonaldõs restaurant in beijing does not make beijing into peoria, even though it makes beijing something different from what it was.the challenge in the development of new technologies, as thompson hasnoted, is to emphasize òinflexibility reduction.ó19 the premise is that it isimpossible to predict all of the social and cultural effects of a new technol19michael thompson, òcultural theory and technology assessment,ó manuscript prepared for european parliament, office of scientific and technological options assessment,luxembourg, october 1995.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information networks and culture223ogy on the institutions of society; those institutions themselves include amixture of individuals and groups that fall into different òsocial solidarities,ó each of which will affect and react differently to the technology.there is therefore a need for experimentation and iteration in the construction of technological applications. this requires both attention to theinteractive effects as they occur and the capacity to make adjustments inresponse.examining the impact of global networks on local cultural values musttherefore be viewed as an ongoing challenge. ability to predict thechanges is less important than alertness in observing them and creativityin responding with altered designsñnot with the goal or expectation thatglobal networks should not or will not alter detailed local cultural patterns of behavior, but to ensure that the changes do not disconnect thecultural present and future from the past, or alter the balance of solidarities in a way that is unacceptable to the society they affect.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10principles and conclusionsfor reasons outlined in chapter 1, the committee came to the conclusion early on that an exhaustive study of the impact of global networks onlocal values was not possible within the constraints of time, focus, andgroup composition under which it was operating. nevertheless, in thecourse of the symposia it hosted and the discussions it held, the committee was able to make some tentative judgments about some of the pertinent issues that may serve as a starting point for later studies.10.1governments and the evolutionof local valuesas noted in chapter 3, the values of a society are both formal andsubstantive. because the world is increasingly diverse and interconnected,the committee believes that modern societies are better served by valuesthat emphasize process and mutual respect than by those that seek toestablish orthodoxies. such an emphasis would give priority to formalvalues over substantive ones, though substantive values continue to haveimportance in defining a society or culture.considerable historical evidence suggests that the values of a societychange over time. thus, rather than seeking an unchanging status quo inwhich social and cultural values are frozen for all time, governments ofmodern societies might well choose a role in guiding such evolution, whileensuring the existence of a healthy process that is conducive to such change.governments could choose to intervene directly in the process. how224global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and conclusions225ever, direct government intervention is hard to legitimate in a liberal statewhere value formation is a social rather than a governmental process. inaddition, a coherent plan is hard to design, especially if it seeks to changethe overall balance among values. governments may be able to implant asingle new value in the minds of the citizens or erase a single older value,as totalitarian governments have shown. but affecting the processes asvalues evolve is a much more ambitious task, the pursuit of which wouldnecessarily aim at controlling thought rather than action; such an attemptwould be inappropriate for democratic societies striving to maintain therule of law.a second approach is to regulate the mechanisms that affect the process. consider, for example, the internet as a possible influence on theevolution of local values. governments do have a continuing and longterm role in ensuring that, on balance and in aggregate, communicationinforms rather than manipulates, and that it serves the purposes of democratic society with respect to universal access and the balance of socialand political power.nevertheless, the internet is not the only influence on the evolution ofvalues; there is a multitude of other influences. thus the internet policy ofgovernment should be part of a larger strategy aimed at promoting thehealthy evolution of a societyõs value set, in response to the many changesoccurring as that society becomes better educated, more diverse, and morefully connected to the wider world around it.10.2democracypolicy interventions to channel or direct the impact of global networkson democracy and political institutions are fraught with difficulty, and itwould be naive to expect that political leaders would make neutral decisions where their own future power base is concerned. even if that werenot the case, it would still make sense to be cautious, even modest, aboutmaking explicit recommendations. the fact is that the structure and influence of global networks are constantly evolving, and the normative goalsthat would presumably be served by such policy efforts continue, as theyhave been for centuries, to be in dispute. nevertheless, or perhaps withthese caveats in mind, the committee concludes the following:¥to the extent that policymakers believe that action is necessary,their focus should be on outcomes rather than on tools or modalities. thusthey should seek to define what outcomes are desirable and undesirablerather than seek to regulate one particular instrumentality such as theinternet. the internet is only one factor, albeit an important one, in globalization and modernization.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226global networks and local values¥networks such as the internet (that is, systems capable of multinode generation and receipt of information) and broadcast media (that is,few generators to many recipients) each have, in principle, advantagesand disadvantages in promoting democratic goals. networkbased information resources are probably more effective in providing access to information and to political forums, and to the maintenance of a plurality ofideas, although network users have the ability to determine what information reaches them, thus limiting what ideas can reach people. broadcast media do a better job of integrating a society because they expose thebroad population to a relatively common pool of information. actingtogether, they can facilitate plurality with integration; they also providecertain checks and balances in the polity.¥global networks create new opportunities for direct democracy,and policymakers in each country should consider how these opportunities might best be used. they should decide howñand whetherñdirectand representative processes should be rebalanced to maximize legitimacyin both òinputó (the voices of citizens) and òoutputó(policy actions resulting from those processes).¥policymakers should assess whether the postulated disintegratingeffect of global networks is actually felt in their polities. has there, forexample, been a recent trend toward singleissue constituencies?¥if global networks are seen as competing with established mechanisms for the provision of public goods, it becomes clear that research isneeded into what one might call antitrust rules. the goal is to devise workable competition among the variety of political arenas.¥despite a host of pressures toward greater internationalization andmultilateral activity (especially in the european union), actual changemay be slow and painful. countries give up previously sovereign rightsand powers only grudgingly, if at all.10.3regulatory structurean alternative to commandandcontrol regulation is the use of selfregulation and intermediation within a statutory framework. with hybrid regulation, a credible threat of state intervention stimulates selfregulatory activities, and overt state involvement is unnecessary once theselfregulatory activities are under way. (a supranational entity, an international organization, or wellorganized societal forces may also have thesame effect.) because global networks are characterized by a complexsystem of private, public, and quasipublic forces, a stable system is easierto achieve when stakeholders can take an active part in shaping their roles.commandandcontrol regulation often attacks a wellbalanced statusglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and conclusions227quo; because hybrid regulation builds on the status quo, it is more likelyto be successful.improved prospects for a new hybrid system of governance for globalnetworks are consistent with the shifting boundary between public andprivate international law. policy statements by national governments, andthe actual establishment of a number of hybrid regulatory approaches,are promising signs that new forms of international governance will helpimplement the recommendations of this report.10.4free speechas noted in chapter 5, the united states and germany both recognizea constitutional right to freedom of expression. however, the interpretations of that right in the two countries are significantly different. as importantly, the weights given to that right, in comparison with other values,are different in the two societies as well. as a result, the legal structuresand protections that have developed to implement the right are also different, exemplifying why harmonization of nationsõ laws related to freedom of expression on the internet is likely to remain quite difficult.the nature of todayõs internet is a significant impediment for nationalauthorities who wish to unilaterally implement laws and regulations thatreflect national substantive values. at the same time, national pride andsubstantive cultural values are unlikely to be abandoned, so that a homogenization of values among nationsñparticularly with respect to themost restrictive or the leastñis also unlikely to occur.there are some areas, such as child pornography, where there is moreorless universal agreement on the substantive values to be protected. international treaties that harmonize rules appear to be well within reachfor these few, but important, areas. generally, the more homogeneous thegroup of nations, the more likely it is that treaty solutions covering content will be practical. even if the group of nations is small, it can still beuseful in providing a model for harmonization and a bloc for bringingpressure on nonsignatory nations to respect the treatyõs provisions.to reduce the tensions and chaos that national differences create for aglobal activity, governments could cooperate in a number of ways. nations could work together to discourage content providers from using theregulatory environment of one country to circumvent the regulations ofanother. they could establish an international information agency (or support private or quasipublic organizations) to help providers understandeach nationõs regulatory standards and structures. finally, they couldupdate and extend to the networked world the mechanisms that currentlyexist for dealing with circumstances in which domestic laws conflict.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228global networks and local valuesgiven the limited effectiveness of unilateral commandandcontrolrules regulating content, commercial law, selfregulation, and encouragement of intermediation (perhaps driven by the threat of imposing regulation) are options for national action in the appropriate circumstances.¥commercial law is a useful tool when material on the network injures a clearly identifiable party (e.g., a web site has published libelousmaterial about a person or has violated a personõs legally protected privacy). however, ccommercial law does not work well if large groups areindirectly or only potentially affectedñfor example, when child pornography endangers children, hate speech intimidates minority groups, ornazi ideology threatens democratic government.¥voluntary selfregulation on the part of the parties directly exposedto material on the internetñthrough siteidentification and labelingschemes, ageverification software, or the provision of filtering software,for exampleñis attractive in some ways, because it offers the potential forgreater diversity of material to be accessible through the internet, enhanced freedom of expression, and customization of controls to fit theneeds and desires of the individuals involved.¥intermediaries, such as host providers, can play a useful role inoffering the public a regulating or authenticating service. that is, hostproviders can market their internet access software by promising to include certain kinds and quality of content and exclude others. hostswould compete with each other on the basis of the cluster of options theyoffer as well as over their softwarebased filtering systems (although therigidity of these latter technical tools is a clear disadvantage).finally, government should provide means for improving the mediacompetence of the users. an oversight function for government will remain important in striking a balance between the preservation of the individual right of freedom of expression and other legitimate goals of ademocratic society.10.5privacyprivacy regulation must cover both online and offline transactions,either through the internet or private networks, and must include comprehensive and consistent protection regardless of whether data are collected, held, manipulated, or disseminated by public sector or private sector entities. the united states faces particular challenges in this respectbecause its many sectorspecific regulatory approaches are so differentfrom (and indeed often inconsistent with) each other.the existence of transborder data flows creates a strong need for harglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and conclusions229monization, or at least convergence, of national legislative regimes, particularly among developed countries. because the united states and germany, as well as europe more generally, share a number of values concerning privacy rights, harmonization is not out of the realm of possibility.however, subtle but important differences in cultural views about theappropriate role of the government make it unlikely that explicit, uniform, legislatively based regulations will ever be agreed on.hybrid approaches that combine selfregulation with a legislativeframework that establishes general principlesñas well as mechanisms formonitoring and enforcementñappear much more likely to provide flexibility, customization, and quickresponse capability in the dynamic worldof global networks.10.6freedom of informationthere are few international tensions related to inconsistencies in national freedomofinformation laws, as this is an area in which individualnations can control compliance with their own statutes. however, freedom of information is so vital to the proper functioning of a democracythat it is reasonable to endorse an upward harmonization of national standards toward the comprehensive lawbased regime in place in the unitedstates. that regime takes as a premise the right of citizens to access virtually all public documents (with narrowly drawn exceptions), though inpractice the extent to which u.s. government agencies adhere to this regime varies widely. among the few exceptions, in addition to nationalsecurity matters or judicial proceedings, are the privacy rights of individuals. advances in technology make it generally easier to anonymizedata in government records, thereby allowing their release without compromising privacy.primary legal informationñincluding laws, judicial opinions, andadministrative rulingsñshould not be excluded from freedomofinformation regimes merely to protect a property interest of a private entitythat uses the data to create valueadded databases. if copyright protectionis granted to such entities, it should not cover the raw data on which theinformation product is based.government institutions should encourage the trend of using web sitesand the internet to increase the availability of public information.10.7technology developmentthe network of networks appears to be what the economist, in july1995, called òthe accidental superhighway.ó in its early stages the internetwas promoted and funded, but not designed, by the u.s. government. atglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230global networks and local valuesno time did some kind of master plan exist to guide the internetõs evolution. the history of the internetõs technology suggests that it would be amistake for governments to seek to control the future developmentthrough comprehensive action plans. there are alternatives to centralizedapproaches, such as coordination and selfregulation, though these posechallenges both within particular countries and globally. such approachesrequire accommodating new forms of hybrid publicprivate internationalregimes, which may be experimental in the near term (as discussed insection 10.3).the core of the internetõs technologyñthe tcp/ip protocol stackñdeveloped in a niche that sheltered it from market selection for manyyears. this incubation was very useful, and it suggests that creating andprotecting other niches may be beneficial in keeping options for technological development open. the challenge will be to provide suitable,timely exposure to market realities while avoiding the propping up ofwhat might not be viable.10.8culture and technologygenerally speaking, cultural hegemony arising from global networksdoes not appear to be a major concern for developed nations. technologies are available that allow localization of the language and culture ofnetworks, the cost of entry of information providers of all kinds is low,and saturation of available bandwidth by early users does not appear tobe a serious problem.there is more reason for concern about cultural hegemony with respect to nations in the developing world. here, too, the technological capacity exists to localize networks, but the incentives to do so are oftenmarginal. moreover, in certain of these societies, networks may exacerbate social stratification, reinforcing the power of elites and upsetting cultural balances that have developed over time. of particular concern is thepossibility of òtechnological lockinó during these next several years asthe structure and use patterns of the internet develop.an untested postulate, put forward by a number of east asian andmiddle eastern countries, is that there is a strong connection between theircultural values and their political structuresñand that global networkscan be a threat to both. an examination of how electronic networks havebeen adopted in the growing diasporas of ethnic groups from these countries might provide further insights on this question.global networks appear more likely to change the culture of and relationships between various groups within societies, as defined by profession and level of education rather than by national identity. these changesresult from the groupsõ different ways of using the internet, the differentglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and conclusions231interdependencies among groups that thereby occur, and the consequentchanges in the modes of operation of certain professionals that affect activities unrelated to electronic networks as well as those directly related tothe networks.networks are profoundly challenging the traditional and culturallydefined conceptions of public and private spaces. it is not yet clearwhether this will lead to two worldsñreal space and cyberspaceñwithdifferent rules and mores concerning privacy, or whether there will bespillover effects that create tensions or changes in local cultural practices.a separate cyberworld of ònetizensó is not likely to achieve any permanence, even as electronic network penetration and use grow over the yearsto come.finally, many of the observations about the cultural effects of globalnetworks are likely to be transitory. global electronic networks will causea sea change resulting more from continual, dynamic evolution than fromany onetime adjustment that remains fixed. thus, longterm changes inthe nature of local culture are certainly probable, but not predictable onthe basis of phenomena currently being observed.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix biographies233a.1committee memberskenneth h. keller, chair, directs the center for science, technology, and public affairs at the university of minnesota. he also holds anappointment in the department of chemical engineering and materialsscience. his research examines the intersection of science and technologywith international politics and economics. his recent writings have dealtwith technology and national sovereignty, the environment, the globalization of research and development, and policy issues in high technology medicine. he has spent most of his career at the university of minnesota where he joined the faculty in 1964, became vice president foracademic affairs in 1980, and university president in 1985. he was seniorfellow for science and technology at the council on foreign relations from1990 to 1996. he has chaired and served on a number of public and private boards and advisory groups and is a member of the commission onphysical sciences, mathematics, and applications of the national research council, and the boards of randõs institute for education andtraining and the science museum of minnesota. he chairs the medicaltechnology leadership forum and is vice chair of the board of laspau:academic and professional programs for the americas. he earned amasterõs degree and doctorate in chemical engineering from johnshopkins university, and was named a distinguished johns hopkins alumnus in 1996.kenneth w. dam is max pam professor of american and foreign lawat the university of chicago law school. mr. dam was elected to theglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234global networks and local valuesorder of the coif while at the law school; he was also a managing editorof the law review. in 1964, he was visiting professor at the university offreiburg. mr. dam has published five books: federal tax treatment of foreign income (with lawrence krause); the gatt: law and international economic organization; oil resources: who gets what how?; economic policybeyond the headlines (with george shultz); and the rules of the game: reform and evolution in the international monetary system. he was law clerk tosupreme court justice whittaker and then an associate with the new yorkfirm of cravath, swaine and moore. he joined the law school faculty in1960, but in 1971 he left to become assistant director of the office of management and budget, where he was concerned with national security andinternational affairs. in 1973, he was executive director of the council oneconomic policy, which was responsible for coordination of u.s. domestic and international economic policy. he returned to the university ofchicago law school in 1974. he served as provost of the university from1980 to 1982. he served as deputy secretary of state from 1982 to 1985 andthen as vice president for law and external relations with ibm from 1985to 1992. in 1992, he took leave from ibm to serve, on an interim basis, aspresident and ceo of the united way of america in order to clean up ascandal in that organization and to put into place a new system of controls and governance. in early 2001 he was nominated by president bushto be deputy secretary of the treasury, and he is currently on a leave ofabsence from the law school.paul a. david is professor of economics at stanford university, and,since 1994, also holds a senior research fellowship at all souls college,oxford. he currently is extraordinary professor of the economics of science and technology in the faculty of economics and business administration at the university of maastricht. paul david is known internationally for his contributions in several fields, including economic history,economic and historical demography, and the economics of science andtechnology. the development of òthe new economics of scienceó has beena focal point of his most recent research and writings, and he continues todirect the high technology impact program of the center for economicpolicy research at stanford. he has served as a consultant to the u.s.national academy of sciences, the united nations commission on tradeand development, the united nations university institute on new technologies, the world bank, the organization for economic cooperationand development, and other public organizations.kenneth keniston is andrew w. mellon professor of human development and director of projects in the program in science, technology, and society at the massachusetts institute of technology. he is theglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix235author of seven books and more than 100 articles and chapters. his mostrecent works are, with d. guston, the fragile contract (1994), and with j.ker conway and l. marx, earth, air, fire, water: humanistic studies of theenvironment. he is the director of the mit india project at mit, a part ofthe mit international science and technology initiative (misti). in recent years, professor kenistonõs research focused on information technology and development in india. his research in india focuses on suchtopics as indic language software (or the absence therof), and on indianprojects and research to close the òdigital divideó within india and between india and the socalled northern nations. in the fall of 1999, hewas sir ashutosh mukerjee visiting professor at the national instituteof advanced studies at the indian institute of science in bangalore; hehas lectured at a number of indian institutions including iitchennai,iitmumbai, the confederation of indian industries, and private firms.he was a member, carnegie commission on higher education (19641971); director, behavioral sciences study center, yale medical school(19671971); chairman and director, carnegie council on children (19711977), author of its report, all our children; and member, board of overseers of harvard university (19731979); guggenheim fellow for studyof engineering education (1982); evaluator, guggenheim foundation forlatin american applicants (1988); member, committee of selection forthe macarthur prize fellowships (19731979); member, committee ofselection for the guggenheim fellowships (19911994). he has been avisiting scholar at the ecole des mines (paris); visiting professor at theuniversity of parisv (sorbonne); visiting professor at the centro deestudios avanzados de ciencias sociales (madrid). he has been a consultant on a number of projects in venezuela, kuwait, mendoza (argentina), malaysia, politecnico of torino, italy, petroleum institute indhahran, saudi arabia. he is currently a member of the national research council/maxplanckinstitute (americangerman) workinggroup on global networks and local values. he is a member of thecouncil on foreign relations and the american academy of arts andsciences. keniston was educated in part at the colegio nacional debuenos aires (central). he graduated magna cum laude from harvardcollege, with a thesis on the political philosophy of jos” ortega y gasset.he received his d. phil. in social studies from oxford university, wherehe was a rhodes scholar at balliol college. he has taught at harvarduniversity, where he was a junior fellow; in the departments of psychology and psychiatry at yale university; and at the massachusetts institute of technology, where he has been director (19861992) and director of graduate studies (19921996) of the program in science,technology, and society.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.236global networks and local valueshenry h. perritt, jr., is dean of chicagokent college of law andvice president of the downtown campus of illinois institute of technology. he is the author of more than 70 law review articles and 15 books ontechnology and law and employment law, including the 730page lawand the information superhighway. he served on president clintonõs transition team, working on telecommunications issues, and drafted principlesfor electronic dissemination of public information, which formed the coreof the electronic freedom of information act amendments adopted bycongress in 1996. during the ford administration, he served on the whitehouse staff and as deputy under secretary of labor. he serves on the computer science and telecommunications policy board of the national research council. he was a member of the interprofessional team thatevaluated the fbiõs carnivore system. he is a member of the bars of virginia, pennsylvania, the district of columbia, maryland, illinois and theunited states supreme court. he is a member of the council of foreignrelations and of the economic club and is secretary of the section onlabor and employment law of the american bar association. he earnedhis b.s. in engineering from mit in 1966, a masterõs degree in management from mitõs sloan school in 1970, and a j.d. from georgetown university law center in 1975.robert spinrad retired from xerox corporation, as vice presidentof technology strategy in 1998. he joined xerox in 1968, and over theyears has held a variety of computer science positions, including that ofdirector of xerox parc (palo alto research center). before his careerwith xerox, spinrad was a senior scientist at brookhaven national laboratory and project engineer at bulova research and development laboratory. spinrad received a ph.d. in electrical engineering from the massachusetts institute of technology. he received his m.s. in electricalengineering, and b.s. in engineering from columbia university. spinradwas a bridgham fellow at columbia and a whitney fellow at mit.spinrad has served in various advisory and oversight roles at harvarduniversity, stanford university, the massachusetts institute of technology, the university of california, educom, the national science foundation, the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, the national research council, the american association forthe advancement of science, the council on library and informationresources, the council on foreign relations, bell telephone laboratory,the defense departmentõs advanced research projects agency,livermore national laboratory, the rand corporation, the international institute for applied systems analysis, digital pathways, inc.,the mcgrawhill encyclopedia of science and technology, and the information society. spinrad is on the board of advisors for the berkeleyglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix237center for law and technology and on the national reconnaissanceoffice advisory council. he is also a member of the national academyof engineering and the national research councilõs united states/japan task force on corporate innovation.a.2the german delegationchristoph engel, chair of the german delegation, was born in 1956,and he took the first state exam for lawyers in 1981 at tuebingen university. after 2 years as assistant at the tuebingen law faculty, he was for 9years a research fellow of the hamburg maxplanckinstitute on foreignprivate law and conflicts of law. he took his second state exam for lawyers in 1987 and received a degree of doctor juris in 1988. in 1992, theuniversity of hamburg gave him tenure (habilitation) for public law, economic law, european law, and public international law. from 1992through 1997, he held a chair for media and communications law atosnabrueck university. since 1997 he is codirector of a newly foundedinstitution within the maxplancksociety, the project group on the lawof common goods at bonn. his main fields are public law, economic law,media law, environmental law, and the impact of social sciences, in particular economics, on law. he is a member of the scientific council withthe german minister of economics.klaus w. grewlich is a professor in the european general and interdisciplinary department at the college of europe/bruges. from 1990to 1995 he served as executive vice president (director general) business development and board representative at deutsche telekom, bonnand from 1996 to 1997 as director general and member of the board ofan industrial confederation in brussels. dr. grewlich has held positions in the european space agency and in the oecd madrid, in thecabinet of the ec commission in brussels, and was member of the foreign policy planning group and director for international technologyand telecommunications policy in the federal foreign office, bonn. hereceived his dr. jur. from the university of freiburg, his dr.sc.econ. fromthe university of lausanne/hec, and his ll.m. from the university ofcalifornia, berkeley. dr grewlich is the author of various publications,particularly in the field of international economic relations, public international and european law, international technology policy, governmentbusiness relations, and communications, including the books direct investment in the oecdcountries (1978), transnational enterprises ina new international system (1980), europe in the global technology race(1992), conflict and order in global communications (1997), and governancein cyberspace (1999).global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238global networks and local valuesbernd holznagel is a professor of law and director of the institutefor information, telecommunication and media law at the university ofthe free university in berlin in 1984, he participated in a postgraduatelaw program at mcgill university in montreal where he received a master of laws (ll.m.) degree in 1985. after receiving his ph.d. from theuniversity of hamburg on dispute resolution through negotiation in 1990and passing the second state exam in law in 1991, he began to write histhesis, òbroadcasting law in europe,ó which was completed in 1996 andreceived a special award from the european group at public law. in 1997he was announced as professor for constitutional and administrative lawfor information, telecommunication and media law. his involvement inresearch projects covers areas such as access problems in the multimediaage, legal frameworks of data protection and data security, and new media in university teaching. in 1998 he was a visiting professor at the university of virginia (charlottesville) teaching òeuropean community lawóin the fall term. since 1999, he has been a faculty member of oxforduniversityõs summer school for incoming law students. his consultingwork on the international level includes media law courses in moscowand ljubljana (with the council of europe), as well as working as an expert on the legal problems concerning bosnian election law, residence law,data protection and i.d. cards (with the phare project financed by the european commission). furthermore, he was a member of the europeanexpert group for the preparation of the working group òthe right regulatory framework for a creative media economyó at the april 1998 birmingham conference organised by the european community. currentlyhe is a coeditor of the law journal òmultimedia and lawó and coinitiator of the òinternational journal of communications law and policy,óand yale. in addition, he has published numerous articles in several german law journals relating to various problems concerning german administrative law.michael hutter is professor of economic theory and director of theinstitute for economy and culture at witten/herdecke university, thefirst private university in germany. he received his dr. rer.pol. with asummacumlaude thesis on the logical structure of property rights andhis dr. rer. pol. habil. with a study on the production of pharmaceuticalpatent law in germany, italy, and the united states. his current researchinterests focus on the role of communication in economic theory, and onapplications of social systems theory on the economics of the arts, mediaindustries and networks, and monetary systems. dr. hutter was educatedglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix239at portland state university (b.a. math., 1970), university of washington(m.a. econ., 1971), and the university of munich (dr. rer. pol., 1976, anddr. rer. pol. habil., 1986). he taught at claremont mckenna college and atthe university of munich before joining the faculty of business administration and economics at witten/herdecke university in 1987. he wasdean of the faculty from 199295, and he was president of the associationfor cultural economics. he serves on the editorial board of the journal ofcultural economics, the european journal of law and economics, andsoziale systeme. he has published in the areas of cultural economics, history and theory of money, history of economic thought and economicmethodology.raymund werle is principal research associate with the maxplanckstudy of societies, cologne). he is head of the mpi research group onnetwork development and standardization in telecommunications. hisresearch is focused on the institutional conditions and the structural consequences of technological and scientific innovations, in particular in theinformation and telecommunications technology industry. it includes thedevelopment of telecommunications and data networks, the internet inparticular, and their structural and societal consequences. he has published in the area of science and technology studies, development andgovernance of large technical systems, but also in the sociology of lawand the legal profession and research methodology. he received a diploma (m.a.) in economics and sociology and a ph.d. in political science.he was educated at the universities of bonn, cologne, mannheim and atthe state university of new york at stony brook (postgraduate daadfellow). he held research and teaching positions at the universities ofbielefeld, mannheim and heidelberg and at the research center onnuclear energy in karlsruhe. in 1997 he was visiting scholar at the center for technology, policy and industrial development (research programon communications policy) at the massachusetts institute of technology(mit). he is chair of the coordination committee of the research network òsociology of science and technologyó (sstnet) of the europeansociological association.a.3staffjoachim d–lken is a research assistant with the maxplanckprojectgroup on the law of common goods at bonn and currently enrolled inthe preparatory program (òrechtsreferendariató) for the second stateexam for lawyers. he received his first law degree (j.d. equivalent) with aglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240global networks and local valuesuniversity. since 1992, he was a junior research assistant with the chairfor the law of the new media at osnabrueck university. from 19951996,he was a visiting scholar at the university of chicago law school (erpscholarship of the ministry of economics and the national scholarshipfoundation). his work is on antitrust law related to convergence in multimedia markets.herbert lin is senior scientist and senior staff officer at the computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil of the national academies, where he has been study directorof major projects on public policy and information technology. thesestudies include a 1996 study on national cryptography policy(cryptographyõs role in securing the information society), a 1991 study onthe future of computer science (computing the future), a 1999 study ofdefense department systems for command, control, communications,computing, and intelligence (realizing the potential of c4i: fundamentalchallenges), and a 2000 study on workforce issues in hightechnology(building a workforce for the information economy). prior to his nrc service, he was a professional staff member and staff scientist for thehouse armed services committee (19861990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms control issues. he also has significantexpertise in math and science education. he received his ph.d. in physics from mit in 1979. apart from his cstb work, he is published incognitive science, science education, biophysics, and arms control anddefense policy.lorenz mƒller is higher executive officer in the administration ofthe german bundestag on temporary leave of absence. he was researchassistant of the parliamentary study commission ófuture of the mediain the economy and societyñgermany«s road into the information society,ó which finished his work in june 1998. after 4 years as a journalist, hestudied law and arabic and islamic studies in hamburg and damascus.he took his first and second state exam for lawyers in 1991 and 1995 inhamburg and received a degree of doctor juris in 1996 with a thesis on therelationship between modern islamic theory and the idea of human rights.currently he is a research assistant with the maxplanckproject groupon the law of common goods at bonn.wolf osthaus, born in 1971, received his first law degree (j.d. equivalent) with a focus on international private law and comparison of law in1997 from osnabrueck university after studying at the universities ofosnabrueck, paris (xii), and florence. he is a research assistant with theglobal networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix241maxplanckproject group on the law of common goods at bonn andalso a member of the graduate college òinternationalization of privatelawó at the university of freiburg/germany (dfg scholarship). his ph.d.thesis, which is supervised by prof. von bar, osnabrueck, will be on therights to information in the international tort law.global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united statescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.