detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10057principles and practices for a federal statistical agency:second edition72 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309073141 | doi 10.17226/10057margaret e. martin, miron l. straf, and constance f. citro, editors; committeeon national statistics, national research councilprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practicesfor a federal statistical agencysecond editioncommittee on national statisticsmargaret e. martin, miron l. straf, and constance f. citro, editorscommission on behavioral and social sciences and educationnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington, d.c. 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by thegoverning board of the national research council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for thereport were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.the study was supported by contract/grant no. sbr9709489 between the national academy of sciences and the national science foundation. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of theauthor(s) and do not necessarily reflect the view of the organizations or agencies thatprovided support for this project.international standard book number 0309073146additional copies of this report are available from national academy press, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, d.c. 20055call (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)this report is also available online at http://www.nap.eduprinted in the united states of americacopyright 2001 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.suggested citation: national research council (2001). principles and practices for afederal statistical agency, second edition. committee on national statistics. margarete. martin, miron l. straf, and constance f. citro, editors. commission on behavioraland social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has amandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technicalmatters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter ofthe national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing withthe national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimedat meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute actsunder the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressionalcharter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, toidentify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciencesin 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with theacademyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, thecouncil has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy ofsciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council isadministered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m.alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of thenational research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on national statistics20002001john e. rolph (chair), marshall school of business, university ofsouthern californiajoseph g. altonji, institute of policy research, northwesternuniversitylawrence d. brown, department of statistics, university ofpennsylvaniajulie davanzo, rand, santa monica, californiawilliam f. eddy, department of statistics, carnegie mellonuniversityrobert m. groves, university of michigan and joint program insurvey methodology, university of marylandhermann habermann, statistics division, united nations,new yorkjoel l. horowitz, department of economics, university of iowawilliam kalsbeek, department of biostatistics, university of northcarolinaroderick j.a. little, school of public health, university ofmichiganthomas a. louis, rand, washington, dccharles f. manski, department of economics, northwesternuniversityedward b. perrin, department of health services, university ofwashingtondaryl pregibon, at&t laboratoriesresearch, florham park,new jerseyfrancisco j. samaniego, division of statistics, university ofcalifornia, davisrichard schmalensee, sloan school of management,massachusetts institute of technologymatthew d. shapiro, department of economics, university ofmichiganandrew a. white, director, committee on national statisticsmargaret e. martin, consultantmiron l. straf, deputy director, commission on behavioral andsocial sciences and educationvprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.constance f. citro, senior study director, committee on nationalstatisticscarrie l. muntean, research assistant, committee on nationalstatisticshttp://www.nationalacademies.org/cnstatviprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsthe committee on national statistics thanks the many people whocontributed their time and expertise to the preparation of this report. weare most appreciative of their cooperation and assistance.in expressing our gratitude to the staff, a special measure of recognition is due to margaret martin and miron straf, who were coeditors of theoriginal edition of this report. in revising the report, they were joined aseditors of the second edition by constance citro. linda ingram and flossiewolf assisted the committee in preparing the original report, and carriemuntean, andrew white, and thomas jabine assisted in preparing thissecond edition. eugenia grohman offered comments and guidance in editing the first edition. this second edition benefited from the editing ofchristine mcshane. we also are indebted to many others who offeredvaluable comments and suggestions.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the report review committee of the national researchcouncil (nrc). the purpose of this independent review is to providecandid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making thepublished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to thestudy charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we thank the following individuals for their participation in the reviiprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.view of this report: mary ann baily, hastings center, garrison, ny;vincent p. barabba, general motors corporation, detroit, mi; ivan fellegi,statistics canada, ottawa, canada; joel greenhouse, department of statistics, carnegie mellon university; jay hakes, jimmy carter library, atlanta, ga; janet l. norwood, chevy chase, md; alice robbin, school oflibrary and information science, indiana university; and stephen stigler,department of statistics, university of chicago.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusionsor recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before itsrelease. the review of this report was overseen by john t. bailar, professoremeritus, department of health studies, university of chicago. appointed by the nrcõs report review committee, he was responsible formaking certain that an independent examination of this report was carriedout in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.finally, we recognize the many federal agencies that support the committee on national statistics directly and through a grant from the national science foundation. without their support and their commitmentto improving the national statistical system, the committee work that is thebasis of this report would not have been possible.viiiacknowledgmentsprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentspreface to the second editionxipreface to the first editionxiiipart i: principles and practices for afederal statistical agency 1part ii: commentary13references39appendicesafundamental principles of official statistics of thestatistical commission of the united nations45bselected federal statistical world wide web sites,may 2000, and index of federal statistical sites listed48ixprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface to the second editionin 1992 the committee on national statistics (cnstat) issued awhite paper on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. thepaper responded to requests from congress and others for advice on whatconstitutes an effective statistical agency. it identified and commented onthree basic principles: relevance to policy issues, credibility among datausers, and trust among data providers. it also discussed 11 important practices, including a strong measure of independence and commitment to quality and professional practice (national research council, 1992).the cnstat report has been used by federal statistical agencies toinform department officials, advisory committees, and others. it has alsobeen used in a congressionally mandated study by the u.s. general accounting office (1995) to evaluate the performance of major statisticalagencies and in a review of the federal statistical system by a former commissioner of the bureau of labor statistics (norwood, 1995). its principles informed the establishment and later assessment of a new statisticalagency, the bureau of transportation statistics (see national researchcouncil, 1997b).eight years have passed since the white paper was first issued, and thecommittee decided that it would be useful to release a revised and updatedversion at this time. this second edition does not change the basic principles for federal statistical agencies, because the committee believes theseprinciples are and will continue to be important guides for effective practice. the second edition does revise and expand the discussion of some ofxiprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the practices that characterize an effective federal statistical agency and bringsthe discussion up to date with references to recent reports by the committeeand others.driving the revisions is our recognition of the need for statistical agencies to keep up to date and to meet the challenges for their missions that areposed by such technological, social, and economic changes as the widespread use of the internet for the dissemination and, increasingly, the collection of data, the heightened concern about safeguards for confidentialinformation, and the information requirements of a changing economy.new and revised text addresses the reasons for establishing a federal statistical agency, the necessity for and characteristics of independence of a federalstatistical agency, the need for continual development of more useful data,for example, by integrating data from multiple sources, practices for fairtreatment of data providers, the role of the internet in the release of data,and the need for effective coordination and cooperation among statisticalagencies to ensure that policy makers and citizens receive data that are accurate, relevant, and timely for their needs.we stress that the principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyarticulated here are guidelines, not prescriptions. we intend them to behelpful not only to the agencies, from whose experience we benefited inpreparing this revised edition, but also to inform others of the characteristics of effective statistical agencies that can serve policy makers in the executive and legislative branches, other data users, and the public well.john e. rolph, chaircommittee on national statistics, 2001xiipreface to the second editionprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface to the first editionfrom time to time the committee on national statistics (cnstat) isasked for advice on what constitutes an effective federal statistical agency.for example, congressional staff raised the question as they were formulating legislation for a bureau of environmental statistics, and the secretaryof the u.s. department of transportation asked cnstat for advice onestablishing a new bureau of transportation statistics, called for in theintermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991. the nationalresearch councilõs transportation research board had earlier turned tocnstat for information on common elements of the organization andresponsibilities of federal statistical agencies for its study on strategic transportation data needs. of interest in all of these requests are the fundamental characteristics that define a statistical agency and its operation.statistical agencies sometimes face situations that tax acceptable standards for professional behavior. examples occur when policy makers, regulators, or enforcement officials seek access to data on individual respondents from a statistics agency or when policy interpretations are added topress releases announcing statistical data. because the federal statisticalsystem is highly decentralized, statistical agencies must operate under thepolicies and guidance of officials in many departments of government. notall of these officials are knowledgeable about what is generally accepted asproper for a federal statistical agency, and issues involving judgments aboutconflicting objectives also arise.in response to these situations, cnstat has prepared this òwhite paxiiiprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivpreface to the first editionperó on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. this paperbrings together conclusions and recommendations made in many cnstatreports on specific agencies, programs, and topics, and it includes a discussion of what is meant by independence of a federal statistical agency and ofthe roles of research and analysis in a statistical agency. the commentarysection contains supplementary information to further explain or illustratethe principles and practices.in preparing this paper, cnstat and its staff solicited suggestionsfrom many involved with federal statistical agencies. a draft of the paperwas discussed by the heads of some federal statistical agencies at an openmeeting of cnstat, and a draft was also discussed at a meeting of thecouncil of professional associations on federal statistics. the committeeis grateful for the many suggestions and comments it received. when thereport is published, cnstat plans to seek an even wider discussion of it atmeetings of professional societies and to encourage reviews and commentaries. we hope that, in this way, the paper may evolve further and possiblyinfluence legislation, regulations, and standards affecting federal statisticalagencies.as we were completing our work on this report, the conference ofeuropean statisticians drafted a resolution on the fundamental principlesof official statistics in the region of the economic commission for europe(ece). although the two documents were done independently, there is alarge amount of agreement between them. we note particularly the emphasis the ece resolution places on the need for independence for officialstatistics agencies (united nations statistical commission and economiccommission for europe, 1991).1although focused on federal statistical agencies, many of the principlesand practices presented here also apply to statistical activities elsewhere,particularly to those in state and local government agencies and other statistical organizations. in addition, this paper and the ece resolution maybe useful to emerging democracies that seek to establish statistical organizations in their governments.the principles and practices articulated here are statements of best1the ece resolution was later adopted by the statistical commission of the unitednations (united nations statistical commission, 1994). see appendix a.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface to the first editionxvpractice rather than legal or scientific rules. they are based on experiencerather than law or experiment. some of them may need to be changed aslaws change, society changes, or the practice of statistics changes. they arethus intended as guidelines, not prescriptions.burton h. singer, chaircommittee on national statistics, 1992principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1part i:principles and practicesfor a federal statistical agencydefinition of a federal statistical agencyestablishment of a federal statistical agencyprinciples for a federal statistical agency¥relevance to policy issues¥credibility among data users¥trust among data providerspractices for a federal statistical agency¥a clearly defined and wellaccepted mission¥a strong position of independence¥continual development of more useful data¥openness about the data provided¥wide dissemination of data¥cooperation with data users¥fair treatment of data providers¥commitment to quality and professional standards ofpractice¥an active research program¥professional advancement of staff¥coordination and cooperation with other statistical agenciesnote: part i is a summary statement of principles and practices foran effective statistical agency. part ii, òcommentary,ó further explains, defines, and illustrates the topics in part i.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2principles and practices for a federal statistical agencydefinition of a federal statistical agencya federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal governmentwhose principal function is the compilation and analysis of dataand the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.the theory and methods of the discipline of statistics and related fieldsand the practice of the profession of statistics are brought to bear on thecompilation of data, on producing information from the data, and on disseminating that information.¥the unit must be generally recognized as a distinct entity. it may belocated within either a cabinet department or an independent agency, or itcould itself be an independent agency.¥compilation may include direct collection of data from individuals,organizations, or establishments or the use of administrative records. itmay include assembling information from a variety of sources, includingother statistical agencies, in order to produce an integrated data series, suchas the national income and product accounts.¥analysis may take various forms, such as developing indicators, modeling, making projections, and interpreting data. it may include researchand explanations of relationships between survey statistics at various levelsof aggregation and other variables. analysis by a statistical agency does notadvocate policies or take partisan positions.¥dissemination means making information available to the public, toothers in the executive branch, and to congress.¥statistical purposes include description, evaluation, analysis, inference, and research. for these purposes, a statistical agency may collect datafrom individuals, establishments, or other organizations directly, or it mayobtain data from administrative records, but it does not do so for administrative, regulatory, or enforcement purposes. statistical purposes excludeany interest in an individual person or economic unit. the data are usedsolely to describe and analyze statistical patterns, trends, and relationshipsinvolving groups of persons or other units.establishment of a federal statistical agencystatistics that are publicly available from government agencies are essential for a nation to advance the economic wellbeing and quality of lifeprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices3of its people. its public policy makers are best served by statistics that areaccurate, timely, and relevant for policy decisions. even more, the operation of a democratic system of government depends on the unhinderedflow of statistical information that citizens can use to assess governmentactions and for other purposes. federal statistical agencies are establishedto be a credible source of useful, accurate statistics in one or more subjectareas that are available to the public and policy makers on a timely basis.accuracy requires proper concern for consistency across geographicareas and across time, as well as statistical measures of errors in the data.timeliness requires concern for issuing data as frequently as is needed toreflect important changes in what is being studied, as well as disseminatingdata as soon as practicable after they are collected. relevance requires concern for providing data that help users meet their current needs for decisionmaking and analysis, as well as anticipating future data needs. and credibility requires concern for both the reality and appearance of impartiality,and of independence from political control. it is the primary mission ofagencies in the federal statistical system to work to ensure the goals of accuracy, timeliness, relevance, and credibility of statistical information.one reason to establish a separate statistical agency is the need for dataseries to be independent of control by policy makers or regulatory or enforcement agencies. other reasons include:¥the need for information in a subject area that is updated on a continuing basis and that extends beyond the scope of individual operating units, possibly involving other departments or agencies,¥the need to protect the confidentiality of responses, and¥the opportunity to achieve greater efficiency or higher qualitythrough a consolidated and more highly professional activity.the principles and practices for a federal statistical agency that arereviewed in this report pertain to individual agencies as separate organizational entities in the context of a decentralized system for providing federalstatistics. historically, the response of the u.s. government to new information needs has been to create separate statistical units, so that the unitedstates now has one of the most decentralized statistical systems of any modern nation. this report does not comment on the advantages or disadvantages of the u.s. system compared with other models for organizing government statistics. it discusses the need for federal statistical agencies tocoordinate their work and cooperate with other agencies on a range ofprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyactivities, describes the coordinating role of the office of management andbudget, and reviews some mechanisms for interagency collaboration.principles for a federal statistical agencyrelevance to policy issuesa federal statistical agency must be in a position to provide information relevant to issues of public policy.a statistical agency must be knowledgeable about the issues and requirements of public policy and federal programs and able to provide objective information that is relevant to policy and program needs. in establishing priorities for statistical programs for this purpose, a statistical agencymust work closely with the users of such information in the executivebranch, the congress, and interested nongovernmental groups.often, the provision of statistics concerning a particular subject area isitself a public policy, with the goal of serving a broad range of informationneeds of private and publicsector users as well as the public. to establishpriorities for such statistics, a statistical agency must maintain contact witha broad spectrum of users in the business sector, academia, state and localgovernments, and elsewhere.credibility among data usersa federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutualrespect and trust with those who use its data and information.it is essential that a statistical agency strive to maintain credibility foritself and for its data. few data users are in a position to verify the completeness and accuracy of statistical information; they must rely on anagencyõs reputation as a credible source of accurate and useful statistics.to have credibility, an agency must be and must be perceived to be freeof political interference and policy advocacy. also important for credibilityis that an agency follow such practices as wide dissemination of data, openness about the quality of the data provided, commitment to quality, andfair treatment of data providers.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices5trust among data providersa federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutualrespect and trust with respondents who provide data and with alldata subjects whose information it obtains.data providers must be able to rely on the word of a statistical agency.an agency achieves credibility with its providers by ensuring appropriateconfidentiality of responses. maintaining confidentiality, in particular, precludes the use of individually identifiable information for any administrative, regulatory, or enforcement purpose.trust with respondents is also achieved by respecting individual privacy. such respect requires that an agency minimize to the extent possiblethe time and effort of respondents to provide information and fairly informrespondents of the intended uses of their information.practices for a federal statistical agencythe effective operation of a federal statistical agency must begin withtwo related elements: a clearly defined and wellaccepted mission togetherwith a strong position of independence. with these prerequisites, effectiveoperation involves a wide range of practices: continual development ofmore useful data, openness about the data provided, wide dissemination ofdata, cooperation with data users, fair treatment of data providers, commitment to quality and professional practice, an active research program, professional advancement of staff, and coordination and cooperation with otherstatistical agencies.a clearly defined and wellaccepted missionan agencyõs mission should include responsibility for all elements of itsprograms for providing statistical information: determining sources of data,measurement methods, efficient methods of data collection and processing, and appropriate methods of analysis; and ensuring the public availability not only of the data, but also of documentation of the methods used toobtain the data and their quality. the mission should include the responsibility for assessing information needs and priorities and ways to meet thoseneeds, which could include the establishment of a data collection programor the modification or discontinuance of an existing program.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6principles and practices for a federal statistical agencya strong position of independencea widely acknowledged position of independence is necessary for astatistical agency to have credibility and to carry out its function to providean unhindered flow of useful, highquality information for the public andpolicy makers. without the credibility that comes from a strong degree ofindependence, users may lose trust in the accuracy and objectivity of theagencyõs data, and data providers may become less willing to cooperate withagency requests.in essence, a statistical agency must be distinct from those parts of thedepartment that carry out enforcement and policymaking activities. itmust be impartial and avoid even the appearance that its collection, analysis, and reporting processes might be manipulated for political purposes orthat individually identifiable data might be turned over for administrative,regulatory, or enforcement purposes.the circumstances of different agencies may govern the form that independence takes. in some cases, the legislation that establishes the agencymay specify that the agency head be professionally qualified, be appointedby the president and confirmed by the senate, serve for a specific term notcoincident with that of the administration, and have direct access to thesecretary of the department in which the agency is located. these organizational requirements are associated with and facilitate the ability of a statistical agency to achieve a strong position of independence and credibility, butthey are neither necessary nor sufficient.other characteristics related to independence are that the statisticalagency have:¥ authority for professional decisions over the scope, content, andfrequency of data compiled, analyzed, or published. most statistical agencies have such broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints, departmental requirements, office of management and budget (omb) review,and congressional mandates.¥ authority for selection and promotion of professional, technical,and operational staff.¥ recognition by policy officials outside the statistical agency of itsauthority to release statistical information without prior clearance.¥ authority for statistical agency heads and qualified staff to speakabout the agencyõs statistics before congress, with congressional staff, andbefore public bodies.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices7¥ adherence to predetermined schedules in public release of important economic or other indicator data to prevent even the appearance ofmanipulation of release dates for political purposes.¥ maintenance of a clear distinction between the release of statisticalinformation and policy interpretations of such information by the president, the secretary of the department, or others in the executive branch.¥ dissemination policies that foster regular, frequent release of majorfindings from an agencyõs statistical programs to the public via the media,the internet, and other means.continual development of more useful datastatistical agencies must continually look to improve their data systems to provide information that is accurate, timely, and relevant for changing public policy needs. they must also continually seek to improve theefficiency of their programs for collecting, analyzing, and disseminatingstatistical information.ways for an agency to achieve these goals include:¥ seeking opportunities to integrate data from more than one survey,or to integrate data from surveys with data from administrative records,with appropriate safeguards for confidentiality. when separate data sets arecollected and analyzed in such a manner that they may be used together,the value of the resulting information and the efficiency of obtaining it canbe greatly enhanced.¥ sharing technical information and ideas with other statistical agencies. such sharing can stimulate the development of innovative data collection, analysis, and dissemination methods that improve the accuracy andtimeliness of information and the efficiency of data operations.¥ establishing a balanced data collection program to provide relevantinformation for different types of data needs. such a program could include onetime surveys on special topics, repeated surveys of crosssectionsof the population that provide regularly updated statistics, and longitudinalsurveys that track people, firms, and institutions over time and make itpossible to analyze the causes and effects of changes in their circumstances.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyopenness about the data provideda statistical agency should be open about its data and their strengthsand limitations. data releases from a statistical program should be accompanied by a full description of the purpose of the program, the methodsand assumptions used for data collection, processing, and reporting, whatis known (and not known) about the quality and relevance of the data,appropriate methods for analysis that take account of variability and othersources of error in the data, and the results of research on the methods anddata.when problems are found in a previously released statistic that couldaffect its use, an agency should issue a correction promptly and publicly.an agency should be proactive in seeking ways to alert known and likelyusers of the data about the nature of the problem and the appropriate corrective action.wide dissemination of dataa statistical agency should strive for the widest possible dissemination of the data it compiles. data dissemination should be timely andpublic. also, measures should be taken to ensure that data are preservedand accessible to the public for use in future years.elements of an effective dissemination program include:¥ an established publications policy that describes, for a data collection program, the types of reports and other data releases to be made available, the audience to be served, and the frequency of release.¥ a variety of avenues for data dissemination, chosen to reach as broada public as reasonably possible. channels of dissemination include, but arenot limited to, an agencyõs internet web site, government depository libraries, and the media for regular communication of major findings.¥ release of data in a variety of formats (e.g., printed reports, variouskinds of computerreadable data files), so that the information canbe accessed by users with varying skills and needs for data retrieval andanalysis.¥ procedures for release of information that preclude actual or perceived political interference. in particular, the timing of the public releaseof data should be the responsibility of the statistical agency. as noted earlier, adherence to predetermined release schedules for important economicprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices9or other indicator data serves to prevent even the appearance of manipulation of release dates for political purposes.¥ policies for the preservation of data that guide what data to retainand how they are to be archived for future secondary analysis.cooperation with data usersa statistical agency should consult with a broad spectrum of users of itsdata in order to make its products more useful. it should:¥ seek advice on data concepts, methods, and products from datausers as well as from other professional and technical subjectmatter andmethodological experts, using a variety of formal and informal means ofcommunication that are appropriate to the types of input sought.¥ seek advice from external groups, including those with relevant subjectmatter and technical expertise, on its statistical program as a whole, onsetting statistical priorities, and on the statistical methodologies it uses.¥ endeavor to meet the needs for access to data while maintainingappropriate safeguards for the confidentiality of individual responses.¥ provide equal access to data to all users.fair treatment of data providersto maintain credibility and a relationship of respect and trust withdata subjects and other data providers, a statistical agency must observe fairinformation practices. such practices include:¥ policies and procedures to maintain the confidentiality of data,whether collected directly or obtained from administrative record sources.¥ policies and procedures to respect the privacy of respondents, whichinclude informing them of the purposes of data collection and the anticipated uses of the information, whether their participation is mandatory orvoluntary, and, if voluntary, using appropriate informed consent procedures to obtain their information.¥ further respecting privacy by minimizing the contribution of timeand effort asked of respondents, consistent with the purposes of the datacollection activity.¥recognizing the value of respondentsõ participation in data collecprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10principles and practices for a federal statistical agencytion programs by accurately representing the statistical information theyprovide and by making it widely available.¥seeking the advice of respondents, as well as others, in planning thescope and content of the agencyõs statistical programs, designing its datacollection procedures, and determining its data products.commitment to quality and professional standards of practicea statistical agency should:¥ use modern statistical theory and sound statistical practice in alltechnical work.¥develop strong staff expertise in the disciplines relevant to its mission, in the theory and practice of statistics, and in data collection, processing, analysis, and dissemination techniques.¥develop an understanding of the validity and accuracy of its dataand convey the resulting measures of uncertainty to users.¥undertake ongoing quality assurance programs to improve data validity and reliability and to improve the processes of compiling, editing,and analyzing data.¥develop a strong and continuous relationship with appropriate professional organizations in the fields of statistics and relevant subjectmatterareas.¥follow good practice, in reports and other data releases, in documenting concepts, definitions, data collection methodology, and measuresof uncertainty, and in discussing possible sources of error.an active research programan effective statistical agency should have a research program that isintegral to its activities. because smaller agencies may not be able to affordas extensive a research program as larger agencies, ways should be sought tofoster sharing of research results and methods among agencies. agenciescan also augment their staff resources for research by obtaining the servicesof experts not on the agencyõs staff through consulting or other arrangements as appropriate.the research program of a statistical agency should include:principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices11¥ research on the substantive issues for which the data were compiled. such research should be conducted not only to provide useful objective analytical results, but also as a means to identify potential improvements to the content of the data, suggest improvements in the design andoperation of the data collection, and provide fuller understanding of thelimitations of the data.¥ research to evaluate and improve statistical methodology, in particular the identification and creation of new statistical measures and thedevelopment of improved methods for analyzing errors in data that are duenot only to sampling variability, but also to other sources. research shouldalso be conducted on ways to reduce the time and effort requested of respondents and to improve the timeliness, accuracy, and efficiency of datacollection, analysis, and dissemination procedures.¥ research to understand the policy uses of the agencyõs information,in order to make the data more relevant to policy concerns and more usefulfor policy analysis and decision making.professional advancement of staffa statistical agencyõs professional staff should be committed to the highest standards of quality work and professional practice. they should alsobe committed to the highest standards of professional ethics with regard tomaintaining the agencyõs credibility as an objective, independent source ofaccurate and useful information obtained through fair information practices.to develop a highcaliber staff, a statistical agency must recruit andretain qualified statisticians, analysts in fields relevant to its mission, andother staff with skills that are needed for its efficient and effective operation. an agencyõs personnel policies should encourage staff to maintainand extend their technical capabilities through appropriate professional anddevelopmental activities, such as attendance at professional meetings, participation in relevant training programs, and rotation of assignments. anagency should also seek opportunities to reinforce the commitment of itsstaff to ethical standards of practice.coordination and cooperation with other statistical agenciesa statistical agency must seek opportunities to cooperate with otherstatistical agencies to enhance the value of its own information and that ofprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyother agencies in the federal statistical system. although agencies differ intheir subjectmatter focus, there is overlap in their missions and a commoninterest in serving the public need for credible, highquality statistics gathered as efficiently as possible.when possible and appropriate, federal statistical agencies should cooperate not only with each other, but also with state and local statisticalagencies in the provision of data for subnational areas. federal statisticalagencies should also cooperate with foreign and international statisticalagencies to exchange information on both data and methods and to develop common classifications and procedures to promote internationalcomparability of information.such cooperative activities as integrating data compiled by differentstatistical agencies invariably require much effort to overcome differencesin agency missions and operations. but the rewards are data more relevantto policy concerns and a stronger statistical system as a whole. for thesereasons, statistical agencies must act as partners to one another, not only inthe development of data, but also for the entire panoply of statistical activities, including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analyticaltools, professional practice, dissemination modes, means to protect the confidentiality of responses, and ways to advance the effective use of statisticalinformation.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.13part iicommentarythis part of the report comments on most of the topics in the principles and practices; the comments are offered to explain, illustrate, or further define the statement of principle in part i.definition of a federal statistical agencya federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal governmentwhose principal function is the compilation and analysis of dataand the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.a statistical agency may be labeled a bureau, center, division, or officeor similar title, so long as it is recognized as a distinct entity. statisticalagencies have been established for several reasons: (1) to develop new information for an area of public concern (e.g., the bureau of labor statistics, the national center for health statistics); (2) to conduct large statistical collection and dissemination operations (e.g., the bureau of the census);(3) to compile and analyze statistics from sets of administrative records forpolicy purposes and public use (e.g., units in the internal revenue serviceand the social security administration); and (4) to develop broad and consistent estimates from a variety of statistical and administrative sources inaccordance with a prespecified conceptual framework (e.g., the bureau ofeconomic analysis in the department of commerce and the economicprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyresearch service in the department of agriculture). once established,many statistical agencies engage in all these functions to varying degrees.this definition of a federal statistical agency does not include manystatistical activities of the federal government because they are not performed by distinct units, or because they do not result in the disseminationof statistics to othersñfor example, statistics compiled by the postal serviceto set rates or by the department of defense to test weapons (see, e.g.,national research council, 1998b, on statistics and testing for defenseacquisition). nor does it include agencies whose primary functions are theconduct or support of problemoriented research, although much of theresearch may be based on information gathered by statistical means, forexample, by the department of energyõs national laboratories and by thenational institutes of health.finally, this definition of a statistical agency does not usually includeagencies whose primary function is policy analysis and planning (e.g., theoffice of tax analysis in the department of the treasury, the office of theassistant secretary for planning and evaluation in the department ofhealth and human services). such agencies may collect and analyze statistical information, and statistical agencies, in turn, may perform somepolicyrelated analysis functions for their department. however, to maintain credibility as an objective source of accurate, useful information, statistical agencies must be separate from units that are involved in developingpolicy and assessing policy alternatives.the work of federal statistical agencies is coordinated through the interagency council on statistical policy (icsp), created by the 1995 reauthorization of the paperwork reduction act. the icsp currently includesrepresentation from 10 principal statistical agencies and from the statisticalunits in the environmental protection agency, the internal revenue service, the national science foundation, and the social security administration (see box ii1).throughout the federal government, the office of management andbudget recognizes more than 70 units and agencies that are not statisticalagencies but that have annual budgets of $500,000 or more for statisticalactivities (u.s. office of management and budget, 2000). many of theconsiderations in the principles and practices presented here may be pertinent to these agencies. similarly, the principles and practices may be relevant to statistical units in state and local government agencies, and international audiences may find them useful as well.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary15establishment of a federal statistical agencyone of the most important reasons for establishing a statistical agencyis to provide information that will allow for an informed citizenry. a democracy depends on an informed electorate. a citizen has a right to information that is relevant, accurate, and timely. timely information of highquality is also critical to policy analysts and decision makers in both thepublic and private sectors. (for more information on the purposes of official statistics, see the fundamental principles of official statistics of theunited nations statistical commission in appendix a.) federal statisticalagencies serve the key functions of providing a broad array of informationto the public and policy makers and of ensuring the necessary quality andcredibility of the data.box ii1federal agencies represented on the interagencycouncil on statistical policy as of 2000office of management and budget (omb), chairbureau of the census, department of commercebureau of economic analysis (bea), department of commercebureau of justice statistics (bjs), department of justicebureau of labor statistics (bls), department of laborbureau of transportation statistics (bts), department oftransportationeconomic research service (ers), department of agricultureenergy information administration (eia), department of energynational agricultural statistics service (nass), department ofagriculturenational center for education statistics (nces), department ofeducationnational center for health statistics (nchs), department ofhealth and human servicesoffice of environmental information, environmental protectionagency (epa)office of research, evaluation, and statistics, social securityadministration (ssa)science resources studies division, national sciencefoundation (nsf)statistics of income division (soi), internal revenue serviceprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyprivatesector organizations also provide useful statistical information,including data they compile and data collected by government agenciesand others to which they add value. however, because the benefits ofstatistical information are shared widely throughout society and because itis difficult to collect payments for these benefits, private markets are notlikely to provide all of the data that are needed for public and private decision making or to make data as widely available as needed for importantpublic purposes. government statistical agencies are established to ensurethat a broad range of information is publicly available. (see national research council, 1999b, for a discussion of the governmental role in providing public goods, or nearpublic goods, such as research and data.)the united states collected and published statistics long before anydistinct federal statistical agency was formed (see duncan and shelton,1978; norwood, 1995). the u.s. constitution mandated the conduct ofa decennial census of population beginning in 1790, and the census enumeration was originally conducted by u.s. marshals as just one of theirmany duties. legislation providing for the compilation of statistics onagriculture, education, and income was enacted by congress in the 1860s.the bureau of labor (forerunner of the bureau of labor statistics) wasestablished by law in 1884 as a separate agency with a general mandate torespond to widespread public demand for information on the conditions ofindustrial workers. the bureau of the census was established as a permanent agency in 1902 to conduct the decennial census and related statisticalactivities.many federal statistical agencies that can trace their roots back to the19th or early 20th century, such as the national center for educationstatistics and the national center for health statistics, were organized intheir current form following world war ii. several new agencies were alsoestablished, such as the energy information administration and the bureau of justice statistics. in every case, the agency itself, in consultationwith users of its information, has major responsibility for determining itsspecific statistical programs and for setting priorities. initially, many ofthese agencies also had responsibilities for certain policy analysis functionsfor their department heads. more recently, policy analysis has generallybeen located in separate units that are not themselves considered to bestatistical agencies.a statistical agency has at least two roles: (1) provider of the statisticalinformation and analysis needed for policy and program administration byits own department and (2) source of national statistics for the public in itsprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary17area of concern. it is sometimes difficult to keep these two roles distinct onpolicyrelevant statistics. an effective statistical agency, nevertheless, willfrequently play a creative, not just reactive, role in the development of dataneeded for policy analysis. sometimes federal statistical agencies play additional roles, such as monitor and consultant on statistical matters to otherunits within the same department (see, e.g., national research council,1985a) and collector of data on a reimbursable basis for other agencies.there is no set rule or guideline for when it is appropriate to establish aseparate federal statistical agency, carry on statistical activities within theoperating units of departments and independent agencies, or contract forstatistical services from existing federal statistical agencies or other organizations. establishment of a federal statistical agency may be consideredwhen one or more of the following conditions prevail:¥there is a need for information extending beyond onetime usesand the scope of individual operating units, possibly involving other departments and agencies. such needs may require coordinating data fromvarious sources, initiating new data collection programs to fill gaps, or developing regularly updated time series of estimates.¥ there is a need, in fact or as a matter of credibility, to ensure thatmajor data series are independent of policy makersõ control.¥there is a need to establish confidentiality of data by law or regulation covering a distinct organizational unit. when a separate statisticalunit is established, the data it collects that could identify individual reporting units can be more easily protected by law or regulation from disclosure.statistical agencies disseminate statistical data for statistical purposes; theydo not disseminate identifiable data for administrative, regulatory, or enforcement uses. the functional separation of statistical data, recommendedby the privacy protection study commission (1977), is easier to maintainwhen the data are compiled in a unit separate from operating units. at thesame time, functional separation makes the promise of confidentiality morecredible.¥there is a need to emphasize the principles and practices of an effective statistical agency, for example, professional practice, openness aboutthe data provided, and wide dissemination of data.¥there is a need to encourage research and development of a broadrange of statistics in a particular area of public interest or of governmentactivity or responsibility.¥there is a need to consolidate compilation, analysis, and disseminaprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18principles and practices for a federal statistical agencytion of statistics in one unit to encourage highquality performance, eliminate duplication, and streamline operations.principles for a federal statistical agencya federal statistical agency must be in a position to provide information relevant to issues of public policy.a statistical agency supplies information not only for the use of immediate managers and policy makers in the executive branch and for legislative designers and overseers in congress, but also to all those who requirestatistical information on public issues, whether the information is neededfor purposes of production, trade, consumption, or participation in civicaffairs. just as a free enterprise economic system depends on the availabilityof economic information to all participants, a democratic political systemdepends on wide access to information on education, health, transportation, the economy, the environment, criminal justice, and other socialconcerns.federal statistical agencies are responsible for providing statistics onconditions in a variety of areas. the resulting information is used bothinside and outside the government not only to delineate problems andsometimes to suggest courses of action, but also to evaluate the results ofgovernment activity or lack of activity. the statistics provide much of thebasis on which the government itself is judged. this role places a heavyresponsibility on federal statistical agencies for impartiality and objectivity.in order to provide information that is relevant for public policy, statistical agencies need to reach out to users of the data. federal statisticalagencies usually are in touch with the primary users in their own departments. considerable energy and initiative are required to open avenues ofcommunication more broadly to other current and potential users, including analysts and policy makers in other federal departments, state and localgovernment agencies, academic researchers, privatesector organizations,organized constituent groups, the media, and congress. advisory committees representing major users are frequently employed and are recommended as a means to obtain usersõ views (see, e.g., national researchcouncil, 1993a).one frequently recommended method for alerting statistical agenciesto emerging statistical information needs is for the agencyõs own staff toengage in analysis of its data (norwood, 1975; martin, 1981; triplett,principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary191991). for example, relevant analysis may use the agencyõs data to examinecorrelates of key social or economic phenomena or to study the statisticalerror properties of the data. such inhouse analysis can lead to improvements in the statistics, to identification of new needs, to a reordering ofpriorities, and to closer cooperation and mutual understanding with policyanalysis units. in its work for a policy analysis unit, a statistical agencydescribes conditions and possibly measures progress toward some previously identified goal, but it refrains from making policy recommendations.the distinction between statistical analysis and policy analysis is not alwaysclear, and a statistical agency will need to consider carefully the extent ofpolicyrelated activities that are appropriate for it to undertake.a federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutualrespect and trust with those who use its data and information.users of a statistical agencyõs data must be able to trust that the datawere collected and analyzed in an objective, impartial manner and that theyare as reliable as the agency can make them. an agency should make everyeffort to provide accurate and credible statistics that will permit policy debates to be concerned about policy, not about the credibility of the data.credibility is enhanced when an agency fully informs users of the strengthsand weaknesses of the data, makes data available widely, and consults withusers about priorities for data collection and analysis.a federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutualrespect and trust with respondents who provide data and all datasubjects whose information it obtains.the statistics program of the federal government relies in large part oninformation supplied by individuals and by organizations outside the federal government, such as state and local governments, businesses, and otherorganizations. some of this information is required by law or regulation(such as employersõ wage reports), some of it is related to administration ofgovernment programs (such as information provided by benefit recipients),but much of it is obtained through the voluntary cooperation of respondents in statistical surveys. even when response is mandatory, the cooperation of respondents reduces costs and is likely to promote accuracy (seenational research council, 1995). important elements in encouragingsuch cooperation are that respondents believe that the data requested areprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyimportant, that they are being collected in an impartial, competent manner, and that the confidentiality of their responses will be protected.in brief, trust in a statistical agency must be maintained. the agencymust not be perceived as being swayed by political considerations. it mustbe perceived as working in the national interest, not the interest of a particular administration, and as taking a long view, balancing new data needsagainst the need for consistency with past data (ryten, 1990). respondenttrust also depends on providing respondents with realistic promises of confidentiality that the agency can reasonably expect to honor and then scrupulously honoring those promises.practices for a federal statistical agencya clearly defined and wellaccepted missiona clear understanding of the mission of an agency, the scope of itsstatistical programs, and its authority and responsibilities is basic to planning and evaluating its programs and to maintaining credibility and independence from political control (national research council, 1986). someagency missions are clearly spelled out in legislation; other agencies haveonly very general legislative authority. on occasion, very specific requirements may be set by legislation or regulation.agencies should communicate their mission clearly to others. the useof the internet is one means to publicize an agencyõs mission to a broadaudience and to provide related information, including enabling legislation, the scope of the agencyõs statistical program, confidentiality provisions, and operating procedures.an agencyõs mission should focus on the compilation, evaluation,analysis, and dissemination of statistical information. in addition, considerable and formal attention must be paid to setting statistical priorities(national research council, 1976). advice from outside groups should besought on the agencyõs statistical program, on setting statistical priorities,on the statistical methods used, and on data products. such advice may besought in a variety of formal and informal ways, and it should be obtainedfrom data users and providers as well as professional or technical experts inthe subjectmatter area and in statistical methods and procedures. a strongresearch program in the agencyõs subjectmatter field can assist in settingpriorities and identifying ways to improve an agencyõs statistical programs(triplett, 1991).principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary21a strong position of independencea statistical agency must be able to provide credible information thatmay be used to evaluate the program and policies of its own department orthe government as a whole. more broadly, a statistical agency must be atrustworthy source of objective, reliable information for decision makers,analysts, and others inside and outside the government who want to usestatistics to understand current conditions, draw comparisons with the past,and help guide plans for the future. for these purposes, a strong position ofindependence for a statistical agency is essential. (see the fundamentalprinciples of official statistics of the united nations statistical commission in appendix a.)statistical agency independence must be exercised in a broader framework. legislative authority usually gives ultimate responsibility to the department rather than the statistical agency head. in addition, an agency issubject to the normal budgetary processes and to various coordinating andreview functions of the office of management and budget (omb), as wellas the legislative mandates, oversight, and informal guidance of congress.within this broader framework, a statistical agency must work to maintain its credibility as an impartial purveyor of information. in the long run,the effectiveness of an agency depends on its maintaining a reputation forimpartiality; thus, an agency must be continually alert to possible infringements on its credibility and be prepared to argue strenuously against suchinfringements.independence of an agency head is usually encouraged when the headis appointed by the president with approval by the senate. examples ofagencies with such an arrangement are the bureau of the census, the bureau of justice statistics, the bureau of labor statistics, the bureau of transportation statistics, the energy information administration, and the national center for education statistics. a further safeguard is provided whensuch a head is appointed for a fixed term, as is currently the case with thebureau of labor statistics, the bureau of transportation statistics, and thenational center for education statistics. it is desirable that the term notcoincide with the presidential term, so that incumbents need not end theirleadership with changes of administration and professional considerationsmay more easily predominate over political aims in the appointment process.it is also desirable that a statistical agency head have direct access to thesecretary of the department or the head of the independent agency in whichprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyit is located. such access allows the head to inform new secretaries aboutthe appropriate role of a statistical agency and present the case for newstatistical initiatives to the secretary directly. among the agency heads withpresidential appointments, such direct access currently is provided by legislation only for the bureau of labor statistics and the bureau of transportation statistics.these organizational aspectsñappointment by the president with approval by the senate, a fixed term not coincident with that of the administration, and direct access to the secretary of the agencyõs departmentñfacilitate a strong position of independence for a statistical agency.however, they are neither necessary nor sufficient.control over personnel actions, especially the selection and appointment of qualified professional staff, including senior executive career staff,is another aspect of independence. agency staff reporting directly to theagency head should have formal education and deep experience in the substantive, methodological, operational, or management issues facing theagency as appropriate for their positions. in addition, professional qualifications are of the utmost importance for statistical agency heads, whetherthe profession is that of statistician or the subjectmatter field of the statistical agency (national research council, 1997b). the american statisticalassociation has, when requested, assisted in the development of a list ofsuitable candidates for heads of statistical agencies.authority to decide the scope and content of the data collected orcompiled is an important element of independence. most statistical agencies have broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints, departmentalinterests, omb review, and congressional mandates. in addition, the courtssometimes become involved in interpreting laws and regulations that affectstatistical agencies, as in a number of issues concerning confidentiality andfreedom of information, as well as in the issue of adjusting the census population counts.congress frequently specifies particular data that it wishes to be collected (e.g., by the national agricultural statistics service in the department of agriculture, the national center for health statistics in the department of health and human services) and, in the case of the decennialcensus, requires an opportunity to review the proposed questions beforethe forms are printed. the omb office of information and regulatoryaffairs, under the paperwork reduction act (and under the preceding federal reports act), has the responsibility for designating a single data collection instrument for information wanted by two or more agencies. it alsoprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary23has the responsibility under the same act for reviewing all questionnairesand other instruments for the collection of data from 10 or more respondents.the budgetary constraints on statistical agencies and omb review ofdata collections are ongoing; the other pressures depend, in part at least, onthe relations between a statistical agency and those who have supervisory oroversight functions. agencies need to develop skills in communicating tooversight groups the need for statistical series and credibility in assessingthe costs of statistical work. in turn, although it is standard practice for thesecretary of a department or the head of an independent agency to haveultimate responsibility for all matters within the department or agency, forcredibility, the head of a statistical agency should be allowed full authorityin professional and technical matters.other aspects of independence that underscore a statistical agencyõscredibility are also important. these aspects include authority to releasestatistical information without prior clearance and authority for the statistical agency head and qualified staff to speak about the agencyõs statisticsbefore congress, with congressional staff, and before public bodies.it is important, when a statistical agency releases information publicly,that a clear distinction be made between the statistical information and anypolicy interpretations of such information by the secretary of the department, the president, or others. not even the appearance of manipulationfor political purposes should be allowed. this is one reason why statisticalagencies adhere to predetermined schedules for the public release of important economic indicators and take steps to ensure that no person outsidethe agency can gain access to such indicators before the official release time(see u.s. office of management and budget, 1985).continual development of more useful datafederal statistical agencies cannot be static. to provide information ofcontinued relevance for public and policy use, they must continually anticipate data needs for future policy considerations and look for ways todevelop data systems that can serve broad purposes. to improve the qualityand timeliness of their information, they must keep abreast of methodological and technical advances and be prepared to implement new procedures in a timely manner. they must also continually seek ways to maketheir operations more efficient. preparing for the future requires that agencies reevaluate existing data series, plan new data series as required, and beprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyinnovative and open in their consideration of ways to improve their programs.because of the decentralized nature of the federal statistical system,innovation often requires crossagency collaboration. for example, an effective way to increase the usefulness of survey data is to integrate themwith data from other surveys or with data from administrative records, suchas social program records. such integration typically requires that severalagencies work together. for example, in the area of health care statistics, astudy by a panel of the committee on national statistics concluded thatno single survey was likely ever to meet all the criteria, address all the technical problems, or meet all usersõ needs for data. in order to provide adequate information on the availability, financing, and quality of health care,a coordinated and integrated system of data collection activities involvingseveral organizational entities was required (national research council andinstitute of medicine, 1992).innovation also implies a willingness to implement different kinds ofdata collection efforts to answer different needs. for example, the need tounderstand temporal changes in important social or economic events maycall for the development of longitudinal surveys that track people, institutions, or firms over time. statistical agencies have developed useful longitudinal surveys. however, because agencies are oriented toward the mission of their particular department, such surveys (and crosssectional dataactivities as well) are typically focused on population groups (or other entities) that the department serves. so information is available on the healthstatus of infants and young children, on the educational performance ofchildren in schools, and on participation in the labor force by working ageadults. but the health status of young children affects educational performance, and educational performance affects labor force outcomes. longitudinal surveys that track population groups across the important transitions from early childhood to school and from school to the labor force areimportant to consider (national research council, 1998a).developing longitudinal data often requires much coordination withpolicy research agencies and with academic researchers and, especially inthe case of children, requires coordination across many departments of government. longitudinal data are often more expensive to collect than crosssectional data and generally require more sophisticated methods for collection and analysis. in addition, more time may be needed to produce usefuldata products from longitudinal surveys. yet data from longitudinal surveys are potentially very usefulñsometimes they are the only means toprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary25answer important policy questions (see, e.g., national research council,1997a, on data needs to inform retirement income policy).another area in which it is important for statistical agencies to be innovative concerns the methods used for data collection, analysis, and dissemination. agencies need to investigate new or modified methods thathave the potential to improve the accuracy and timeliness of their data andthe efficiency of their operations. careful evaluation of new methods isrequired to assess their benefits and costs in comparison to current methodsand to determine effective implementation strategies.for example, experience with the use of computerassisted interviewing techniques, which many agencies have adopted for data collection, hasidentified benefits. it has also identified challenges for the timely provisionof data and documentation that require continued research to develop solutions that maximize the gains from these techniques. similarly, agenciesneed to carefully evaluate their growing use of the internet, which has become a standard vehicle for data dissemination and is increasingly beingused for data collection. internet dissemination facilitates the timely availability of data to a broad audience and provides a valuable tool for users tolearn of related data sets from other agencies. however, it poses challengesin several areas, such as how best to provide information on data qualityand appropriate use of the data to an audience that spans a wide range ofanalytical skills and understanding.openness about the data providedan important means to instill credibility and trust among data usersand data providers is for an agency to operate in an open manner withregard to the limitations of its data. openness requires that an agencyprovide a full description of its data with acknowledgment of any uncertainty and a description of the methods used and assumptions made. agencies should provide to users reliable indications of the kinds and amountsof statistical error to which the data are subject (presidentõs commission onfederal statistics, 1971). some statistical agencies have developed detailedquality profiles for some of their major series. these have proved helpful toexperienced users and agency personnel responsible for the design and operation of major surveys and data series.openness about data limitations requires much more than estimates ofsampling error. in addition to a discussion of aspects that statisticians recognize as nonsampling errors, such as coverage errors, nonresponse, meaprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26principles and practices for a federal statistical agencysurement errors, and processing errors, a description of the concepts usedand how they relate to the major uses of the data is desirable. descriptionsof the shortcomings of and problems with the data should be provided insufficient detail to permit the user to take them into account in the analysisand interpretation of the data.openness also means that a statistical agency should describe how decisions on methods and procedures were made for a data collection program. it is important to be open about research conducted on methodsand data and other factors that were weighed in a decision.openness means as well that when mistakes are discovered after a statistic is released, the agency has an obligation to issue a correction publiclyand in a timely manner. it should not only use the same disseminationvehicles to announce corrections that it used to release the original statistic,but also use additional vehicles, as appropriate, to alert the widest possibleaudience of current and potential users.in summary, agencies should make an effort to provide information onthe quality, limitations, and appropriate use of their data that is as frankand complete as possible. such information, which is sometimes termedòmetadata,ó should be made available in ways that are easy for users toaccess and understand, recognizing that users differ in their level of understanding of statistical data (see national research council, 1993a, 1997b).agencies need to work to educate users that all data contain some uncertainty and error, which does not mean the data are wrong but that theymust be used with care.wide dissemination of dataa statistical agency must have vigorous and wellplanned dissemination programs to get information into the hands of users who need it on atimely basis. planning should be undertaken from the viewpoint that thepublic has contributed the data elements, has paid for the data collectionand processing, and should in return have access to the information in waysthat make it as useful as possible to the largest number of users.a good dissemination program provides data to users in forms that aresuited to their needs. data release may take the form of regularly updatedtime series, crosstabulations of aggregate characteristics of respondents,and analytical reports that are made available in printed publications, oncomputerreadable media (e.g., cdrom), and on the internet. (see apprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary27pendix b for a number of federal statistical agency web sites, many of whichare accessible from a single source:  www.fedstats.gov).yet another form of dissemination involves access to microdata files,which make it possible to conduct indepth research in ways that are notpossible with aggregate data. publicuse microdata files may be developedfor general release. such files contain data for individual respondents thathave been processed to protect confidentiality by such means as deleting oraggregating any information that might permit individual identification.or an agency may provide a facility on the internet to allow users to aggregate survey data to suit their purposes, with safeguards so that the datacannot be retabulated in ways that could identify individual respondents.or access to data may be restricted in some cases to secure sites to whichresearchers must come to conduct their analysis and follow stringent procedures for protecting confidentiality. agencies should consider all forms ofdissemination in order to gain the most use of their data consistent withprotecting the confidentiality of responses.a good dissemination program also uses a variety of channels to inform the broadest possible audience of potential users about available dataproducts and how to obtain them. such channels may include providingdirect access to data on the internet, depositing data products in libraries,establishing a network of data centers (such as the census bureauõs statedata centers), and maintaining lists of individuals and organizations to notify about new data. agencies should also arrange for archiving of datawith the national archives and records administration and other dataarchives, as appropriate, so that data are available for historical research infuture years.an effective dissemination program provides not only the data, butalso information about the strengths and weaknesses of the data in waysthat can be comprehended by diverse audiences. information about thelimitations of the data should be included in every form of data release,whether in a printed report, on a computerreadable data file, or on theinternet.on occasion, the objective of presenting the most accurate data possible may require more time than is consistent with the needs of users forthe information. the tension between frequency and promptness of release on one hand and accuracy on the other should be explicitly considered. when concerns for timeliness prompt the release of preliminary estimates (as in some economic indicators), consideration should be given tothe frequency of revisions and the mode of presentation of revised figuresprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyfrom the point of view of the users as well as the issuers of the data. agencies that release preliminary estimates must educate the public about differences among preliminary, revised, and final estimates.cooperation with data usersusers of federal statistical data span a broad spectrum of interests andneeds. they include policy makers, planners, administrators, and researchers in federal agencies, state and local governments, the business sector, andacademia. they also include activists, citizens, students, and media representatives. an effective statistical agency endeavors to learn about its datausers and to obtain input from them on the agencyõs statistical programs.the needs of users can be explored by forming advisory committees,holding focus groups, analyzing requests and internet activity, or by undertaking formal surveys of users. the task requires continual alertness to thechanging composition and needs of users and the existence of potentialusers. an agency should cooperate with professional associations, institutes, universities, and scholars in the relevant fields to determine the needsof the research community and obtain their insight on potential uses. anagency should also work with relevant associations and other organizationsto determine the needs of business and industry for its data.within the limitations of its confidentiality procedures as noted above,an agency should seek to provide maximum access to its data, includingmaking the data available to external researchers for secondary analysis (national research council, 1985b). having data accessible for a wide rangeof analyses increases the return on the investment in data collection andprovides support for an agencyõs program. once statistical data are madepublic, they may be used in numerous ways not originally envisaged. anagency should attempt to monitor the major uses of its data as part of itsefforts to keep abreast of user needs.researchers and other users of data frequently request data from statistical agencies for specific purposes. the agency should have procedures inplace for referring users to professionals within the agency who can comprehend the userõs purposes and needs and who have a thorough knowledgeof the agencyõs data. statistical agencies should view these services as a partof their dissemination activities.ensuring equal access requires avoiding release of data to selected individuals, organizations, or news media in advance of other users. agenciesthat prepare special tabulations of their data on request for external groupsprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary29must be alert to the proposed uses. if the data are to be used in court cases,administrative proceedings, or collective bargaining negotiations, it is wiseto have a known policy ensuring that all sides receive the special tabulations, regardless of which side requested them or paid the cost of the tabulation.fair treatment of data providersprotecting confidentialitydata providers must believe that the data they give to an agency cannot be used to harm them. for statistical data collection programs, protecting the confidentiality of individual responses is considered essential toencourage high response rates and accuracy of response. some agencieshave legislative mandates supporting promises of confidentiality; others relyon strong statements of policy, legal precedents in court cases, or custom.the latter agencies risk having their policies overturned by judicial interpretations of legislation or executive decisions that may require the agencyto disclose identifiable data collected under a pledge of confidentiality.agencies that lack strong legal protection for confidentiality should be especially careful not to give data providers stronger promises of confidentiality than they can reasonably expect to honor.to give additional weight and stature to policies that statistical agencies have pursued for decades, omb issued a federal statistical confidentiality order on june 27, 1997. this order assures respondents who providestatistical information to specified agencies that their responses will be heldin confidence and will not be used against them in any government action,òunless otherwise compelled by lawó (u.s. office of management and budget, 1997).the heads of statistical agencies must be prepared to deal with requestsfrom other units in their own department, from other agencies and organizations, and from the courts wanting to use individually identifiable data.when such uses would be contrary to confidentiality pledges to data providers, agency heads should do everything in their power under the law todeny access to the data. in all such circumstances, agencies must be prepared to stand firm and to justify the importance of a strong commitmentto confidentiality for maintaining credibility and trust with the public, inparticular with data providers, and therefore in maintaining the future quality and credibility of their statistics.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30principles and practices for a federal statistical agencystatistical agencies devote much time and effort to avoid inadvertentdisclosure of confidential information in disseminating data. recently, thewidespread dissemination of statistical data via the internet has heightenedattention by agencies to effective safeguards for confidential information.risks are increased when data for small groups are tabulated, when thesame data are tabulated in a variety of ways, or when publicuse microdatafiles (samples of records for unidentified individuals or units) are releasedwith highly detailed geographic or other characteristics. because of thedisclosure risks associated with detailed tabulations and publicusemicrodata files, there is always a tension between the desire to safeguardconfidentiality and the desire to provide broader public access to data. thisdilemma is an important one to federal statistical agencies, and it has stimulated ongoing efforts to develop new statistical and administrative procedures to safeguard confidentiality while permitting more extensive access.an effective federal statistical agency will exercise judgment in determiningwhich of these procedures are best suited to its requirements to serve datausers while protecting confidentiality. (for discussion of these issues andalternative procedures, see the report of the panel on confidentiality anddata access [national research council, 1993b] and the report of theworkshop on improving access to and confidentiality of research data[national research council, 2000].)respecting privacyto promote trust and encourage accurate response, it is important thatstatistical agencies respect the privacy of respondents to the extent possible.when data providers are asked to participate in a survey, they should betold whether the survey is mandatory or voluntary, how the data will beused, and who will have access to the data. in the case of voluntary surveys,information on these matters is necessary in order for data providers to givetheir informed consent to participate.respondents invest time and effort in replying to surveys. the amountof effort varies considerably from survey to survey, depending on such factors as the complexity of the information that is requested. statistical agencies should attempt to minimize such effort, to the extent possible, by using concepts and definitions that fit respondentsõ common understanding;by simplifying questionnaires; by allowing alternative modes of response(e.g., via the internet) when appropriate; and by using administrativerecords or other data sources, if they are sufficiently complete and accurateprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary31to provide some or all of the needed information. in surveys of businessesor other institutions, agencies should seek innovative ways to obtain information from the institutionõs records and minimize the need for respondents to reprocess and reclassify information. it is also the responsibility ofagencies to use qualified, welltrained interviewers. as provided in ombdirectives, respondents should be informed of the likely duration of a survey interview and, if the survey involves more than one interview, howmany times they will be contacted over the life of the survey. this information is particularly important when respondents are asked to cooperate inextensive interviews, search for records, or participate in longitudinal surveys.ways in which participation in surveys can be made easier for respondents and result in more accurate data can be explored by such means asfocus group discussions or surveys. many agencies apply the principles ofcognitive psychology to questionnaire design, not only to make the resulting data more accurate, but also to make the time and effort of respondentsmore efficient (national research council, 1984). some agencies thankrespondents for their cooperation by providing them with brief summariesof the information after the survey is compiled.a reason that respondents reply to statistical surveys is because theyhave been persuaded that their answers will be useful to the government orto society generally. statistical agencies should respect this contribution bycompiling the data and making them accessible to users in convenientforms. a statistical agency has an obligation to publish statistical information from the data it has collected unless it finds the results invalid.commitment to quality and professional standards of practicethe best guarantee of highquality results is a strong professional staffthat includes experts in the subjectmatter fields covered by the agencyõsprogram, experts in statistical methods and techniques, and experts in datacollection, processing, and other operations. a major function of anagencyõs managers is to strike a balance among these groups and promoteworking relationships that make the agencyõs program as productive as possible, with each group of experts contributing to the work of the others.an effective statistical agency keeps up to date on developments intheory and practice that might be relevant to its program. an effectiveagency is also alert to changes in the economy or in society that may call forchanges in the concepts or methods used in particular data sets. often theprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyneed for change conflicts with the need for comparability with past dataseries, and this issue can easily dominate consideration of proposals forchange. agencies have the responsibility to manage this conflict by initiating more relevant data series while producing statistical bridges betweenold and new series.an active research programsubstantive research and analysisthere are strong arguments for a statistical agency to have staff whoseresponsibility is to conduct objective substantive analyses of the data thatthe agency compiles, such as analyses that assess trends over time or compare population groups:¥agency analysts are in a position to understand the need for andpurposes of the data and know how the statistics will be used. such information must be available to the agency and understood thoroughly if thesurvey design is to produce the data required.¥those involved in analysis can best articulate the concepts thatshould form the basic framework of a statistical series. agency analysts arewell situated to understand and transmit the views of external users andresearchers; at the same time, close working relationships between analystsand data producers are needed for the translation of the conceptual framework into the design and operation of the survey.¥agency analysts have access to the microdata and so are in a betterposition than analysts outside the agency to understand and describe thelimitations of the data for analysis purposes.¥substantive research by analysts on an agencyõs staff will have credibility because of the agencyõs commitment to openness about the dataprovided and maintaining independence from political control.¥substantive research by analysts on an agencyõs staff can assist informulating the agencyõs data program, suggesting changes in priorities,concepts, and needs for new data or discontinuance of outmoded or littleused series.as with descriptive analyses provided by the agency, substantive analyses must be designed to be relevant to policy but not take positions onpolicy options or be designed with any particular policy agenda in mind.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary33these issues are discussed in norwood (1975), martin (1981), and triplett(1991).methodological researchfor statistical agencies to be innovative in methods for data collection,analysis, and dissemination, methodological research must be ongoing.such research may be directed toward improving survey design; measuringand, when possible, reducing error from such sources as nonresponse andreporting errors; making data collection, processing, and disseminationoperations more efficient; reducing the time and effort asked of respondents; or developing new and improved summary measures and estimationtechniques.much of what is current practice in statistical agencies was developedthrough research they conducted or obtained from other agencies. federalstatistical agencies, frequently in partnership with academic researchers, pioneered the applications of statistical probability sampling, the national economic accounts, inputoutput models, and other analytic methods. theu.s. census bureau pioneered the use of computers for processing thecensus, and research on data collection, processing, and dissemination operations continues to lead to creative uses of automated procedures andequipment in these areas. several federal statistical agencies sponsor research using principles of cognitive psychology to improve the design ofquestionnaires, the clarity of data presentation, and the ease of use of electronic data collection and dissemination tools such as the internet. suchresearch has been furthered by interactions between statistical agencies andthe academic community. the history of the statistical agencies has shownrepeatedly that methodological research can lead to large productivity gainsin statistical activities at relatively low cost.research on policy usesmuch more needs to be known on how statistics are actually used inthe policymaking process, both inside and outside the government. research on how the information produced by a statistical agency is used inpractice should contribute to future improvements in the design, concepts,and format of data products. for example, publicuse files of statisticalmicrodata were developed in response to the growing analytic needs ofgovernment and academic researchers.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34principles and practices for a federal statistical agencygaining an understanding of the variety of uses and users of an agencyõsdata is only a first step. more indepth research on the policy uses of anagencyõs information might, for example, explore the use of data inmicrosimulation or other economic models, or go further to examine howthe information from such models and other sources is used in decisionmaking (see national research council, 1991a, 1991b). the focus ofsuch research should be on ways to improve the relevance and accuracy ofan agencyõs data for use in policy analysis and decision making, independent of any particular policy agenda.professional advancement of staffan effective federal statistical agency has personnel policies that encourage the development and retention of a strong professional staff whoare committed to the highest standards of quality work. there are severalkey elements of such a policy:¥the required levels of technical and professional qualifications forpositions in the agency are identified, and the agency adheres to these requirements in recruitment and professional development of staff. positionrequirements take account of the different kinds of technical and otherskills, such as supervisory skills, that are necessary for an agency to have afull range of qualified staff, including not only statisticians, but also expertsin relevant subjectmatter areas, data collection, processing, and dissemination processes, and management of complex, technical operations.¥continuing technical education and training of staff, appropriate tothe needs of their positions, are provided by sponsoring inhouse trainingprograms and providing opportunities for external education and training.¥professional activities, such as publication in refereed journals andpresentations at conferences, are encouraged and recognized. participationin relevant statistical and other scientific associations is encouraged to promote interactions with academic researchers and other data users. suchparticipation is also a mechanism for openness about the data provided.¥interaction with other professionals is increased through technicaladvisory committees, supervision of contract research and research consultants, fellowship programs of visiting researchers, exchange of staff with relevant statistical, policy, or research organizations, and opportunities fornew assignments within the agency.¥accomplishment is rewarded by appropriate recognition and by afprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary35fording opportunity for further professional development. the prestigeand credibility of a statistical agency is enhanced by the professional visibility of its staff, which may include establishing highlevel nonmanagementpositions for highly qualified technical experts.an effective statistical agency also has policies and practices to instillthe highest possible commitment to professional ethics among its staff.when an agency comes under pressure to act against its principlesñforexample, if it is asked to disclose confidential information for an enforcement purpose or to support an inaccurate interpretation of its datañitmust be able to rely on its staff to resist such actions as contrary to theethical principles of their profession. an effective agency will refer its staffto such statements of professional practice as the guidelines published bythe american statistical association and the international statistical institute on their internet web sites (www.amstat.org/profession; www.cbs.nl/isi/ethics.htm), as well as to the agencyõs own statements about protectionof confidentiality and similar matters. it will endeavor in other ways toensure that its staff are fully cognizant of the ethics that must guide theiractions in order for the agency to maintain its credibility as a source ofobjective, reliable information for use by all.coordination and cooperation with other statistical agenciesthe u.s. federal statistical system consists of many agencies in different departments, each with its own mission. nonetheless, statistical agencies do not and should not conduct their activities in isolation. an effectivestatistical agency will actively explore ways to work with other agencies tomeet current information needs, for example, by seeking ways to integratethe designs of existing data systems to provide new or more useful data thana single system can provide. an effective agency will also be alert for occasions when it can provide technical assistance to other agenciesñincludingnot only other statistical agencies, but also program agencies in its departmentñas well as occasions on which it can receive such assistance in turn.efforts to standardize definitions further contribute to effective coordination of statistical agency endeavors, as does the development of broad macromodels, such as the system of national accounts. initiatives for sharing dataamong statistical agencies (possibly including individual data and addresslists when permitted by law and when sharing does not violate confidentiality promises) can also be helpful for such purposes as achieving greaterprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyefficiency in drawing samples or reducing duplication among statisticalprograms.the responsibility for coordinating statistical work in the federal government is specifically assigned to the office of information and regulatory affairs (oira) in the office of management and budget by the paperwork reduction act (previously, the federal reports act and the budgetand accounting procedures act). some functions are undertaken by oiradesk officers; others, by the omb statistical policy office. under the paperwork reduction act, oira desk officers review proposed data collection instruments. the statistical policy office, generally working with theassistance of interagency committees, reviews concepts of interest to morethan one agency; issues standard classification systems (of industries, metropolitan areas, etc.) and oversees their periodic revision; consults with otherparts of omb on statistical budgets; and, by reviewing the statistical program of the government as a whole, identifies gaps in statistical data, programs that may be duplicative, and areas in which interagency cooperationmight lead to greater efficiency and added utility of data. the statisticalpolicy office also is responsible for coordinating u.s. participation in international statistical activities.the statistical policy office encourages the use of administrative datafor statistical purposes, when feasible, and works to establish common goalsand norms on major statistical issues, such as confidentiality. it sponsorsand heads the interagency federal committee on statistical methodology,which issues guidelines and recommendations on statistical issues commonto a number of agencies (see federal committee on statistical methodology, 1978a2000; see also www.fcsm.gov). it has encouraged the committee on national statistics at the national academies to serve as an independent adviser and reviewer of federal statistical activities. the 1995reauthorization of the paperwork reduction act created the interagencycouncil on statistical policy (icsp), formalizing an arrangement wherebystatistical agency heads participate with omb to coordinate federal statistical activities. (see box ii1 for a list of agencies represented on the icsp.)there are many forms of interagency cooperation and coordination.some efforts are multilateral, some bilateral. many result from commoninterests in specific subject areas, such as economic statistics, statistics onpeople with disabilities, or statistics on children or the elderly. (see u.s.office of management and budget, 2000, for a description of several current interagency collaborative efforts.)a common type of bilateral arrangement is the agreement of a proprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary37gram agency to provide administrative data to a statistical agency to be usedas a sampling frame, a source of classification information, or a summarycompilation to check (and possibly revise) preliminary sample results. thebureau of labor statistics, for example, benchmarks its monthly establishment employment reports to data supplied by state employment securityagencies. such practices improve statistical estimates, reduce costs, andeliminate duplicate requests for information from the same respondents.in other cases, federal statistical agencies engage in cooperative data collection with state counterparts to let one collection system satisfy the needs ofboth. a number of such joint systems have been developed, notably by thebureau of labor statistics, the national agricultural statistics service, thenational center for education statistics, and the national center forhealth statistics.another example of a joint arrangement is the case in which one statistical agency contracts with another to conduct a survey, compile specialtabulations, or develop models. such arrangements make use of the specialskills of the supplying agency and facilitate use of common concepts andmethods. the bureau of the census conducts many surveys for other agencies, as do the bureau of labor statistics, the national center for healthstatistics, and the national agricultural statistics service. (see u.s. officeof management and budget, 2000, for a discussion of these and otherreimbursable arrangements.)the major federal statistical agencies are also concerned with international comparability of statistics. under the overall guidance of ombõsstatistical policy office, they contribute to the deliberations of the unitednations statistical commission and other international organizations, participate in the development of international standard classifications andsystems, and support educational activities that promote improved statistics in developing countries. several statistical agencies run educationalprograms for government statisticians in developing countries. some statistical agencies have had longterm cooperative relationships with international groups, for example, the bureau of labor statistics with the international labor organization, the national agricultural statistics service withthe food and agriculture organization, and the national center for healthstatistics with the world health organization.to be of most value, the efforts of statistical agencies to cooperate aspartners with one another should involve the full range of their activities,including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analytical tools,professional practice, dissemination modes, and disclosure limitation techprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyniques. such efforts should also extend to the development of data, especially for emerging policy issues (national research council, 1999a). insome cases, it may be not only more efficient, but also productive of needednew data for agencies to fully integrate the designs of existing data systems,such as when one survey provides the sampling frame for a related survey.in other instances, cooperative efforts may identify ways for agencies toimprove their individual data systems so that they are more useful for awide range of purposes. two of the more effective continuing cooperative efforts in this regardhave been the federal interagency forum on agingrelated statistics andthe federal interagency forum on child and family statistics. the formerwas established in the mid1980s by the national institute on aging, incooperation with the national center for health statistics and the censusbureau. the forumõs goals include coordinating the development and useof statistical data bases among federal agencies, identifying information gapsand data inconsistencies, and encouraging crossnational research and datacollection for the aging population. the forum was reorganized in 1998 toinclude six new member agencies, and the reconfigured forum decided atits first meeting in march 1999 to focus on developing an indicators chartbook, which was published the following year (federal interagency forumon agingrelated statistics, 2000).the federal interagency forum on child and family statistics wasformalized in a 1994 executive order to foster coordination and collaboration in the collection and reporting of federal data on children and families.it includes many relevant statistical and program agencies. its annual reports (e.g., federal interagency forum on child and family statistics,2000) describe the condition of americaõs children, including changingpopulation, family characteristics, and the context in which children areliving and indicators of wellbeing in the areas of economic security, health,behavior, social environment, and education.no single agency, whether a statistical or program agency, could haveproduced the forum reports alone. working together in this way, federalstatistical agencies contribute to data more relevant to policy concerns andto a stronger statistical system overall.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.39referencesduncan, joseph w., and william c. shelton1978revolution in united states government statistics, 19261976. office of federalstatistical policy and standards. washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.federal committee on statistical methodology1978areport on statistics for allocation of funds. statistical policy working paper 1.(ntis pb86211521/as) washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1978breport on statistical disclosure and disclosureavoidance techniques. statisticalpolicy working paper 2. (ntis pb86211539/as) washington, d.c.: u.s.department of commerce.1978can error profile: employment as measured by the current population survey.statistical policy working paper 3. (ntis pb86214269/as) washington, d.c.:u.s. department of commerce.1978dglossary of nonsampling error terms: an illustration of a semantic problem instatistics. statistical policy working paper 4. (ntis pb86211547/as)washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.1980areport on exact and statistical matching techniques. statistical policy workingpaper 5. (ntis pb86215829/as) washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.1980breport on statistical uses of administrative records. statistical policy working paper6. (ntis pb86214285/as) washington, d.c.: u.s. department ofcommerce.1982aan interagency review of timeseries revision policies. statistical policy workingpaper 7. (ntis pb86232451/as) washington, d.c.: u.s. office ofmanagement and budget.1982bstatistical interagency agreements. statistical policy working paper 8. (ntispb86230570/as) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40principles and practices for a federal statistical agency1983acontracting for surveys. statistical policy working paper 9. (ntis pb83233148)washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1983bapproaches to developing questionnaires. statistical policy working paper 10.(ntis pb84105055) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management andbudget.1984aa review of industry coding systems. statistical policy working paper 11. (ntispb84135276) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1984bthe role of telephone data collection in federal statistics. statistical policy workingpaper 12. (ntis pb85105971) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of managementand budget.1986federal longitudinal surveys. statistical policy working paper 13. (ntis pb86139730) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1987workshop on statistical uses of microcomputers in federal agencies. statistical policyworking paper 14. (ntis pb87166393) washington, d.c.: u.s. office ofmanagement and budget.1988quality in establishment surveys. statistical policy working paper 15. (ntispb88232921) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1990aa comparative study of reporting units in selected employer data systems. statisticalpolicy working paper 16. (ntis pb90205238) washington, d.c.: u.s. officeof management and budget.1990bsurvey coverage. statistical policy working paper 17. (ntis pb90205246)washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1990cdata editing in federal statistical agencies. statistical policy working paper 18.(ntis pb90205253) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management andbudget.1990dcomputer assisted survey information. statistical policy working paper 19. (ntispb90205261) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1991seminar on quality of federal data. statistical policy working paper 20. (ntispb91142414) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1993indirect estimators in federal programs. statistical policy working paper 21. (ntispb93209294) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1994report on statistical disclosure limitation methodology. statistical policy workingpaper 22. (ntis pb94165305) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of managementand budget.1995aseminar on new directions in statistical methodology. statistical policy workingpaper 23. (ntis pb95182978) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of managementand budget.1995belectronic dissemination of statistical data. statistical policy working paper 24.(ntis pb96121629) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management andbudget.1996data editing workshop and exposition. statistical policy working paper 25. (ntispb97104624) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.1997seminar on statistical methodology in the public service. statistical policy workingpaper 26. (ntis pb97162580) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of managementand budget.1998training for the future: addressing tomorrowõs survey tasks. statistical policyprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references41working paper 27. (ntis pb99102576) washington, d.c.: u.s. office ofmanagement and budget.1999aseminar on interagency coordination and cooperation. statistical policy workingpaper 28. (ntis pb99132029) washington, d.c.: u.s. office of managementand budget.1999bfederal committee on statistical methodology research conference (conferencepapers). statistical policy working paper 29. (ntis pb99166795) washington,d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.20001999 federal committee on statistical methodology research conference: completeproceedings. statistical policy working paper 30. (ntis pb2000105886)washington, d.c.: u.s. office of management and budget.federal interagency forum on agingrelated statistics2000older americans 2000: key indicators of wellbeing. available online (http://www.agingstats.gov).federal interagency forum on child and family statistics2000americaõs children: key national indicators of wellbeing, 2000. washington,d.c.: u.s. government printing office.martin, margaret e.1981statistical practice in bureaucracies. journal of the american statistical association76(373):18.national research council1976setting statistical priorities: report of the panel on methodology for statisticalpriorities of the committee on national statistics. assembly of mathematical andphysical sciences, committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.1984cognitive aspects of survey methodology: building a bridge between disciplines.report of the advanced research seminar on cognitive aspects of surveymethodology, thomas b. jabine, miron l. straf, judith m. tanur, and rogertourangeau, eds. committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.1985aimmigration statistics: a story of neglect. panel on immigration statistics, danielb. levine, kenneth hill, and robert warren, eds. committee on nationalstatistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1985bsharing research data. stephen e. fienberg, margaret e. martin, and miron l.straf, eds. committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.1986creating a center for education statistics: a time for action. panel to evaluate thenational center for education statistics, daniel b. levine, ed. committee onnational statistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1991aimproving information for social policy decisions: the uses of microsimulationmodeling, volume i: review and recommendations. panel to evaluatemicrosimulation models for social welfare programs, constance f. citro anderic a. hanushek, eds. committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.:national academy press.1991bimproving information for social policy decisions: the uses of microsimulationmodeling, volume ii: technical papers. panel to evaluate microsimulation modelsprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyfor social welfare programs, constance f. citro and eric a. hanushek, eds.committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1992principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. margaret e. martin andmiron l. straf, eds. committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.:national academy press.1993athe future of the survey of income and program participation. panel to evaluatethe survey of income and program participation, constance f. citro and grahamkalton, eds. committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.1993bprivate lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of governmentstatistics. panel on confidentiality and data access, george t. duncan, thomasb. jabine, and virginia a. de wolf, eds. committee on national statistics.washington, d.c.: national academy press.1995modernizing the u.s. census. panel on census requirements in the year 2000and beyond. barry edmonston and charles schultze, eds. committee onnational statistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1997aassessing policies for retirement income: needs for data, research, and models. panelon retirement income modeling, constance f. citro and eric a. hanushek, eds.committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1997bthe bureau of transportation statistics: priorities for the future. panel on statisticalprograms and practices of the bureau of transportation statistics, constance f.citro and janet l. norwood, eds. committee on national statistics andtransportation research board. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1998alongitudinal surveys of children. committee on national statistics and board onchildren, youth, and families, kirsten k. west, robert m. hauser, and terri m.scanlan, eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1998bstatistics, testing, and defense acquisition: new approaches and methodologicalimprovements. panel on statistical methods for testing and evaluating defensesystems, michael l. cohen, john e. rolph, and duane l. steffey, eds.committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.1999ahealth performance measurement in the public sector: principles and policies forimplementing an information network. panel on performance measures and datafor public health performance partnership grants, edward b. perrin, jane s.durch, and susan m. skillman, eds. committee on national statistics.washington, d.c.: national academy press.1999bsowing seeds of change: informing public policy in the economic research service ofusda. panel to study the research program of the economic research service,john f. geweke, james t. bonnen, andrew a. white, and jeffrey j. koshel, eds.committee on national statistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.2000improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshop.christopher mackie and norman bradburn, eds. committee on nationalstatistics. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council and institute of medicine1992toward a national health care survey: a data system for the 21st century. panelon the national health care survey, gooloo s. wunderlich, ed. committee onprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references43national statistics and division of health care services. washington, d.c.:national academy press.norwood, janet l.1975should those who produce statistics analyze them? how far should analysis go?an american view. bulletin of the international statistical institute, proceedings ofthe 40th session, 46:420432.1995organizing to count: change in the federal statistical system. washington, d.c.:the urban institute press.presidentõs commission on federal statistics1971federal statistics. vol. i. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.privacy protection study commission1977personal privacy in an information society. washington, d.c: u.s. governmentprinting office.ryten, jacob1990statistical organization criteria for intercountry comparisons and their applicationto canada. journal of official statistics 6(3):319332.triplett, jack1991the federal statistical systemõs response to emerging data needs. journal ofeconomic and social measurement 17(3,4):155201.united nations statistical commission1994fundamental principles of official statistics. in official records of the economicand social council, 1994, supplement no. 9.united nations statistical commission and economic commission for europe1991draft of a resolution on fundamental principles of official statistics in theeconomic commission for europe. in report of the thirtyninth plenary session,june 1721, 1991.u.s. general accounting office1995statistical agencies: adherence to guidelines and coordination of budgets.washington, d.c.u.s. office of management and budget1985statistical policy directive on compilation, release, and evaluation of principalfederal economic indicators. federal register 50(186):932934.1997order providing for the confidentiality of statistical information. federal register62(124):3504435050.2000statistical programs of the united states government, fiscal year 2001. statisticalpolicy office, office of information and regulatory affairs, u.s. office ofmanagement and budget. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.45appendix afundamental principles ofofficial statistics of the statisticalcommission of the united nations[excerpted from the report of the statistical commission on its specialsession, held in new york 1115 april 1994. official records of the economic and social council, 1994, supplement no. 9.]action taken by the commission59. the commission adopted the fundamental principles of official statistics as set out in ece decision c (47), but incorporating a revised preamble. the preamble and principles, as adopted, are set out below:fundamental principles of official statisticsthe statistical commission,bearing in mind that official statistical information is an essential basisfor development in the economic, demographic, social and environmental fields and for mutual knowledge and trade among the statesand peoples of the world,bearing in mind that the essential trust of the public in official statistical information depends to a large extent on respect for the fundamental values and principles which are the basis of any society which seeksto understand itself and to respect the rights of its members,principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46principles and practices for a federal statistical agencybearing in mind that the quality of official statistics, and thus the quality of the information available to the government, the economy andthe public depends largely on the cooperation of citizens, enterprises,and other respondents in providing appropriate and reliable dataneeded for necessary statistical compilations and on the cooperationbetween users and producers of statistics in order to meet usersõ needs,recalling the efforts of governmental and nongovernmental organizations active in statistics to establish standards and concepts to allowcomparisons among countries,recalling also the international statistical institute declaration of professional ethics,having expressed the opinion that resolution c (47), adopted by theeconomic commission for europe on 15 april 1992, is of universalsignificance,noting that, at its eighth session, held at bangkok in november 1993,the working group of statistical experts, assigned by the committeeon statistics of the economic and social commission for asia and thepacific to examine the fundamental principles, had agreed in principleto the ece version and had emphasized that those principles wereapplicable to all nations,noting also that, at its eighth session, held at addis ababa in march1994, the joint conference of african planners, statisticians and demographers, considered that the fundamental principles of officialstatistics are of universal significance,adopts the present principles of official statistics:1. official statistics provide an indispensable element in the information system of a democratic society, serving the government, theeconomy and the public with data about the economic, demographic,social and environmental situation. to this end, official statistics thatmeet the test of practical utility are to be compiled and made availableon an impartial basis by official statistical agencies to honour citizensõentitlement to public information.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a472. to retain trust in official statistics, the statistical agencies need todecide according to strictly professional considerations, including scientific principles and professional ethics, on the methods and procedures for the collection, processing, storage and presentation of statistical data.3. to facilitate a correct interpretation of the data, the statistical agencies are to present information according to scientific standards on thesources, methods and procedures of the statistics.4. the statistical agencies are entitled to comment on erroneous interpretation and misuse of statistics.5. data for statistical purposes may be drawn from all types of sources,be they statistical surveys or administrative records. statistical agenciesare to choose the source with regard to quality, timeliness, costs andthe burden on respondents.6. individual data collected by statistical agencies for statistical compilation, whether they refer to natural or legal persons, are to be strictlyconfidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes.7. the laws, regulations and measures under which the statistical systems operate are to be made public.8. coordination among statistical agencies within countries is essential to achieve consistency and efficiency in the statistical system.9. the use by statistical agencies in each country of international concepts, classifications and methods promotes the consistency and efficiency of statistical systems at all official levels.10. bilateral and multilateral cooperation in statistics contributes tothe improvement of systems of official statistics in all countries.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48appendix bselected federal statistical world wideweb sites, may 2000executive office of the presidentfederal statistics briefing roomseconomic statistics (esbr): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/esbr.htmlsocial statistics (ssbr): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/ssbr.htmloffice of management and budget (omb): www.whitehouse.gov/ombfederal committee on statistical methodology: www.fcsm.govfederal interagency council on statistical policy, federal statistics:www.fedstats.govfederal interagency forum on agingrelated statistics:www.agingstats.govfederal interagency forum on child and family statistics:childstats.govconsumer product safety commission (cpsc): www.cpsc.govdepartment of agriculture (usda): www.usda.govagricultural research service (ars): www.ars.usda.govnote: this list is adapted from a listing in u.s. office of management and budget(2000) and includes federal statistical agencies, as well as other federal agencies that producestatistical information.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b49economic research service (ers): www.ers.usda.govfood and nutrition service (fns): www.fns.usda.gov/fnsforeign agricultural service (fas): www.fas.usda.govforest service (fs): www.fs.fed.usnational agricultural statistics service (nass): www.usda.gov/nassnatural resources conservation service (nrcs): www.nrcs.usda.govdepartment of commerce: www.doc.govbureau of economic analysis (bea): www.bea.doc.govcensus bureau: www.census.goveconomics and statistics administration (esa): www.esa.doc.govinternational trade administration (ita): www.ita.doc.govnational marine fisheries service (nmfs): www.nmfs.govnational oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa):www.noaa.govdepartment of defense: www.defenselink.milarmy corps of engineers (corps):www.environmental.usace.army.mildefense manpower data center (dmdc): www.dmdc.osd.mildirectorate for information operations and reports (dior):web1.whs.osd.mil/diorhome.htmdepartment of education: www.ed.govnational center for education statistics (nces): nces.ed.govdepartment of energy: www.doe.govenergy information administration (eia): www.eia.doe.govoffice of environment, safety and health (eh): www.eh.doe.govdepartment of health and human services: www.dhhs.govadministration for children and families (acf): www.acf.dhhs.govagency for health care research and quality (ahrq):www.ahcpr.govagency for toxic substances and disease registry (atsdr):www.atsdr.cde.govcenters for disease control and prevention (cdc): www.cdc.govhealth care financing administration (hcfa): www.hcfa.govprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyhealth resources and services administration (hrsa):www.hrsa.dhhs.govindian health service (ihs): www.ihs.govnational center for health statistics (nchs): www.cdc.gov/nchsnational institute on aging (nia): www.nih.gov/nianational institutes of health (nih): www.nih.govoffice of population affairs (opa): www.dhhs.gov/progorg/opaoffice of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation (aspe):aspe.os.dhhs.govsubstance abuse and mental health services administration(samhsa): www.samhsa.govdepartment of housing and urban development: www.hud.govoffice of the assistant secretary for policy development andresearch (pd&r): www.huduser.orgdepartment of the interior: www.doi.govbureau of reclamation: www.usbr.govminerals management service (mms): www.mms.govnational park service (nps): www.nps.govunited states fish and wildlife service (fws): www.fws.govunited states geological survey (usgs): www.usgs.govdepartment of justice: www.usdoj.govbureau of justice statistics (bjs): www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjsbureau of prisons (bop): www.bop.govdrug enforcement administration (dea): www.usdoj.gov/deafederal bureau of investigation (fbi): www.fbi.govimmigration and naturalization service (ins): www.ins.usdoj.govdepartment of labor: www.dol.govbureau of labor statistics (bls): www.bls.govemployment and training administration (eta): www.doleta.govmine safety and health administration (msha): www.msha.govoccupational safety and health administration (osha):www.osha.govoffice of the assistant secretary for policy (oasp): www.dol.gov/dol/aspprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b51pension and welfare benefits administration (pwba): www.dol.gov/dol/pwbadepartment of state: www.state.govagency for international development (aid): www.usaid.govdepartment of transportation: www.dot.govbureau of transportation statistics (bts): www.bts.govfederal aviation administration (faa): www.faa.govfederal highway administration (fhwa): www.fhwa.dot.govfederal railroad administration (fra): www.fra.dot.govfederal transit administration (fta): www.fta.dot.govmaritime administration (marad): www.marad.dot.govnational highway traffic safety administration (nhtsa):www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/ncsadepartment of the treasury: www.ustreas.govinternal revenue service (irs): www.irs.ustreas.govstatistics of income (soi): www.irs.ustreas.gov/taxstats/index.htmlunited states customs service: www.customs.treas.govdepartment of veterans affairs (va): www.va.govenvironmental protection agency (epa): www.epa.govoffice of environmental information: www.epa.gov/oeifederal emergency management agency (fema): www.fema.govnational aeronautics and space administration (nasa): www.nasa.govnational science foundation: www.nsf.gov/sbe/srsdirectorate for social, behavioral, and economic sciences:www.nsf.gov/sbemethodology, measurement, and statistics program: www.nsf.gov/sbe/ses/mms/start.htmscience resources studies division: www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/stats.htmprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52principles and practices for a federal statistical agencysmall business administration (sba): www.sba.gov/advo/statssocial security administration (ssa): www.ssa.govoffice of research, evaluation, and statistics: www.ssa.gov/statistics/oreshome.htmlindex of federal statistical sites listedadministration for children and familiesñsee department of healthand human servicesagency for health care research and qualityñsee department ofhealth and human servicesagency for international developmentñsee department of stateagency for toxic substances and disease registryñsee department ofhealth and human servicesagricultural research serviceñsee department of agriculturearmy corps of engineersñsee department of defensebureau of economic analysisñsee department of commercebureau of justice statisticsñsee department of justicebureau of labor statisticsñsee department of laborbureau of prisonsñsee department of justicebureau of reclamationñsee department of the interiorbureau of transportation statisticsñsee department of transportationcensus bureauñsee department of commercecenters for disease control and preventionñsee department of healthand human servicesconsumer product safety commissionñsee consumer product safetycommissiondefense manpower data centerñsee department of defensedirectorate for information operations and reportsñsee department ofdefensedirectorate for social, behavioral, and economic sciencesñsee nationalscience foundationdrug enforcement administrationñsee department of justiceeconomic research serviceñsee department of agricultureeconomic statistics briefing roomñsee executive office of thepresident, federal statistics briefing roomseconomics and statistics administrationñsee department of commerceemployment and training administrationñsee department of laborprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b53energy information administrationñsee department of energyenvironmental protection agencyñsee environmental protectionagencyfederal aviation administrationñsee department of transportationfederal bureau of investigationñsee department of justicefederal committee on statistical methodologyñsee executive office ofthe president, office of management and budgetfederal emergency management agencyñsee federal emergencymanagement agencyfederal highway administrationñsee department of transportationfederal interagency council on statistical policy, federal statisticsñseeexecutive office of the president, office of management and budgetfederal interagency forum on agingrelated statisticsñsee executiveoffice of the president, office of management and budgetfederal interagency forum on child and family statisticsñsee executiveoffice of the president, office of management and budgetfederal railroad administrationñsee department of transportationfederal statistics briefing roomsñsee executive office of the presidentfederal transit administrationñsee department of transportationfood and nutrition serviceñsee department of agricultureforeign agricultural serviceñsee department of agricultureforest serviceñsee department of agriculturehealth care financing administrationñsee department of health andhuman serviceshealth resources and services administrationñsee department ofhealth and human services immigration and naturalizationserviceñsee department of justiceindian health serviceñsee department of health and human servicesinternal revenue serviceñsee department of the treasuryinternational trade administrationñsee department of commercemaritime administrationñsee department of transportationmethodology, measurement, and statistics programñsee nationalscience foundation, directorate for social, behavioral, andeconomic sciencesmine safety and health administrationñsee department of laborminerals management serviceñsee department of the interiornational aeronautics and space administrationñsee nationalaeronautics and space administrationnational agricultural statistics serviceñsee department of agricultureprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54principles and practices for a federal statistical agencynational center for education statisticsñsee department of educationnational center for health statisticsñsee department of health andhuman servicesnational highway traffic safety administrationñsee department oftransportationnational institute on agingñsee department of health and humanservicesnational institutes of healthñsee department of health and humanservicesnational marine fisheries serviceñsee department of commercenational oceanic and atmospheric administrationñsee department ofcommercenational park serviceñsee department of the interiornational science foundationñsee national science foundationnatural resources conservation serviceñsee department of agricultureoccupational safety and health administrationñsee department oflaboroffice of environmental informationñsee environmental protectionagencyoffice of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluationñseedepartment of health and human servicesoffice of the assistant secretary for policyñsee department of laboroffice of the assistant secretary for policy development and researchñsee department of housing and urban developmentoffice of environment, safety and healthñsee department of energyoffice of environmental informationñsee environmental protectionagencyoffice of management and budgetñsee executive office of the presidentoffice of population affairsñsee department of health and humanservicesoffice of research, evaluation, and statisticsñsee social securityadministrationpension and welfare benefits administrationñsee department of laborscience resources studies divisionñsee national science foundation,directorate for social, behavioral, and economic sciencessmall business administrationñsee small business administrationsocial security administrationñsee social security administrationsocial statistics briefing roomñsee executive office of the president,federal statistics briefing roomsprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b55statistics of income divisionñsee department of the treasurysubstance abuse and mental health services administrationñseedepartment of health and human servicesunited states customs serviceñsee department of the treasuryunited states fish and wildlife serviceñsee department of the interiorunited states geological surveyñsee department of the interiorprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: second editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.