detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10346ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identitysystems74 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309084307 | doi 10.17226/10346stephen t. kent and lynette i. millett, editors, committee on authenticationtechnologies and their privacy implications, national research councilids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.idsñnot that easyquestions about nationwide identity systemsstephen t. kent and lynette i. millett, editorscommittee on authentication technologies andtheir privacy implicationscomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencesnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press ¥ 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. ¥ washington dc 20418notice: the project from which this report was generated was approved by thegoverning board of the national research council, whose members are drawnfrom the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy ofengineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation, theoffice of naval research, the general services administration, the federal chiefinformation officersõ council, and the social security administration. supportfor this special report was provided by the vadasz family foundation, a contributor to the computer science and telecommunications boardõs program on information technology and society. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.international standard book number 030908430xadditional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution avenue, n.w.box 285washington, dc 20055800/6246242202/3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)the report is also available online at <http://www.nap.edu> and <http://www.cstb.org/>copyright 2002 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a.wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the nationalacademy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providingservices to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute ofmedicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chairman and vicechairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on authentication technologies andtheir privacy implicationsstephen t. kent, bbn technologies, chairmichael angelo, compaq computer corporationsteven bellovin, at&t labs researchbob blakley, ibm tivoli softwaredrew dean, sri internationalbarbara fox, microsoft corporationstephen h. holden, university of maryland at baltimore countydeirdre mulligan, university of california at berkeleyjudith s. olson, university of michiganjoe pato, hp labs cambridgeradia perlman, sun microsystemspriscilla m. regan, george mason universityjeffrey i. schiller, massachusetts institute of technologysoumitra sengupta, columbia universityjames l. wayman, san jose state universitydaniel j. weitzner, massachusetts institute of technologystafflynette i. millett, study director and program officerjennifer bishop, senior project assistantivids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairdavid e. borth, motorola labsjames chiddix, aol time warnerjohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstthomas e. darcie, at&t labs researchjoseph v. farrell, university of california at berkeleyjeffrey m. jaffe, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesanna karlin, university of washingtonbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid e. liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitydonald a. norman, nielsen norman groupdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt, jr., chicagokent college of lawburton j. smith, cray inc.terry r. smith, university of california at santa barbaralee s. sproull, new york universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitymarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistalan s. inouye, senior program officerjon eisenberg, senior program officerlynette i. millett, program officercynthia a. patterson, program officersteven woo, program officerjanet briscoe, administrative officerdavid padgham, research associatemargaret huynh, senior project assistantdavid drake, senior project assistantjanice sabuda, senior project assistantjennifer m. bishop, senior project assistantbrandye williams, staff assistantids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethe terrorist attacks of september 11, 2001, and subsequent discussions have brought fresh urgency to the challenges of providinginformation security. in the wake of these and other recent events,numerous proposals have been circulating both in policy circles and thenational media.one proposal that has received a fair amount of attention is a nationalidentification cardñor, more precisely, a nationwide identity system. thebush administration has indicated that a national identification card isnot within the scope of options it is contemplating. congress, however,has been considering various alternativesñfor example, a measure in theenhanced border security and visa entry reform act of 2001 wouldrequire biometric identifiers to be employed on visas and other travel andentry documents for aliens (h.r. 3525, section 303). additional suggestions include a proposal by the american association of motor vehicleadministrators (aamva) to link state motor vehicle departments and aproposed òtrusted traveleró system for airports.the persistence of public discussion on the topic and the expectationthat other proposals will be offered argue for an informed analysis andcritique of the concept of a nationwide identity system.in early 2001, the computer science and telecommunications board,(cstb) a unit of the national research council with a long history ofviiids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefaceexamining information technology, security, and related issues,1 launcheda study to examine authentication technologies and their privacy implications. sponsored by the national science foundation, the office of navalresearch, the general services administration, the federal chief information officersõ council, and the social security administration, thestudy aims to assess emerging approaches to user authentication in computing and communications systems, and it specifically focuses on theimplications of these authentication technologies for privacy.the study is being conducted by the multidisciplinary committee onauthentication technologies and their privacy implications, whose members include experts in the design, implementation, deployment, and useof information systems generally and information systems security inparticular, along with experts in privacy law and policy (see appendix afor committee and staff biographies). given that identification and authentication systems constitute a large portion of the committeeõs agenda,it is well positioned to comment on the technology and policy issuessurrounding a nationwide identity system and its supporting infrastructures (hereinafter referred to as a nationwide identity system). in fact,cstb asked the committee to do so, in the interest of providing a timelycontribution to the public debate. additional resources from the vadaszfamily foundation enabled development of this report.the committeeõs broader and more comprehensive final report is expected in late 2002, but its members felt compelled to issue a brief reportat this time because of the real possibility that further debate on a nationwide identity system, and even action on the topic, could take place priorto the final reportõs issuance. thus the present effort outlines the issuesthe committee believes must be addressed and raises a number of questions that the committee believes should be answered as part of any consideration of a nationwide identity system.this brief report is a product of the committeeõs deliberations, drawing on its membersõ areas of expertise. but, given time and resourcelimitations, it is not an exhaustive assessment. it is intended to catalyze a1see, for example, cstb reports such as growing vulnerability of the public switched networks (1989), computers at risk (1991), evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure (1995), cryptographyõs rolein securing the information society (1996), for the record: protecting electronic health information (1997), trust in cyberspace (1999), the internetõs coming of age (2000), embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers (2001), and cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later (2002). see <http://www.cstb.org/web/topicsecurity> for a complete list of cstb reports related to security, assurance, andprivacy.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixbroader and more sophisticated discussion. clearly, the legal, policy, andtechnological issues associated with nationwide identity systems warranta much more detailed and comprehensive examination. the committeeinvites feedback on this brief report as it continues the process of preparing its broader and more indepth final report on the topic of authentication technologies and their implications for privacy.the committee thanks david d. clark, chair of the cstb, and marjorys. blumenthal, cstbõs director, for their commentary and feedback ondraft versions of the report. the committee also wishes to thank thevarious members of the cstb staff who helped to make it happen. jennifer bishop took over as senior project assistant for the authentication studymidway through the project, managing logistics, organizing materials,and coping with an unplanned brief report and review with aplomb. shealso assisted in developing the diagrams in the report and designed itscover. janet briscoe, cstbõs administrative officer, provided crucial administrative and logistical support as well as the suggestion that ultimately led to the reportõs title. andy white, director of the nrcõs committee on national statistics, provided feedback during the formulationand review phases. the committee also thanks steven j. marcus, a freelance editor, for assistance at multiple stages of the reportõs development.liz fikre at the national research council also made significant editorialcontributions to the final manuscript. lynette millett is the study directorfor this project; she synthesized this report, coordinating contributionsfrom committee members and drafting the response to reviewers.stephen t. kent, chaircommittee on authenticationtechnologies and theirprivacy implicationsids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs report reviewcommittee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candidand critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness tothe study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remainconfidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wishto thank the following individuals for their review of this report:alfred blumstein, carnegie mellon university,michael caloyannides, mitretek systems, inc.,julie e. cohen, georgetown university law center,jerome h. saltzer, massachusetts institute of technology,peter swire, george washington university, andlee m. zeichner, legalnet works, inc.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the reportbefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by willis wareof rand. appointed by the national research council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this reportwas carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that allreview comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the finalcontent of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and theinstitution.xids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary11introduction and overview52policy considerations16what does identity provide?, 16to whom and for what?, 19permitted users of the system, 24permitted uses of the system, 26voluntary or mandatory?, 28what legal structures?, 29benefits and drawbacks, 303technological challenges34binding persons to identities, 37backend systems, 41data correlation and privacy, 444concluding remarks46appendixesacommittee member and staff biographies51bwhat is cstb?60xiids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarynationwide identity systems have been proposed as a solution forproblems ranging from counterterrorism to fraud detection toenabling electoral reforms. in the wake of september 11, 2001,and renewed interest in the topic, the committee on authentication technologies and their privacy implications of the computer science andtelecommunications board1 developed this short report as part of its ongoing study process, in order to raise questions and catalyze a broaderdebate about such systems. the committee believes that serious andsustained analysis and discussion of the complex constellation of issuespresented by nationwide identity systems are needed. understandingthe goals of such a system is a primary consideration. indeed, before anydecisions can be made about whether to attempt some kind of nationwideidentity system, the question of what is being discussed (and why) mustbe answered.there are numerous questions about the desirability and feasibility ofa nationwide identity system. this report does not attempt to answerthese questions comprehensively and does not propose moving towardsuch a system or backing away. instead, it aims to highlight some of thesignificant and challenging policy, procedural, and technological issues1see <http://www.cstb.org/web/projectauthentication>.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2idsñnot that easypresented by such a system, with the goal of fostering a broad, deliberate,and sophisticated discussion among policy makers and stakeholdersabout whether such a system is desirable or feasible.policy questions that the committee believes should be consideredwhen contemplating any kind of identity system include the following:¥what is the purpose of the system? possibilities range from expediting and/or tracking travel to prospectively monitoring individualsõ activities in order to identify and look for suspicious activity to retrospectively identifying perpetrators of crimes.¥what is the scope of the population that would be issued an òidó and,presumably, be recorded in the system? how would the identities ofthese individuals be authenticated?¥what is the scope of the data that would be gathered about individuals participating in the system and correlated with their national identity?while colloquially it is referred to as an òidentification system,ó implyingthat all the system would do is identify individuals, many proposals talkabout the id as a key to a much larger collection of data. would thesedata be identity data only (and what is meant by identity data)? or wouldother data be collected, stored, and/or analyzed as well? with whatconfidence would the accuracy and quality of this data be established andsubsequently determined?¥who would be the user(s) of the system (as opposed to those whowould participate in the system by having an id)? one assumption seemsto be that the public sector/government will be the primary user, butwhat parts of the government, in what contexts, and with what constraints? in what setting(s) in the public sphere would such a system beused? would state and local governments have access to the system?would the private sector be allowed to use the system? what entitieswithin the government or private sector would be allowed to use thesystem? who could contribute, view, and/or edit data in the system?¥what types of use would be allowed? who would be able to ask foran id, and under what circumstances? assuming that there are datasetsassociated with an individualõs identity, what types of queries would bepermitted (e.g., òis this person allowed to travel?ó òdoes this person havea criminal record?ó)? beyond simple queries, would analysis and datamining of the information collected be permitted? if so, who would beallowed to do such analysis and for what purpose(s)?¥would participation in and/or identification by the system be voluntary or mandatory? in addition, would participants have to be aware ofor consent to having their ids checked (as opposed to, for example, allowing surreptitious facial recognition)?ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3¥what legal structures protect the systemõs integrity as well as thedata subjectõs privacy and due process rights, and determine the government and relying partiesõ liability for system misuse or failure?each of these issues is elaborated on in the report. and each of theabove questions evokes a larger set of issues and questions that must beresolved. in addition, many of these issues are interdependent, andchoices made for each will bear on the options available for resolvingother issues.decisions made at this level will also have ramifications for the technological underpinnings of the system, including what levels and kindsof system security will be required. in fact, òsystemó may be the mostimportant (and heretofore least discussed) aspect of the term ònationwideidentity system,ó because it implies the linking together of many social,legal, and technological components in complex and interdependentways. the success or failure of such a system is dependent not just on theindividual components but also on the ways they workñor do not workñtogether. the control of these interdependencies, and the mitigation ofsecurity vulnerabilities and their unintended consequences, would determine the overall effectiveness of the system.the committee believes that given the complexity and potential impact of nationwide identity systems, more analysis is needed with respectto both desirability and feasibility. in particular,¥given the potential economic costs, significant design and implementation challenges, and risks to both security and privacy, there shouldbe broad agreement on what problem(s) a nationwide identity systemwould address. once there is agreement on the problem(s) to be solved,alternatives to identity systems should also be considered as potentialsolutions to whatever problem(s) is identified and agreed upon.¥the goals of a nationwide identity system must be clearly andpublicly identified and deliberated upon, with input sought from all stakeholders; public review of these goals prior to selecting a proposed systemis essential.¥proponents of such a system should be required to present a verycompelling case, addressing the issues raised in this report and solicitinginput from a broad range of stakeholder communities.¥serious consideration must be given to the idea thatñgiven thebroad range of uses, security needs, and privacy needs that might becontemplatedñno single system may suffice to meet the needs of potential users of the system.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4idsñnot that easy¥care must be taken to explore completely the potential ramifications, because the costs of abandoning, correcting, or redesigning a system after broad deployment might well be extremely high.the legal, policy, and technological issues associated with nationwide identity systems warrant much more detailed and comprehensiveexamination and assessment than are presented in this report. the committee hopes that the extensive set of questions and issues raised here willhelp to both further and inform the policy debate. the committee welcomes feedback on this brief report as it continues preparing its broaderand more indepth final report on the topic of authentication technologiesand their privacy implications.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introduction and overviewwhile the events of september 11, 2001, have galvanized a searchfor improvements in the safety and security of our society, thechallenge is to provide protection without sacrificing fundamental freedoms. an idea that has resurfaced as a result of the attacks isthe creation of a ònational identity card,ó often referred to simply as aònational id.ó1 this term is a bit of a misnomer, in that a card wouldlikely be but one component of a large and complex nationwide identitysystem, the core of which could be a database of personal information onthe u.s. population. this report by the committee on authenticationtechnologies and their privacy implications provides a limited exploration of such a system and of the potential legal, policy, and technicalchallenges that it might present.no one really knows if a nationwide identity system could detect ordeter terrorism, although several arguments have been advanced. one isthat such a system could be used to easily identify known terrorists upontheir interaction with particular agents (such as airline security officials),facilitating their arrest. on the other hand, unless the database of suspects includes those particular individuals, the best possible identity sys51see, for example, òstates devising plan for hightech national identification systemóat <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/articles/a327172001nov2.html> andònational id card gaining supportó at <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/articles/a523002001dec16.html>.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6idsñnot that easytem would not lead to their apprehension. another suggestion is that thedata collected from the widespread use of nationwide ids could helpprevent terrorists from achieving their objectives. this might involve thedetection of abnormal or suspicious patterns of behavior that accompanythe planning and/or execution of a terrorist act.another potential role of a nationwide identity system is as an investigative tool in the aftermath of a crime or terrorist attack. here, the datacollected could help retrospectively in the identification, arrest, and prosecution of the perpetrators. some argue that this is primarily (though notexclusively) a post facto activity, more useful for law enforcement thanfor counterterrorism, which is, in part, an a priori intelligence function.terrorism issues per se are beyond the scope of this report, whichexamines the concept of a nationwide identity system in the large, notsolely with respect to counterterrorism. the committee believes that theconcept of a nationwide identity systemñincluding whether such a system is a good ideañmust be examined on its own merits.indeed, nationwide identity systems have been sought for many purposes in addition to countering terrorism. they have been proposed toaid in fraud prevention (for example, in the administration of public benefits), catch òdeadbeat dads,ó enable electoral reforms, allow quick background checks for those buying guns or other monitored items, and prevent illegal aliens from working in the united states.depending on the nature of the population, the data collected, andthe scope of use, a nationwide identity system might be able to help withother tasks as well. for example, a robust, accurate and comprehensivesystem might aid lawenforcement officials in tracking or finding people.2it is possible that the correlation of social (for example, health, economic,demographic) information could be more easily accomplished with theuse of a national identity system; statisticians, for example, note how asingle identifier would facilitate some of their analyses. in addition, depending on implementation choices, ecommerce and egovernment transactions might be simplified. however, there could also be negative consequences, ranging from infringement on rights and liberties (includingloss of or invasion of personal privacy) to harm resulting from misidentification or misuse of the system, plus significant implementation anddeployment costs. the tradeoffs (enhanced security versus risks to pri2examples include tracking fugitives, executing warrants, tracking noncitizens with expired visas, tracking illegal aliens, and confirming alibis for those innocent of criminalcharges. a nationwide identity system could facilitate the work done by the nationalcrime information center, a computerized database at the federal bureau of investigationthat permits access by authorized users to documented criminal justice information.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overview7vacy, cost versus functionality, and so on) need to be carefully considered.many other countries have nationwide identity systems, which theyoften use for such diverse purposes as proof of age (e.g., belgium), proofof citizenship, and for generating electronic signatures (e.g., finland). inthe united states, citizensõ concern for civil liberties, their historic association of id cards with repressive regimes, and statesõ rights concerns havediscouraged movement toward a governmentally sanctioned nationwideidentity system.3 additionally, because the country was settled by immigrants, a significant fraction of whom wanted to escape just such practices, many u.s. record systems were intentionally designed not to gatherlinking data.4 further, it appears that laws requiring individuals to showproof of legal status or citizenship result in increased discrimination basedon national origin and/or appearance.5 the human rights issues thatcould arise, such as increased demands for documentation from thosewho look or sound òforeignó and the deterioration of living and workingconditions for aliens, are substantial.6 clearly, an examination of thelegal and social framework surrounding identity systems, while outsidethe scope of this report, would be essential.7although discriminatory acts such as those alluded to above might beconstrainable by law, the presentation of identifying documentsñdriverõslicenses and credit cards, for exampleñis being demanded today in more3the electronic privacy information center has compiled a set of resources and reportson the topic at its web site, <http://www.epic.org/privacy/idcards/>.4an example that frustrates many genealogists is that u.s. birth certificates usually require identifying the town of birth only for parents born in the united states; for peopleborn elsewhere, the country of birth is sufficient. generally speaking, the mindset that suchthings are òno oneõs businessó has deep roots.5see u.s. general accounting office (gao), immigration reform: employer sanctions andthe question of discrimination, march 1990; marvin howe, òimmigration law leads to jobbias, new york reports,ó new york times, february 26, 1990, p. a1. the gao report on theimmigration reform and control act of 1986 (irca) cites a òwidespread pattern of discriminationó resulting òsolely from the implementation of irca.ó ten percent of employersdiscriminated on the basis of foreign accent or appearance, and nine percent discriminatedby preferring certain authorized workers over others.6especially for communities of recent immigrants, there is likely to be significant controversy in shifting to a system that would prohibit or make difficult work and other activitieswithout presentation of an id. in considering the feasibility and desirability of a particularapproach, designers of any such system should be aware of this potential opposition, aswell as possible opposition from other segments of the population.7it would be useful to examine how such systems have worked in other countries, as wellas to examine nations where ids have been proposed but not implemented (such as theunited kingdom).ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8idsñnot that easyand more generic circumstances. there is also evidence of growing efforts in the public and private sectors to collect, maintain, correlate, anduse more and more information on citizensõ activities based on existingidentifiers such as social security numbers (ssns). initially designed onlyfor administering social security benefits, ssns are now common dataelements in public and private sector databases, allowing for easy sharingand correlation of disparate records. this is a classic example of functionòcreepóñcontinuous expansion in the use of a system first intended for alimited purpose.8before any decisions can be made about whether to attempt to formalize some kind of nationwide identity system, the question of what is beingdiscussed must be answered. thus the committee believes that substantive and sustained analysis is needed on the issue.there is no recognized universal model for a nationwide identitysystem. because different people mean different things when they discuss the concept, evaluating it requires clarification of what is intended.the range of possibilities for identity systems is broad and includes alternative approaches such as the following:¥a database establishing a unique identity and maintaining information on every u.s. citizen, including, for example, information onknown felony convictions and place of residence, available for government and commercial query;¥a system similar to the above system that also includes noncitizenswho are legally in the united states;98some might argue that the ssn is already a de facto national identifier. the generalaccounting office makes this assertion and also points out that no one law governs the useof ssns. while originally intended to identify retirees who qualified for the social securityretirement system, the ssn is now required, in some cases by law, to be used to identifyindividuals who seek federal assistance. in addition, of course, the ssn has been adoptedas a taxpayer id number. in his book database nation, simson garfinkel provides a historyof the expanded use of the ssn. provisions of the social security act, the privacy act, andthe computer matching act are among the laws that attempt to limit the conditions underwhich ssns and associated data are used (general accounting office, social security: government and commercial use of the social security number is widespread, gao/hehs9928,february 1999). for example, the privacy act of 1974, available at <http://www.usdoj.gov/foia/privstat.htm>, requires the disclosure of how the ssn will be used by all governmentagencies. in 1986, the office of technology assessment addressed the issue of ubiquitoususe of the ssn as well (u.s. congress, office of technology assessment, government information technology: electronic records systems and individual privacy, otacit296, washington, d.c., u.s. government printing office, june 1986).9note that there are additional discussions about systems aimed exclusively at noncitizens, including, for example, proposals that would more rigorously track foreign students within the united states.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overview9¥a database of only a fraction of the countryõs populationñthoseindividuals who have a specific characteristic (for example, criminalrecord, past noncriminal but anomalous behavior, trusted travelers)ñthat would not include the majority of people in the country; and¥a database allowing voluntary participation in return for such benefits as ease of entry into the country or access to the fast line at the airportsecurity checkpoint.the above possibilities (there are others as well) emphasize the needfor answers to a number of questions before a more substantive analysiscan proceed. several policy questions should be asked when consideringany kind of identity system (see also figure 1.1):¥what would be the purpose of the system? possibilities include expediting and/or tracking travel, prospectively monitoring citizensõ activities in order to discern suspicious behavior, and retrospectively aiding inthe identification of perpetrators of crime, among others.10¥what is the scope of the population for whom an id would be issuedand whose activities would presumably be recorded in the system? howwould the identities of these individuals be authenticated?¥what is the scope of the data that would be gathered about individuals participating in the system and correlated with their national identity?while it may be referred to casually as an òidentification system,ó implying that all the system would do is identify individuals, many proposalstalk about the id as a key to a much larger collection of data. would thesedata include only identity data (and what, precisely, is meant by identitydata)? or would other data be collected, stored, and/or analyzed as well?with what confidence would the accuracy and quality of these data beestablished and subsequently determined?¥who would be the user(s) of the system (as opposed to who wouldparticipate in the system by having an id)? one assumption seems to bethat the public sector/federal government would be the primary user, butwhat parts of the government, in what contexts, and with what constraints? in what setting(s) in the public sphere would such a system beused? would state and local governments have access to the system?would the private sector be allowed to use it? what entities within thegovernment or private sector would be allowed to use the system? whocould contribute, view, and/or edit data in the system?10in general, the narrower the goals, the simpler and, perhaps, less controversial a system is likely to be, although even a narrowly focused system can run into function creepand problems associated with misidentification.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10idsñnot that easyfigure 1.1 interconnecting policy choices. the choices made for each of thequestions posed will bear, with differing degrees of influence, on the choicesmade with respect to all of the other issues. for example, the goals of the systemwill influence what data are collected about individuals. what data are collectedabout individuals will constrain the possible goals of the system. who is allowedto use the system will have a bearing on what legal structures are needed. whatlegal structures are put in place will bear on what kinds of access to the systemare allowed. and so on.¥what types of use would be allowed? who would be able to ask foran id, and under what circumstances? assuming that there are datasetsassociated with an individualõs identity, what types of queries would bepermitted (e.g., òis this person allowed to travel?ó òdoes this person havea criminal record?ó)? beyond simple queries, would analysis and datamining of the collected information be permitted? if so, who would beallowed to do this kind of analysis and for what purpose(s)?¥would participation in and/or identification by the system be voluntary or mandatory? in addition, must participants be aware of or consent to having their ids checked (as opposed to, for example, undergoingsurreptitious facial recognition)?users?voluntary ormandatory?what data?type ofuse?who is participating?legal structures?goals?ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overview11¥what legal structures would protect the systemõs integrity, as wellas the data subjectõs privacy and due process rights, and define the government and relying partiesõ liability for system misuse or failure?these questions will drive technological considerations (described inchapter 3), including what kinds and what levels of system securitywould be required.throughout this report, the term ònationwide identity systemó is usedin lieu of the more colloquial ònational idó or ònational id card.ó manyof the proposals are often presented in terms of a national identity card,though technologies existñpossibly including biometrics, which measures and analyzes unique physiological and behavioral characteristics ofindividualsñthat might serve some of the same proposed purposes without requiring a physical card. nevertheless, the emphasis in this report ison cardbased models simply because they have been proposed mostfrequently. in addition, many of the policy questions and databaserelated technical issues apply both to cardbased systems and those that donot require a physical card (see chapter 3).with respect to the chosen phrase, nationwide identity system, ònationwideó is meant to underscore the scale (both geographic and in termsof numbers of users) needed, without implying that ids would necessarily be generated from a single central location or, implicit in the termònational,ó that only citizens would need an id.the notion of identity is complicated, even when only the identity ofpersons (and not things, arguments, systems, etc.) is being referred to, asthis report is doing. this report distinguishes between an identifier (thename or sign by which a person is known), which can be thought of as alabel by which an individual is known in and to society and with whichhe or she conducts his or her affairs within society, and the identity of aperson as seen by others. for the purposes of this report, òidentityó refersto a set of information about a person x believed to be true by y. morecolloquially, identity is associated with an individual as a convenient wayto characterize that individual to others. the set of information and theidentifier (name, label, or sign) by which a person is known are alsosometimes referred to as that personõs òidentity.ó the choice of information may be arbitrary, linked to the purpose of the identity verification(also referred to as authentication) in any given context, or linked intrinsically to the personñas in the case of biometrics (see box 1.1).11 for11although biometrics are proposed with increasing frequency for a variety of identification and authentication purposes, they pose many difficult issues for system design, implementation, and use. these will be explored in the committeeõs final report.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12idsñnot that easybox 1.1terminologyfor the purposes of this brief report, and to help clarify discussion, concepts thatthe committeeõs final report1 will explore in detail are explained here.¥identity. the identity of x according to y is a set of statements believed by yto be true about x. in this report, identity generally refers to a set of information about x, especially in the context of a particular identity system.¥identification. identification is the process of determining to what identity aparticular individual corresponds, often without a claimed identity on the partof the individual (for example, the identification of an unconscious patient inan emergency room).¥id. in this report, id refers to the identity information pertaining to a particularindividual that is contained within an identity system and/or the token associated with that information.¥authentication. authentication is the process of confirming an asserted identity with a specified or understood level of confidence. note that authentication is quite distinct from identification.¥security. security refers to a collection of safeguards that ensure the confidentiality of information, protect the integrity of information, ensure the availability of information, account for use of the system, and protect the system(s)and/or network(s) used to process the information. security is intended toensure that a system resists (potentially correlated) attacks.¥privacy. the right to privacy is the right of an individual to decide for himselfor herself when and on what terms his or her attributes should be revealed.it should be noted that each of these terms represents a complicated, nuanced,and, in some instances, deeply philosophical topic. the descriptions of these concepts given here are not meant to be definitive, prescriptive, or comprehensive. 1see <http://www.cstb.org/web/projectauthentication> for more information.example, the information corresponding to an identity may contain facts(such as eye color, age, address), capabilities (for example, licensed todrive a car), medical history, financial activity, and so forth. generally,not all such information will be contained in the same identity, allowing amultiplicity of identities, each of which will contain information relevantto the purpose at hand. in the phrase ònationwide identity system,ó theword òidentityó implies that decisions must be made about what constitutes an identity within a system and that an identity will be establishedfor participants.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overview13a critical questionñwhich goes beyond the scope of this report, butwhich must be considered in the larger lawenforcement and nationalsecurity contextñis whether establishing and verifying identity is eithernecessary or sufficient for achieving any of the desired objectives of thesystem. it may be that they require collection and analysis of data and/orprospective or retrospective tracking or surveillance, well beyond mereidentity verification.12 note that even the question of whether to institutecollection of data and surveillance is not binary (see box 1.2).òsystemó may be the most important (and heretofore least discussed)aspect of the term ònationwide identity system,ó because it implies thelinking together of many social, legal, and technological components incomplex and interdependent ways. the success or failure of such asystem is dependent not just on the individual components, but on theways they workñor do not workñtogether. each individual componentcould, in isolation, function flawlessly yet the total system fail to meet itsobjectives.13 the control of these interdependencies, and the mitigationof security vulnerabilities and their unintended consequences, would determine the effectiveness of the system.a nationwide identity system would also consist of more than simplya database, communications networks, card readers, and hundreds ofmillions of physical id cards. the system would need to encompasspolicies and procedures and to take into account security and privacyconsiderations and issues of scalability, along with human factors andmanageability considerations (if the requirements of use prove too onerous or put up too many barriers to meeting the goal of the relying party,that party might try to bypass the system). the system might need tospecify the participants who will be enrolled, the users (individuals, organizations, governments) that would have access to the data, the permitted12for example, if the goal were to track the activities or whereabouts of an individual todetect illegal activity or suspicious patterns, surveillance of the behavior and activities ofsaid individual would be needed after identification was accomplished. surveillance mightrequire a warrant or other judicial intervention, depending on the approach taken. if thegoal were to detect suspicious activity by previously unsuspected individuals (in order toprevent illegal activity), correlation of surveyed actions would be required after identification and surveillance were accomplished. such correlation would presumably have to bedone before establishment of probable cause for a search in order for it to be useful.13there are examples of this in security mechanismsñfor example, where individualtechniques to provide additional security interact unexpectedly in such a way as to makethe system less secure. charles perrow explores the broad concept more thoroughly innormal accidents, mcgrawhill, 1986. in addition, the web site <http://www.safewareeng.com/softwaresafety/accidents.shtml> describes the distinction between componentfailure accidents and system accidents.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14idsñnot that easyuses of the data, and the legal and operational policies and procedureswithin which the system would operate. in addition, a process wouldneed to be in place to register individuals, manipulate (enter, store, update, search and return) identity information about them, issue credentials (if needed), and verify search requests, among other things. theword òsystemó suggests the complicated nature of what would be required in a way that the colloquial phrase ònational id cardó does not.it is important to note that a variety of identity systems fit within thescope of what is being discussed in this report. the recent aamvaproposal14 to link state motorvehicle databases is a nationwide identitysystem. so is the recent proposal to create a traveler id and database toexpedite security checks at airports. each of these systems could andshould be subjected to the kind of analysis and critique described in thisbox 1.2degrees of data collection and surveillancemerely asserting that some data collection or surveillance would occur in asystem or that data would be analyzed is insufficient. it is important to determineprecisely what is meant or intended by òcollectionó and òanalysisó within an identification system. there are at least five different ways to approach this issue:¥little to no data collection. the only data collected and stored are thoseneeded to establish, at a particular time, an individualõs identity within thesystem (for a predetermined meaning of òidentity.ó)¥individual data collection. information about an individualõs activities andbehavior is collected and stored but analyzed only upon request by an authorized agent (for example, a court order).¥aggregate data collection. behavioral data are aggregated and stored butonly analyzed upon request or for a specific purpose. it may or may not bepossible to link data to an individual.¥aggregate data analysis. behavioral data are aggregated and proactively analyzed to search for suspicious or abnormal patterns. upon an authorizedrequest it may or may not be possible to link data to an individual.¥individual data analysis. each individualõs data are proactively analyzed tocheck for suspicious or abnormal patterns of behavior, and any such findingsare flagged and authorized agents alerted.14see <http://www.aamva.org/> for more information. the committee received a briefing describing some of the issues facing aamva in developing a more secure driverõslicense infrastructure in a context where use of driverõs licenses is expanding beyond theirnominal function.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and overview15report. some of the issues raised here will be more applicable to somesystems than to others, but virtually any largescale identity system willneed to take into consideration a number of policy and technologicalissues; in fact, before deciding to build any identity system, the issuesoutlined in this report should be explored.a topdown, monolithic system controlled by the federal governmentis not the only kind of nationwide identity system that this report addresses. for example, unifying document formats and linking the databases of state driverõs licenses and idissuing systems would providebroad (though not complete) coverage without creating a federally controlled nationwide identity system. further, the successes and failures ofthe various nationwide identity systems in use in other countries shouldbe examined in order to have a fully informed discussion in the unitedstates. however, when studying such systems, questions of scale must bekept in mind. experience with a system for a population of tens of millionsis not necessarily applicable to a system that might incorporate hundredsof millions. in any case, many of the questions raised in this report assumelargescale systems and widespread participation in and use of suchsystems.without attempting to answer comprehensively the many questionssurrounding a nationwide identity system and without making assertions about whether to move toward or away from a nationwide identitysystem, the report aims to highlight some of the significant policy, procedural, and technical challenges presented by such a system, with the overall goal of prompting a broad discussion among and between policy makers and stakeholders.this brief document is intended to inform the policy debate. complete policy analysis is outside its scope, though several of the broadthemes outlined here will be addressed more fully in the committeeõsfinal report. chapter 2 describes what the committee believes is the mostimportant issue in the debateñnamely, the system goalsñalong withother policy issues that the committee believes should be considered inadvance of implementation and deployment. chapter 3 explores some ofthe technological issues involved in implementing a reliable and securenationwide identity system while minimizing unintended consequences,such as compromises of privacy or the creation of new vulnerabilities.chapter 4 offers concluding remarks and suggestions.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2policy considerationsnumerous policy questions surround any proposed nationwideidentity system. they require sustained deliberation by policymakers and significant input from the various stakeholdersñincluding federal, state, and local governments and agencies, privacy advocates, publicinterest groups, civil rights and liberties groups, and thosewho would participate in and use the system (that is, id holders, idrequestors, and data analysts). establishing a nationwide identity systemwould almost certainly be a complex and expensive process, requiringyears of legislative, technical, and public relations work, as systems nowin place elsewhere have shown.1what does identity provide?whether and when knowledge of òidentityó could aid in solving aproblem or meeting an objective depends in part on the wordõs verydefinition. for the purposes of this report, identity refers to sets of information (say, a database record or a strongly linked system of records)about a person that can be used to tell who that person is. confirmation161in the philippines, for example, the social security system id card project has beenunder active development and deployment for 6 years and has only reached an enrollmentof just over 2 million, en route to the goal of enrolling 40 million social security beneficiaries, members, and dependents.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations17(at some level of assurance) of identity is useful in contexts when one ormore of the following are needed: (1) knowledge (in the present) about apersonõs past is sought (e.g., the use of a dossier), (2) knowledge about aperson in the present needs to be remembered for use in the future (e.g.,the creation of a dossier), (3) distinguishing between two individuals isrequired to prevent the possibility of mistaking one of them for the other,or (4) verification of identity information provided by a third party. identification and/or authentication are generally used to aid in recognitionwhen there are multiple dealings with a single individual but could alsobe relevant to a single experience/transaction. (note that authenticationpresumes a proffered identity that needs to be confirmed, whereas identification does notñsee box 1.1.)while casual discussions of ids or id cards may assume simple,unique pairings of information and individuals, the reality is often morecomplicated. in practice, individuals usually have multiple identitiesñtofamily, to an employer or school, to neighbors, to friends, to businessassociates, and so on. thus, different sets of information are associatedwith an individual in different contextsñand sometimes an id card orequivalent is relied upon to provide or point to that information. foridentity systems that have existed in our society for some time, there is acommon understanding of what information is associated with each. arecord associated with a driverõs license, for example, includes trafficviolations; a record associated with a credit card includes late paymentinformation; and so on.multiple identities (that is, multiple sets of information corresponding to a single individual) may allow individuals to control who hasaccess to what kinds of information about them, and the use of multipleidentities can be a legitimate strategy for controlling personal privacy inan information society. in addition to providing a measure of privacyprotection, the use of multiple identities, even with respect to a singleorganization, serves legitimate and desirable functions in societal institutions as well. one individual may have several distinct roles with respectto a particular organization. for example, as far as the irs is concerned,one might be an individual taxpayer, an irs employee, or the comptrollerof a nonprofit organization.if, however, colluding agents are willing to make the effort, they mightbe able to link an individualõs recordsñthrough additional informationor correlation with each otherõs informationñto create a single record. inmany cases, an identity will include a common crossreference, such as asocial security number, that makes it trivially easy to link it to otheridentities. moreover, there are usually other possible crossreferences(such as address, age, and so on) that enable different sets of informationto be linked, though there may be institutional practices or practical barriids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18idsñnot that easyers that discourage such linking.2 in addition, questions arise as to howreliable the linking would beñsome institutions may not mind if linkagesare not completely supported, whereas others demand high levels of accuracy.sometimes, the use of multiple identities by a single person, or theuse of a single identity by multiple persons, may be evidence of (or exploitable for) fraudulent behavior. several criminals could use a singleidentity not considered problematic within the system, or a single terrorist could use the least suspicious of multiple identities accessible to himfor boarding a plane. in principle, a nationwide identity system could, insome contexts, eliminate or significantly reduce these sorts of problems ifit is designed to prevent both multiple individuals from claiming a singleidentity and multiple identities from being claimed by a single person.3one implication of the term ònational idó is that these identities arecentrally managed in order to make it difficult, if not impossible, for oneperson to have multiple identities. a system designed to link a person toa single identity (and prohibit use of multiple identities by a single person) within a certain domain must be mandatory (that is, everyone withinthe domain of interest must be included in the system), otherwise thosewishing to establish multiple identities would simply opt out of the program. also, checking is essential at the time an individual joins, to be surethat he or she is not already in the system. if an identity reveals potentially damaging information about a person, the person may try to avoidthe entry of this information into the system by creating a different identity. in some cases, this capability is controlled by having only one centralregistry for the identity information.42see the 1997 cstb report for the record: protecting electronic health information.3historically, the social security administration (ssa) allowed husbands and wives toshare a single social security number, and some grandfathered couples still do. thus, suchan ssa òidentityó refers to two people. similarly, children and one of their parents canshare a single passport and passport number. more commonly, the case of two or moreindividuals maintaining a joint bank account illustrates one identity (the bank account andassociated information) being shared by multiple individuals. creating multiple identitiesout of the single record set would be extremely hard for the issuing agencies, because thelinked people usually share a single last name. splitting the record, therefore, might require additional personal information.4a current example of a system that attempts to disallow multiple identities is the commercial driverõs license information system (cdlis). u.s. federal lawñthe commercialmotor vehicle safety act of 1986 (p.l. 99570)ñprohibits commercial truck drivers fromhaving multiple driving identities. in compliance with the law, cdlis is used by the statesñvia a centralized system that links the various issuing (state) agenciesñto check that multiplelicenses are not issued. however, nothing in the cdlis system itself prevents multipledrivers from using this single license and, in fact, fraud of this type has been documented(see òbiometric identification standards research: final report volume i,ó san jose stateuniversity, december 1997, at <http://www.engr.sjsu.edu/biometrics/fhwabiom.zip>).ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations19depending on the goals of the system, creating a tight identitytoindividual bond might be excessive. often it doesnõt matter exactly whosomeone is as long as it is clear that he or she is a member of a particulargroup (e.g., over 21 or an officer of a corporation with checksigningprivileges). such group identities are often extremely useful in expediting matters in certain contexts and may raise fewer privacy concerns.thus, any proposal for a new identity system requires a discussion ofwhat sorts of identity information would be relevant and helpful to thestated goals of the system.5 it also requires taking into account the levelsof confidence with which information was associated to an individual,since basing a system on fragile or unreliable data poses numerous risks.in addition, in some cases there are legal restrictions on what sort ofinformation may be asked of an individual (presumably to include in thatpersonõs associated identity information)ñfor example, it may not belegal to take into account a personõs race, gender, national origin, religion,and so forth. in other cases, retaining the advantages that come with theability of an individual to maintain multiple identities or to maintaingroup identities could also be desirable. all in all, establishing what ismeant by òidentityó in a nationwide identity systemñin other words,which collection of information is meant to encapsulate an individualõsdistinctivenessñis a firstorder concern.to whom and for what?once the notion of identity has been articulated, a determination mustbe made as to who would be issued an id (see box 1.1 for the distinctionbetween òidó and òidentityó) and for what purpose. first and foremost,the goals and requirements of the system must be carefully articulated.what problems should the system be designed to solve? how would itprovide solutions to those problems? without a priori decisions aboutwhat types of system functions, determined by policy choices, are desired, the software and hardware may impose unwanted or undesirablerestrictions or allowances.6if a goal of the system is the identification and/or tracking of nonu.s.nationals, then issuing ids only to u.s. citizens would not be sufficient.5if the goal of the system is to aid in counterterrorism, then relevant questions mightinclude the following: is a past criminal record a signal of a potential terrorist? is a longrecord of frequent travel a signal that a person is or is not likely to be a terrorist? and so on.6see lawrence lessigõs treatment of software imposing values in code and other laws ofcyberspace, basic books, new york, 1999.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20idsñnot that easyidentification and tracking of all individuals would be required.7 furthermore, nonu.s. nationals are already required to have ids when in theunited states (passports and, in some cases, visas); however, there islikely to be less control overñand therefore less confidence inñsuch foreignissued credentials. this raises questions about international coordination, cooperation, and harmonization.8,9 the problems now present inkeeping track of passports and visas, and in assuring that the right individuals and agencies have the appropriate data when needed, wouldundoubtedly persist in a new identification system.10 they also serve todemonstrate how difficult it is to implement a large identification systemthat is also robust.what is required for id issuance?the best that any system of authentication can do is provide a compelling connection with some previous verification of identity. accordingly, trust in the integrity of the system is based not so much on the firstsuch verification as on increasing confidence when all previous transac7the terrorist attacks of september 11, 2001, were carried out exclusively by nonu.s.nationals; none of them would have had a u.s. id if one had been required only of citizens.in addition, undercover operatives sponsored by a major foreign group or state hostile tothe united states generally are individuals without suspicious records. it follows that suchpeopleõs ids (be they within a united states nationwide identity system or outside it) wouldnot contain anything particularly problematic.8the logistical considerations involved in issuing highsecurity identities for everyoneentering the country are significant, especially when individuals do not need visas in advance (such as citizens of countries in the visa waiver program).9even if ids were issued to foreign visitors entering the united states, the informationwould be based on information provided by their country of origin. its usefulness is limited for at least two reasons: (1) many countries do not have much data about their citizensto begin with, and others may be unlikely to provide other nations with suspicious background information about their own citizens and (2) even if a country indicates that anindividual seeking admission to the united states has a problematic background record,that doesnõt mean the united states would consider such a person a risk (for example, acountry might provide warnings about political dissidents). adding information to anindividualõs id beyond what his or her country of origin provides (presumably gathered byu.s. intelligence) is problematic for a number of reasons, including cost, scale, paucity ofdata, and potential compromise of sources and methods behind the information.10as an example of this, the washington post reported that 15 of the september 11 hijackers applied for visas in saudi arabia, where officials have indicated that identity theft is aserious concern. see <http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/articles/a147882001oct30.html>.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations21tions with that particular individual have worked out.11 but at the outset,upon determination of who should have ids, a host of questions arises:how is identity first established within the system? what informationwould be required of an individual upon application? how would thatinformation be verified?such broad questions imply others that are more specific: how wouldthe òtrueó identity of individuals be established (e.g., for individuals inthe initial stages of a program or after card loss or destruction)? whatfamily name(s) would be used for the individual (birth name, adoptedname, married name, fatherõs name, fatherõs motherõs name)? couldmiddle names, diminutives, or nicknames be used as first names? whencan or must these names be changed? how would people with similar oridentical names (or other pieces of associated data) be differentiated inthe system? if participation in the system were mandatory, at what pointin a personõs life would the id begin to be required? how frequentlywould renewal be required? under what circumstances would reissuancebe required? what if the system òlosesó a person (that is, a person claimsto be in the system, but his or her information is not accessible)?what is the meaning of an id?broader, and perhaps more important, is the meaning of the id (thatis, the identity information about a person in the identity system and itsassociated token). would the law define rights, privileges, and obligations with respect to the id? would the law define a legal person in termsof the id, or vice versa, or neither? related to the meaning is the issue ofa citizenõs and the governmentõs responsibilities with respect to a nationwide identity system. a host of legal issues arises if an id is to havesignificance as, say, a governmentauthorized identification token. usingan id to verify a personõs identity would not be of value without anobligation to present it upon demand by authorities or in an authorizedsearch of oneõs person.12questions that would need to be addressed include the following:when must the id be carried? when must it be presented to a government official? what happens if the holder refuses to present it? whathappens if the id has been lost or stolen? how can information on the id11although trust developed in this fashion is vulnerable as well. for example, individuals may act in a completely trustworthy fashion for a long period of time and then behavefraudulently or criminally.12 other identification techniques, such as facial recognition, might not require an obligation to present an id.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22idsñnot that easy(or associated with it) be changed, and by whom? what if the infrastructure is down and the id cannot be verified? can only the federal government compel the presentation of the id, or would state and local government officials (which is where most lawenforcement occurs and manysocial services are delivered) also have such authority?13where does the identity information reside?these questions point to other questions that must be consideredabout the information associated with a personõs id. if it is a card or otherphysical token, what information is stored on it in humanreadable format on the id? what information does the id store in machinereadableformat? what information about or pertaining to an individual is storedin the identity systemõs databases? what information in those databasesis explicitly linked to information in other databases? who has the authority to create these linkages? who can access which information abouta person in the system? what algorithms are used to analyze data inorder to make assessments about a particular individual in a particularcontext (e.g., risk profiling)?14 (see figure 2.1 for a description of whatcan happen to identity information within a system.)many of the questions raised in this section point more broadly to theproblem of controlling function creep (as mentioned in chapter 1). decisions and policies made for one kind of system may not apply well if thatsystem begins to be used for other than its original purposes. in thecontext of an identity system, function creep can occur when the sameid/token is used to access multiple systems. (this has happened withdriverõs licenses in that they are used not only to prove authorization todrive, but also for proof of age and proof of address in various contexts.)13for example, if the goal were to locate and keep track of nonu.s. citizens and/orknown criminals within the united states, it would probably be necessary to challenge allindividuals (including citizens) to present the card at regular intervals and/or for a widevariety of activities. it would further be necessary to require all individuals to carry thecard at all times. it could be that many forms of purchases and transactions would requireuse of the card in an ancillary fashion, in the same way that purchases with a check oftenrequire the presentation of a driverõs license or equivalent form of photo identification. inthis way, the information associated with the card (and by extension with the holderõsidentity) would become part of the records generated by some set of interactions, just associal security numbers and license numbers are used todayña practice that suggests thedevelopment, in effect, of dossiers. a question then arises as to what an individualõs failureor refusal to present the card under these circumstances would mean.14the european data protection directive mandates a limited right of individuals toknow what algorithms are used to make decisions about them on the basis of personalinformation.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations23idformat?location?carddatabaseelsewherehumanreadablemachinereadablefigure 2.1 potential information flow in identity systems. the informationassociated with an individual identity could be distributed within the identitysystem in multiple ways. parts of it may be machinereadable, parts may bereadable by humans. parts may be stored on a card, in a database, or elsewhere.access to this information may be available to other systems, card readers, and/or people. not present in this diagram, but implicit, is the notion that pieces ofinformation, once outside the system, could then be added to other systems. or,information from outside the system could be incorporated into this system.understanding how information flows through the system, who has access to it,and who can change it will be important in understanding both the security andprivacy implications of an identity system.reuse of an id/token for purposes beyond the original intent leads to thefeasibility of correlating information from many different sources andsystems, which can be a cause of concern, particularly with respect toprivacy. strategies and policies that prevent or constrain function creepwill be an important factor in any identity system.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24idsñnot that easypermitted users of the systemanother set of policy questions arises over users of a nationwideidentity system (recall that a system encompasses numerous social, legal,and technological aspects): may only the government use or request anid? under what circumstances? which branches (federal, state, local) ofthe government? may any private person or commercial entity requestpresentation of an id within the system? may any private person orcommercial entity require presentation of an id? would certain privatesector organizations be required to use, ask for, and verify ids? if so,there is a possibility that such mandates might be interpreted as a safeharbor with respect to some liability questions. how would that behandled? who may use the information on (or associated with) the id,and for what? who may enter or modify information associated with theid?depending on the goals of the system, use of the system by the private sector may be necessary. for example, if the goal is to create adatabase to mine for suspicious activities, tracking of a broad class ofactivities in the private sector may be viewed as critical. to accomplishthis tracking, the id would need to be presented in connection with manytransactions in the private sector (e.g., when traveling on commercialairlines, when purchasing weapons, or when staying in a hotel.) however, as the set of users of a system expands, securing against misusebecomes more complicated. widespread use (and abuse) of the information associated with an id is a major concern, underscoring the importance of the initial policy choices related to the purpose of the system.management and operationsdetermining how any nationwide identity system should be managed and operated will be a key issue. if the federal government were toplay a leading role in operations and management, an overhaul of business and management practices at multiple levels might be necessary.15in addition, worldwide coordination would likely be necessary. for ex15since passage of the paperwork reduction act of 1995, the office of management andbudget has been challenged to manage complex information assurance issues, even thoughit has both budgetary and statutory authority. the department of defense, as another example, is charged with managing classified and other national security systems. nationwide identity systems pose new problems for each of these organizations. if the federalgovernment were to attempt oversight of the system, it would be necessary to determine anappropriate management model suited to undertaking management of largescale identitysystems.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations25ample, depending on the system goals, id issuance by u.s. consulatesabroad may have to be allowed, raising the potential for fraudulentlyobtained ids. pragmatically, even the most secure documents issued bythe u.s. government (passports, green cards, and even currency) havebeen forged with regularity. requiring federal government managementand operations expertise for nationwide identity systems thus raises ahost of issues that must be taken into consideration.another set of policy issues involves the roles of the public, private,and notforprofit sectors in a nationwide identity system. for example,in place of the above scenario (in which the federal government takesresponsibility for the management and administration of a nationwideidentity system), the private sector alone might develop and maintain thesystem. alternatively, the private sector could be subordinate to someprocuring federal agency, in which case any resulting data would besubject to federal laws such as the privacy act, the computer matchingact, the government information security reform act, and the computer security act.16of course, some hybrid modelñfeaturing a public/private partnershipñis also possible, though it would require explicit designation ofwhich sector is responsible for what and who might be liable to potentially aggrieved parties when errors or abuses occur. (in particular, careful attention should be paid to due process issues that may arise in connection with error correction.) in any case, it would be absolutelynecessary to define how a single organizationõs private role in enablingthe system should relate, if at all, to that same organizationõs private rolein its use. furthermore, how the private entity would be funded wouldalso be an issue. moreover, the goals of private institutions with respectto such a system are likely to be very different from those of public institutions.17 this difference in ultimate objectives could lead to significantly16these acts all impose regulatory requirements on federal agencies that collect, use, andmaintain sensitive information. the privacy act and the government information securityreform act in particular impose significant public notice and comment requirements onfederal agencies to ensure public participation in the appropriateness of planned agencyuses of data. the computer security act imposes a riskbased standard for agencies toensure they protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of sensitive federal information and supporting systems. if a nationwide identity system turned out not to be afederal government system, these laws would not apply and the protections they offerwould not be available to individuals whose information is housed in the system.17for example, a smallstore owner probably is not as interested in customersõ individualidentities at pointofsale transactions as he or she is in receiving assurance that paymentwill be made.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26idsñnot that easydifferent system requirements and design and could encourage functioncreep over time.permitted uses of the systema key question about a nationwide identity system is the uses towhich the information in it will be put. will the system be designed tofoster consolidation of other (especially federal) databasesñor might thatbe a predictable side effect? will it be designed to support individualizedqueries about individuals or provide a yes/no answer to simple questions(for example, òis this individual a u.s. citizen?ó)? will the system facilitatedata mining to establish òsuspicious profilesó? if the system is to be usedextensively by law enforcement, checks and balances would need to beput in place to prevent misuse of information (for example, constraintsshould be placed on how information collected or seenñperhaps tangentiallyñas a result of a particular investigation can be used for other purposes).consider the systemõs potential need to make realtime associationsof persons with identityña policy question with technologychallengingimplications. for many purposes, the linkage between the person and theidentity need not be provided instantly. an application for a mortgageneed not be processed in seconds. on the other hand, an identity thatauthorizes access to a secure building must be validated at the time of theintended entry. a related issue is the prospect of constant realtime correlation and analysis of an individualõs nationalidentitybased transactions.18 it is likely that such correlation, while possibly desirable depending on the goals of the system, would be financially, technologically, andadministratively impossible. for that matter, even retrospective correlation of all transactions would be extremely challenging and expensive.depending on what information must be tracked and stored, very largeamounts of data may be generated. and the analysis of large amounts ofdata while looking for certain kinds of patterns is a large and open research area.an additional correlation concern relates to potential uses beyondthose associated with public safety and counterterrorism. if private entities are allowed to use the nationwide identity system for their own purposes, it is likely that ids would be linked to a wide range of information,including bank accounts, credit cards, airline tickets, car rentals, hotelstays, retail transactions, purchases of controlled items (guns, explosives,18for example, it may be useful to correlate instantly the renting of a large truck in onestate with the purchase of a large amount of fertilizer a day later in another state.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations27perhaps some fertilizers, prescription drugs subject to abuse), phone lines,cell phone accounts, prepaid cell phones, and so on.19 even if the datawere not explicitly tied together by organizations, linking users by dataitems in their identity (such as ssns) is possible. in addition, systems thatemploy biometrics could have the ability to link individuals whose information is stored in different databases. that is, two different digitalrepresentations of an iris or fingerprint could be compared to see if theymight have come from the same eye or finger.20,21finally, privacy is of serious concern to many, especially when information linkages extend across the boundaries of multiple identitiesñforexample, in the linking of health data, credit ratings, or organizationalmemberships with our employment records. of greatest concern to mostpeople is the creation without authorization of such linkages by others,particularly those in positions of authorityñgovernments or employers,for example.the òminimization principleó is often used as a guideline when building systems sensitive to privacy concerns.22 it relates to the kind andquantity of information collected from and/or about individuals andemphasizes the need to collect only the minimum amount necessary for19the issues become even thornier when one considers the possibility that physical itemsmay eventually have their own tracking systems embedded in them. crosscorrelation ofinformation about things and people would likely result in an exponential explosion ofdata, further complicating the technical questions and confounding the privacy issues. seecharlie schmidtõs òbeyond the bar code,ó technology review, march 2001.20systems that will allow eye/finger versus database comparisons but not database versus database comparisons have been proposed, such as in n.k. ratha, j.h. connell, andr.m. bolle, òenhancing security and privacy in biometricsbased authentication systems,óibm systems journal, vol. 40, no. 3, 2001. another possible solution would be to usebiometrics only at three points in any given system: when checking for duplicate enrollments at initial registration to prevent issuance of multiple ids to a single user, whenchecking the binding between the cardholder and the card at pointofservice applications,and when reissuing the card. this check, which could occur without revealing the biometric pattern to the holder of the card, would create yet another point in the system wheresecurity is needed.21work done by latanya sweeney (see <http://sweeney.heinz.cmu.edu/confidentiality.html>) suggests that very little information is needed to uniquely identity a particularindividual in even an ostensibly anonymized database, suggesting that creating linkagesbetween databasesñeven without biometric data tying individuals to their datañmay notbe difficult.22this notion is articulated in a report of the u.s. privacy protection study commission,personal privacy in an information society, government printing office, washington, d.c.,1977, also known as the privacy commission report. three principles espoused in thatreport are to (1) minimize intrusiveness, (2) maximize fairness, and (3) create legitimate,enforceable expectations of confidentiality.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28idsñnot that easythe desired transaction. minimization also implies that disclosure of information should be limited to the purpose(s) for which it was collected.a pragmatic reason for this, in addition to the privacy aspects, is thatinformation is likely to have an accuracy commensurate with its originalpurpose (for example, the address given on a videostore membershipapplication form is more likely to be false than the home telephone number given on an employment application). in addition, the minimizationprinciple suggests that information should be deleted when no longerneeded and that the information disclosed be limited to that which isneeded to fulfill the request (as opposed to disclosing all available information about an individual or transaction).clearly, minimization runs counter to the kinds of information collection and correlation needed for the preemptive and retrospective analysescontemplated by proposals for a nationwide identity system meant tocounter terrorism and unlawful activities. resolving or mitigating thistension will be a serious challenge to those developing policies for a nationwide identity system.voluntary or mandatory?whether participation in the system is to be required or chosen is amajor policy decision. until the goals of the system are clearly articulated, it will be difficult to gauge which type of participation would bepreferable. some goals may directly or indirectly require mandatorychecking of identities and/or enrollment in the system. for example, ifthe goal were to prohibit travel by persons with malicious intentions, allair travelers would need to be enrolledñif enrollment were voluntary,such people would simply not enroll and would be permitted to travel. ingeneral, any attempt to ascertain that an individual does not possess anunwanted attribute (for example, malicious intent) requires a completeknowledge of behaviors related to that attribute, and hence mandatorychecks.clearly, a voluntary system is likely to meet with less resistance andto raise fewer concerns about civil liberties, although its voluntary naturewould seem to limit the kinds of goals that it could expect to achieve.however, even when a system is nominally voluntary, attention shouldbe paid to whether the large inconveniences of nonparticipation make iteffectively mandatory. deliberate consideration of whether and when torequire participation and the implications of widespread but voluntaryparticipation would be essential.there are at least two levels at which participation occurs: when anindividual establishes an identity within the system and when his or herid is requested or used in a given interaction. whether an individualids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations29must consent to presenting his or her id as opposed to having the idobserved from a distance (possibly without the personõs knowledge) isanother critical policy decision.what legal structures?in considering whether to implement any nationwide identity system, decision makers would have to determine whether and how such asystem would be regulated, and by whom. what constitutes misuse ofthe id or the data associated with it? what penalties are imposed on theholder for misusing or tampering with the id? what penalties are imposed on officers of the government for abuse of the card or misuse of itsinformation? what penalties are imposed on private parties or businesses other than the holder for abuse of the card or misuse of the identityand associated information? would laws permit, discourage, or forbidprivatesector actors from asking individuals to present the card for reasons other than those intended by the public sector?depending on the policy choices and deployment strategies a nationwide identity system reflects, its constitutional implications may be significant. the constitutional limitations on an agentõs ability to requirepresentation of ids,23 along with the limitations on the ability of congress to enact a nationwide identity system, should be explored beforeany such enactment to avert the costs of imposing the system and thenhaving to revise or abandon it in the face of its unconstitutionality, to saynothing of its effects on civil liberties.depending on implementation details and policy decisions, a nationwide identity system could be used to compile and store large amounts ofinformation on individuals, so that the legal restrictions on compiling andusing dossiers would have to be strictly obeyed. more broadly, an understanding of the principles that support significant privacyrelated authorities, as well as the major legal traditions and principles that drive u.s.privacy law and policy, will be necessary when considering identity systems that will handle personally identifiable information.24 in particular,23in fact, the supreme court has limited the situations in which government authoritiesand police officers may require individuals to leave an area due to lack of apparent purpose. see brown v. texas at <http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/cgibin/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=443&invol=47>.24u.s. department of health, education and welfare, secretaryõs advisory committeeon automated personal data systems, records, computers, and the rights of citizens, government printing office, washington, d.c., 1973.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30idsñnot that easyit would be helpful to have insight into the statutory models that pertainwhere mistakes can have severe repercussions (such as census information collection or tax returns).a further consideration is that because identification in the form ofbirth certificates and driverõs licenses has traditionally been done at thestate and local level, statesõ rights and associated issues could well arise.it will be important to examine the federal/state constitutional tensionsalong with how such issues may facilitate or impede development ofpolicy solutions in this arena. how, for example, should a nationwideidentity system interact with the other federal, state, and local identitysystems that are already in place? should these other systems continue,be coupled to the nationwide system, or be superseded?benefits and drawbackscreation of a wellthoughtout and welldesigned nationwide identity system could have some advantages over the current methods ofestablishing and verifying identity, such as stateissued driverõs licenses,immigration and naturalization service documents, and birth certificates.current systems have many characteristics that pose a challenge to meeting the goals expressed by proponents of a more uniform nationwideidentity system. for example, the documents in current systems are notstandardized in form or information content, so that a person inspectingan offered document often cannot determine if it even resembles an authentic document (much less whether it actually is authentic) withoutsubstantial research.similarly, such documents are generally not strongly linked to theperson who offers one for identity, allowing several people to use a singleauthentic document. identities also cannot be clearly revoked in currentsystems, allowing a person to successfully offer an invalid id as verification of identity. moreover, these systems do not universally employ stronganticounterfeiting measuresñindeed, the existing measures vary fromdocument to document, and the documents are not easily checked.a nationwide identity system, depending on its implementation,might drive many other forms of identification out of use by subsumingtheir functionality. several factors in particular could encourage widespread thirdparty reliance on the nationwide identity system to the exclusion of current systems. first, if the cost of the system is borne by thegovernment and its associated agencies, the systemõs use would be free toother segments of society unless measures (technical, legal, or otherwise)are taken to prevent unauthorized use. second, unless private parties areprevented by law (or restrictions on technology) from relying on the nationwide identity system, the liability associated with such reliance wouldids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations31be shielded by the governmentõs sovereign immunity. third, even if theprivate parties were forbidden to rely on the data, it is very likely thatprivate commercial organizations would begin to correlate data aboutcitizens based on their card and/or identity within the system. the information in these commercial databases may not be as strongly protected(legally or technologically) as, presumably, is the information in the nationwide identity systemõs own databases. the correlation and aggregation of personal information thus raise a variety of policy questions aboutthe use of such information and constraints on it.as garrett hardin wrote in 1968, òyou canõt do just one thing.ó25 theintroduction of a nationwide identity system would create ripplesthroughout society and the legal system. it is difficult to predict whatunintended effects these ripples would have. in part due to our frontierhistory, there seems to be a widespread belief in our country that somesocially good things derive from the current inability to strongly correlatean identity with an individualñfor example, a person often has the option of leaving some detail of his or her life behind. examples include theexpunging of the criminal records of minors, anonymous testing for sexually transmissible diseases (and the consequent publichealth benefits ofreducing the incidence of these diseases), shielding the identity of rapevictims from public view, and erasing the records of bankruptcy after astatutory interval.it is not known how much the smooth operation of society dependson such things, or on the assumption that they are possible. there is arisk, however, that they would be lost, or at least significantly impaired, ifa broadly used nationwide identity system came into existence.26 ensuring the privacy protections in these examples would likely depend oncarefully limiting access to, and the specific uses of, the systemõs databases, and on restricting the required uses of an id to certain circumstances.identity theft is already a critical problem,27 even without central25garrett hardin, òthe tragedy of the commons,ó science 162:12431248 (1968).26years of experience show that when people automate or regiment a previously manualor only lightly regimented system, they discover the new systemõs demand that things bedone òexactly rightó can create havoc, and that what used to be a smooth process needs tobe redesigned to accommodate the less flexible automated system. decision makers mustconsider that introducing a rigorous identity system might wreak similar havoc whenpeople discover that some authentication activities require more flexibility than the newsystem can offer.27time magazine notes that in 2001 the òfederal trade commission logged more than85,000 complaints from people whose identities had been piratedó and that òsome consumer advocates suggest as many as 750,000 identities are stolen each year.ó see <http://www.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,196857,00.html>.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32idsñnot that easyized, mandated identities for everyone. identity theft is an individualõsfraudulent claim that he or she is the person to whom the information inthe system refers, allowing him or her to derive some benefit from another party who is relying on that claim. it might involve theft of aphysical id token or it might involve the thiefõs learning some secret orpersonal information and using this in lieu of the token. one reason forthe problem is the broad misuse of ssns, coupled with the fact that thenumber itself is small enough to be easily memorized. in addition, birthand death data in the united states are not subject to stringent accuracyrequirements nor are they highly correlated, making it relatively straightforward to exploit a deceased personõs birth certificate in order to establish credentials as a basis for an identity.given the attendant risks, a nationwide identity system would needto provide much better protection against identity theft than do currentsystems of identification.28 additional questions arise in the context of anationwide system of how to recover from identity theft. who wouldhave the authority to restore or create a new identity for someone whennecessary? and what safeguards would be needed to prevent this authority from being abused?while offering better solutions to some problems surrounding identity theft, a nationwide identity system poses its own risks. for example,it is likely that the existence of a single, distinct source of identity wouldcreate a single point of failure that could facilitate identity theft. the theftor counterfeiting of an id would allow an individual to òbecomeó theperson described by the card, in very strong terms, especially if the nationwide identity system were to be used for many purposes other thanthose required by the government. paradoxically, it could be that a robust nationwide identity system makes identity theft more difficult whileat the same time making its consequences more dire. the economic incentive to counterfeit these cards could turn out to be much greater thanthe economic incentive to counterfeit u.s. currency.28one strategy might be for the system to avoid displaying humanreadable id ònumbersó or other unique identifiers to private organizations. this would, in effect, make itimpossible for anyone to read another personõs information off his or her card. (imagine,for example, a credit card that does not have the account number embossed on the front butmakes it available only to machines that read magnetic stripes, thereby reducing opportunities for casual theft). the strategy would instead require that agents use cryptographictechniques to authenticate individuals or enable transactions. see figure 2.1 for a description of the kinds of information in an identity system and where the information might endup.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.policy considerations33to determine what safeguards are necessary, a realistic threat analysis would be required. are the asyetundetermined countermeasures upto the challenge? any proposed system must be examined to determinewhether the net result with respect to identity theft would be better orworse than it is now. it may be that more robust security in a nationwideidentity system, along with increased attention to data integrity (for example, correlating birth and death records, as discussed above) in currentidentity systems, would mitigate some of the identity theft problems thatarise.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3technological challengesthough the aim of this short report is merely to point out some ofthe essential policy questions that would be raised by the introduction of a nationwide identity system, the committee believes thatthe technological and implementation challenges raisedñeven without aprecise characterization of such a systemõs goals or subsequent policiesñare enormous and that they warrant significant and serious analysis.this need becomes clear when an id is understood as an element of amuch larger system that includes technical, material, and human elements. at a minimum,¥cards and card readers (if used for validation) would need to bedesigned, fabricated, distributed, and updated or otherwise maintainedor replaced.¥a corresponding (backend) database would need to be established,maintained, and protected.¥procedures for checking the authenticity of ids and for verifyingthe presenter (with or without specialized equipment) would need to beestablished, promulgated, practiced, and audited.1341association of an identity card with its holder has to be verified before the identityinformation it contains can be relied upon (otherwise, stealing the card would permit thetheft of the cardholderõs identity).ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological challenges35¥means to discover, report, verify, and authoritatively correct mistakes would need to be put in place.¥a variety of security measures would need to be factored into allaspects of the system to be sure that it meets its objectives and is notvulnerable to things such as fraud or denialofservice abuses that canresult in privacy violations.fraud (and security in general) is a significant concern in any system,even the most technologically sophisticated.2 the nationwide scale ofsuch a system would require knowing that all aspects of the system arescalableña daunting problem for lesser systems.3 in any case, the challenges of building robust and trustworthy information systemsñthey areextensive and welldocumented4ñare accompanied by the even greaterchallenge of making the systems resistant to attacks by wellfunded adversaries.architectural issues include the degree of centralization of the underlying databases as well as the location and cost of data storage, computation, and communication, which can all be done at different places.5 forexample, how would authorized entities obtain the records they wanted,under what circumstances, and with what degree of authorization?would there be daily or weekly downloads of selected records to morepermanent storage media? would a realtime network feed be required(perhaps similar to those used in realtime credit authorization systems)?would it be possible to secure such a feed sufficiently?6choices among architectural options, as well as other options, woulddepend on the functional goal(s) of the system. architecture influencesscalability, cost, and usability/human factors. it also interacts with proce2a large breach of security with french banking cards is causing a significant upgrade ofthe infrastructure in france (<http://parodie.com/english/smart card.htm>). in the unitedstates, satellitesignal theft by smart card fraud is so extensive that it is now the focus of agovernment sting operation. see ross andersonõs work on cryptography and security,much of which is available at <http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/rja14/>.3cstbõs 2000 report making it better underscores the profound challenges associatedwith largescale systems.4see the cstb reports computers at risk (1990), trust in cyberspace (1999), making it better(2000), and embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers (2001).5a general rule is that the lower the cost of accessing an online database and the largerthe likelihood of doing so, the less sophisticated the card needs to be.6such security might require a very large new network that would have to be connectedinside the firewalls of the institutions and organizations using the system. securing such anetwork is extremely difficult; experience suggests that maintaining that security would bevery challenging.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36idsñnot that easydure: decisions must be made about who would be in charge of issuing,reissuing, renewing, revoking, and administering the cards, along withmaintaining, updating, and granting access to the database. a furtherconcern is the need for graceful recovery from failure as well as substitutemechanisms when the system is compromised or not adequately responsive at the time verification of an identity is needed. all of these factorsinfluence cost, as well as effectiveness.cost needs to be analyzed completely, on a lifecycle basis and withattention to numerous tradeoffs. even if software and hardware costsare minimized, experience with lesser systemsñfrom ssns to state driversõ licenses to military identification systemsñshows that there will besignificant ongoing administrative costs for training, issuing cards, verification, maintenance (keeping whatever information is associated with anindividual and his or her id up to date), and detection and investigationof counterfeiting.7 in particular, the costsñand technological and administrative complexityñof assuring the integrity and security of an identityinfrastructure are likely to be large. they would depend in part onwhether technology for automated checking of an idñas opposed to avisual check used today with ssns or driversõ licensesñis required, whichin turn depends on the choice of id technology (see box 3.1).for example, in response to legislation enacted in august 1996,8 thesocial security administration (ssa) conducted an analysis and produceda report on options for enhancing the social security card.9 citing a number of key business and technology assumptions that appeared valid atthe time of the study (1997), ssa estimated that issuing enhanced cardsmight have a lifecycle cost of $5.2 billion to $10.5 billion, depending onthe technology developed and deployed. these estimates included assumptions about the need for reissuing cards, issuing new cards, andmaintaining the systems in order to store data related to the cards andkeep that data up to date. the study did not assume that each ssn and itsrelated card would relate to just one individual, because ssa estimatedthat at the time, approximately 10 million of the 269 million valid ssns7there are numerous ways in which fraudulent (ònoveltyó) identification documents canbe obtained. a simple web search on òfake idó provides links to many possible suppliers.8section 111 of p.l. 104193, òpersonal responsibility and work opportunity reconciliation act of 1996ó (welfare reform) and section 657 of p.l. 104208, division c, òillegalimmigration reform and immigrant responsibility act of 1996ó (immigration reform).9see report to congress on options for enhancing the social security card, social securityadministration, publication no. 12002, september 1997. available at <http://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/ssnreport.html>.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological challenges37were duplicates (that is, two or more persons had been given the samessn). there was a variety of reasons for such duplication, including erroron the part of ssa and malfeasance on the part of some individuals.as with the design of any system, decisions about tradeoffs wouldneed to be made in advance. the security, efficiency, and effectivenessoptions chosen would depend on the goals and policies (see chapter 2)and the planned uses of the system. for example, a òtrusted travelerósystem whose sole function was to authenticate individuals who had beenpreviously certified as òtrustedó in the particular context of travel mightplace more emphasis on efficiency in travelrelated queues and on eliminating false positives than on protecting the fact that a particular personhas been certified as trusted (or untrusted). a secure driverõs licensesystem, in which the license is used as an id for many activities beyonddriving on a public roadway, might trade ease of replacing a lost licenseagainst the rigorous authentication of individuals who request a replacement. in making decisions about tradeoffs, understanding the potentialthreats and risks will be a large component of assessing the security requirements of a system.binding persons to identitiesa practical issue that would arise in a cardbased identity system isthat of relating cards and identities to individuals: how would the issuing authorities create this binding? most of the systems (both hypothetical and actual) alluded to in this report employ what is known as twofactor authentication, requiring the holders to present more informationthan the card itself (perhaps a face that matches the picture, a pin, or athumbprint) to verify that they are the legitimate holders.if someone has a valid card, how would anyone know that it belongsto him or her? a picture on the front of the card would not be sufficient ifvery high assurance is sought.10 if the card makes use of a magneticstripe, it would have been easy to copy the stored information to a newcard with a different picture. if the card is a memory card or smart card,duplication, while a little more difficult, would still have been possible. ifbiometric information11 is used, it could have been stored on the card and10the inability of human inspectors to reliably match faces to cards was demonstrated inpike, kemp, and brace, òpsychology of human face recognition,ó ieee conference onvisual biometrics, london, march 2, 2001.11there are a number of biometrics that might be used; for the purposes of this discussion, assume an iris scan or fingerprint.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38idsñnot that easybox 3.1cards and their requirementsthe presumed goal of a counterfeitresistant, longlasting, easily replaceable idpresents difficult technical challenges. with respect to the id itself, assuming that itis a physical artifact such as a card, a number of questions need to be answered.1form factorsñthe size, shape, and substance of the cardñwould likely play a partboth in acceptance on the part of the citizenry and in the cardõs resistance to counterfeiting. the more difficult challenges pertain to the aspects of cards that are determined by the kind of technology used.one could use a relatively simple card, like a credit card or driverõs license.each individual in the system would have a card with some information printed on itabout the holder and perhaps a picture. there might be a unique number on thecard, and the information in a nationwide database would be indexed by that number. the card itself might contain a magnetic stripe along with embossed and printeddata. as with a driverõs license or passport, access to this database (for reading dataout or putting data in) would presumably be limited,2 as it would be under theproposal by the american association of motor vehicle administrators to createnationwide standards for driverõs licenses.on the other hand, the counterfeiting of magnetic stripe cards is a trivial undertaking.3 more important, the ease with which the information contained in the magnetic stripe can be duplicated means that a counterfeiter can produce a clone cardand/or retransmit the data in other transactions as if they came from a legitimate card.all of this implies serious security and privacy vulnerabilities, and there is no verifiable connection (by means of biometrics, for example) between the holder of thecard and the person to whom the card was issued. hence, using such credentials asa basis for issuing new cards (and, ergo, identities) would compromise the accuracyof some of the identification data, inasmuch as the credentials depend on attestationsby the individual or even third parties.41the department of defense is now deploying a smart card that it refers to as a commonaccess card (cac) as an authentication device and for other purposes. the card combines amagnetic stripe, bar code, a photo id, and smart card technology. dodõs experiences may wellprove instructive when considering a nationwide system. however, the privacy concerns ofmilitary employees are likely to be different from those of average citizens, making an exactanalogue unlikely. in addition, the cac will be deployed for a population that is more than anorder of magnitude smaller than the u.s. population, which is more diverse in many dimensionsthan the military and currently less subject than the military to sanctions for failure to complywith the identification systemõs requirements.2on november 2, 2001, the washington post reported that the american association ofmotor vehicle administrators was working on a plan to link all driver databases and to strengthen the security and functionality of current driverõs licenses and state identification cards. see<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/articles/a327172001nov2.html>. see also <http://www.aamva.org/standards/stdaamvadlistandard2000.asp> for a description of aamvaõsstandard, which aims to provide a uniform means for identifying holders of driverõs licensesthroughout north america.3see, as just two of many examples, òskim artists can swipe your credit,ó at <http://www.techtv.com/cybercrime/internetfraud/story/0,23008,2583624,00.html> and ònewly discovered bug skims credit card data,ó at <http://www.newsfactor.com/perl/story/11494.html>.4note that the existing identification infrastructure (including the system of birth and deathrecords) in the united states often depends on the presentation of credentials and is highlydecentralized. the lack of common national standards generates skepticism about the quality ofthe data.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological challenges39another possibility is a memory card (or storage card), which would hold moreinformation and be more expensive than the magneticstripe cards of the previousexample.5 these cards contain memory as well as some security logic to preventunauthorized reading or tampering with their data. the information contained onthem could be digitally signed (that is, a number would be associated with thatinformation that is dependent on a secret known only to the signer as well as on thedata itself) to prevent easy counterfeiting. the correspondence between the user andthe card (along with the information on the card and in the database) could beascertained through biometric authentication, which would be undertaken usingspecial equipmentñsuch as a reader for fingerprints or iris scansñin addition topresentation of the card. an additional possibility is to use smart card technologythat permits computation (such as digital signatures and encryption) to take place onthe card itself.though successful attacks have taken place, these cards are even harder tocounterfeit than memory cards. they might have a name, photo, number, and biometric data, all of which could be cryptographically signed. the data would bebacked up in a database to enable checking when reissuing a card and checking forduplicates when the card is first issued. a card of this sort could engage in a realtime, cryptographic exchange with an online system to verify a userõs identityñpossibly without exposing details of that identity to the organization performing thedata captureñfor example, an airline or a retail establishment.as an example of a cardbased system using biometrics, consider the connecticut department of social services, which issues cards to aid welfare recipients.6fingerprints of each applicant are taken and compared with the fingerprint of allapplicants previously enrolled. under the assumption that people are not modifyingtheir fingerprints (and assuming no matching errors), this can prevent a single userfrom registering under multiple identities within the system. the card is printed withthe fingerprints encoded in a twodimensional optical bar code on the front of thecard. at pointofservice applications, the user presents a fingerprint that is compared with that encoded on the card. this prevents multiple users from making useof a single identity. other biometric technologies, such as iris recognition, might beuseful in this application as well. however, no biometric technology is completelyinvulnerable to attacks by sophisticated adversaries.7,85one example is the inspass and the data stored on it, coupled with a handgeometryreader at point of entry to verify identity. another example is a german identification card, diekarte, which uses two separate smart card chips and contains 22 separate mechanisms for cardvalidation/antifraud technology.6for a discussion of the costs associated with identification cards and fingerprints in socialservice applications, see òa review of five cost/benefit studies of fingerprinting in social service applications,ó roger salstrom, burton dean, and james wayman, available at <http://www.dss.state.ct.us/digital/news22/bhsug22.htm>.7t. van der putte and j. keuning, òbiometrical fingerprint recognition: donõt let yourfingers get burned,ó proceedings of ifip tc8/wg8.8 fourth working conference on smart cardresearch and advanced applications, kluwer academic publishers, september 2000, pp. 289303. also, see t. matsumoto et al., òimpact of artificial ôgummyõ fingers on fingerprint systems,ó proceedings of the spie, vol. 4677 (january 2002) and d. maio, d. maltoni, j. wayman,and a. jain, òfvc2000: fingerprint verification competition 2000,ó proceedings of the 15thinternational conference on pattern recognition, barcelona, september 2000, available onlineat <http://bias.csr.unibo.it/fvc2000/>.8d. willis and m. lee, òsix biometric devices point the finger at security,ó networkcomputing, june 1, 1998.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40idsñnot that easya òlive captureó of the biometric could be carried out when an individualpresents the card. the captured data would then be compared with thedata stored on the card. depending on what kinds of cryptographicprotections are used, this system could be susceptible to forgery as wellñfor example, someone might recreate the card with his or her own biometric information in combination with another personõs identity information.another scenario might be to have the person present a biometric to acontrolled scanner and present the card that contains reference information. both pieces of information are then validated in combination againsta backend server. however, this creates a requirement for high availability (that is, the system should be usable essentially all of the time) and adependence on reliable, secure network and communications infrastructures.in principle, a card coupled with biometrics and the appropriate infrastructure for reading and verifying biometric data may offer the greatest confidence with respect to linking persons and their cards. but gettingbiometrics technology right (including control of the risks of compromise) and widely distributed is not easy.12,13 there are additional issuesassociated with the use of biometrics, such as some popular resistance.14note that biometrics allows for cardless system options: a databaseonly system based solely on biometrics eliminates the risk of card loss ortheft, but realtime database accessibility then becomes a major consideration. in addition, compromise of the database is an even greater concernthan in cardbased systems, where the cards can be used to provide acheck against corrupted data in the database. further, a cardless systemimplies that anyone wishing to use the system (even for activities needingonly moderate to low levels of security) would have to invest in the equipment needed to access the infrastructure in real time.12òadvice on the selection of biometric products: issue 1.0,ó (u.k.) communicationelectronic security group, november 23, 2001, available at <http://www.cesg.gov.uk/technology/biometrics>.13j.d.m. ashbourn, biometrics: advanced identity verification: the complete guide, springer,london, 2000.14for further information, see the recent rand report army biometric applications: identifying and addressing sociocultural concerns, 2001. in addition, an accuracy issue ariseswith biometrics because it uses what are known as probabilistic measures of similarity. notwo images of the same biometric pattern (even fingerprints) from the same person areexactly alike. consequently, biometrics is based on patternmatching techniques that return sufficiently close measures of similarity. with enough (or not enough) informationabout the application environment and user population, it is possible to convert those measures into probabilities of a match or nonmatch. thus, incorrect decisions occur randomlywith a probability that can be measured.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological challenges41cryptographic protection and digital signatures, in combination withoffline verification of the signature and a properly deployed public keyinfrastructure (pki),15 could provide a measure of protection for the information associated with ids and guard against misuse. but for anytechnology, some degree of imperfection will exist. therefore, it is necessary to decide on thresholds for false rejection rates (false negatives) andfalse acceptance rates (false positives), not only for when the id is usedbut also at the time of issuance, reissuance, and renewal. policy decisionsñperhaps with corresponding legal backingñneed to be madeabout what happens in the event of a false negative or false positive.creation of exceptionhandling procedures for dealing with incorrect decisions opens up additional vulnerabilities for the system, as impostorsmight claim to have been falsely rejected and request handling as anexception.backend systemsonce methods are in place to satisfactorily link persons to ids, therequirements and goals of the system should drive decision making aboutassociated databases. the databasesõ principal features are likely to include an ability to search based on an id number or other unique identifier, various id attributes, and possibly biometric data. depending onwhether tracking and prediction are requirements of the system, significant logging, auditing, and data mining capabilities would be needed aswell.key issues related to this part of the system stem from both structuraland procedural decisions. if the database needs to be readily accessiblefrom remote locations (which is likely), it would almost certainly need tobe replicated. this, in combination with its perceived (and actual) valueand the fact that more people over a more widespread area would belikely to have authorized access to the system, makes it even more vulnerable to breakins: by physically accessing one of the sites, by finding somecommunicationsbased vulnerability, or by bribing or corrupting someone with access to the system. moreover, if verification of identity required an online database query at airports, a handful of òaccidentsó atkey places around the country (such as wires being cut at critical points ina way that appears accidental) could cripple civil aviation and any other15the committeeõs final report will examine pki and other authentication technologies indetail.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42idsñnot that easycommerce that required identity verification (for example, purchase ofguns or certain chemicals).note that availability would be a key aspect of any online componentof a nationwide identity system. while the desire for cost savings mightlead to such a backend system being accessible via the public internet (asopposed to a dedicated network), this would expose the system to yetmore attacks, both direct and indirect, on shared infrastructure, such asthe routing systems and hardware, the domain name system, or sharedbandwidth. as noted previously, it has proven extremely difficult tosecure systems that utilize the internet; a nationwide identity systemwould likewise need to be widely accessible and would inevitably be thetarget of malicious attacks as well as subject to unintentional or incidentaldamage. failure modes of the system would have to be very carefullystudied, and backup plans and procedures would have to be designedand tested for all critical systems that depend on use of the nationwideidentity system.a further complication would result if it were decided that differentusers should be granted different levels of access to the database, whetherfor aggregated data or information about individuals. this raises querycapability, access control, and security issues. related to the size of theuser base (that is, those who use the identity system to make some sort ofdetermination about an individual) is the question of whether the samesecurity measures need to hold for each user. for example, if the systemwere used broadly in the private sector, a clerk at a liquor store might berelatively less concerned about detecting counterfeit cards than would bean intelligence or lawenforcement agent granting access to national securityrelated sites or information. in addition, the clerk would need lessinformation (for example, age of individual is greater than 21) verifiedthrough the system than would the agent.it is a significant challenge to develop an infrastructure that wouldallow multiple kinds of queries, differing constraints on queries (based onwho was making them), restrictions on the data displayed to what wasneeded for the particular transaction or interaction, and varying thresholds for security based on the requirements of the user. determining thescope of use and the breadth of the user population in advance woulddictate which functionalities are needed.a further challenge resulting from a wide variety of users and uses isdata integrity. different users (even if the system were used only byagencies within the government) would undoubtedly have different perceptions of how critical the accuracy of the data is. therefore, to maintainthe quality of the data, controls over who could input data, and with whatdegree of specificity and security, must also be a factor in the design of thesystem.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological challenges43another necessary component of system and data integrity is auditing capability. keeping track of who has accessed what parts of thesystem and which data would be necessary for reasons of technology (totrack down errors and bugs, for example) and liability.16procedurally, such a large system would require many people to beauthorized to maintain and administer it. even if perfect technologicalsecurity were achievable, there would still be the security risk of compromised insiders, given the very large numbers of people needed to maintain and administer the system.17,18 the human factor would also be anissue with regard to data entry and possible errors in the database. this iswell known among statisticians, and various technical and proceduralsteps can be taken to offset risks of inaccuracy. in general, therefore,correction mechanisms would need to be created; however, these mechanisms provide additional opportunity for fraud. given the uses to whichsuch a system is expected to be put, however, and potential impacts onindividualsõ reputations and freedom to function as social and economicactors, mechanisms that allow individuals to know what is in the database and to contest and/or correct alleged inaccuracies would be desirable and politically essential (and, if run by the federal government, legally required). while such mechanisms can be found in creditreportingand medical databases,19 the lawenforcement and nationalsecurityframeworks that are motivating proposals for a nationwide identity system pose unique accessibility and disclosure challenges.another concern is that depending solely on feedback from participants to correct inaccuracies would catch only a fraction of the errors.people may tend to notice and report only those errors that interfere withsomething they are attempting to accomplish. an incorrectly enteredbirth date, for example, may not be noticed or corrected for decades andmay only come to light when the person applies for, say, medicare. an16indeed, major federal agencies such as the internal revenue service have run intoproblems with tracking and controlling access to information. for a discussion of this as itrelates to privacy, see peter p. swire, òfinancial privacy and the theory of hightech government surveillance,ó washington university law quarterly 177(2):461512 (1999).17cstb held a planning meeting on the topic of the insider threat in late 2000. for moreinformation, see <http://www.cstb.org/web/whitepaperinsiderthreat>.18the presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection at <http://www.ciao.gov/pccip/pccipreport.pdf> discusses cyberthreats, including the insider threat. fortune has examined the cost of insider attacks online at <www.fortune.com/sitelets/sections/fortune/tech/200101esecurity2.html>.19see, for example, computer science and telecommunications board, for the record:protecting electronic health information, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1997.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44idsñnot that easyaccumulation of latent errors is inevitable and leads to at least two problems: (1) by the time the error is discovered it may be hard to locate theinformation needed to verify the claim of error and (2) the act of makingthe correction may interfere with or delay some action that should beallowed by the system. creating a workable nationwide identity systemthat can compensate in effective ways for these inevitabilities is clearly anontrivial task.data correlation and privacya key question about a nationwide identity system database iswhether it would be designed to foster consolidation of other (especiallyfederal) databasesñor whether that might happen as a side effect. eitherway, proponents note that this would make information sharing amongintelligence and lawenforcement agencies easier,20,21 although the committee believes that it could also carry significant risks.a centralized, nationwide identity system essentially offers adversaries a single point of failure and presents an attractive target for identitytheft and fraud. the more valuable the information in the database andthe credentials associated with an identity, the more they become a targetfor subversion. unauthorized access might be sought by terrorists, stalkers, abusive exspouses, blackmailers, or organized crime. furthermore,to the extent that important activities become dependent on the system,the system becomes an attractive target for denialofservice attacks.implementing a secure and reliable nationwide identity system that isresistant to credential theft or loss,22 fraud, and attack is a significanttechnological challenge, with ancillary procedural challenges.related to consolidation, information correlation is facilitated by systems in which one individual has exactly one identity. this has bothnegative and positive implications. such a system is useful for predicting20a forthcoming cstb report will explore issues on critical information infrastructureprotection and the law, including a preliminary analysis of the issue of information sharingbetween the public and private sectors. for more information, see <http://www.cstb.org/web/projectcip>.21see, for example, larry ellisonõs october 8, 2001, article in the wall street journal, òdigital ids can help prevent terrorism,ó and cara garretsonõs december 2001 article in cio,ògovernment info sharing key to fighting terrorism,ó at <http://www.cio.com/government/edit/122001share.html>.22loss of id cards presents its own challenges to the system; if all of the individuals withlost ids were to become immediately òsuspectó in the system, intolerable backlogs and/oroverload could result.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological challenges45or detecting socially detrimental activities, because it avoids the uncertainty and confusion that may arise from multiple identities (notwithstanding that multiple identities can serve useful and socially desirablepurposes, as described previously). credit card companies, for example,can conduct behaviorpattern analysis for fraud detection.23 similar technologies must be used to detect behavior indicative of impending criminal or terrorist activities, although this raises concerns about profiling.on the negative side, such analysis also enables invasions of personalprivacy. the extent to which this occurs would depend heavily on thecircumstances under which an individual can be compelled to present anid, what information is retained, and which activities are tracked withinthe system (a topic explored above). indeed, detecting a problem mightonly be possible in some instances through broad analysis. this wouldnecessitate examining the behavior of many people who do not pose ariskñmost human behavior involves lawabiding citizens pursuing constitutionally protected activitiesñin order to identify the few who do.2423credit card companies make these correlations using both standard statistical methodsand neural networks.24for a discussion of some of the effects and implications of ubiquitous surveillancecameras, see the october 7, 2001, article by jeffrey rosen, òa watchful state,ó new yorktimes magazine.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4concluding remarks46given the complexity of a nationwide identity system, its potentialimpacts, and the broad scope of the issues it raises, the committeebelieves that much more analysis is needed. such analysis cannotproceed, however, without a clear articulation of the systemõs goals andrequirements. the committee believes that if a nationwide identity systemis to be created, the goals of such a system must be clearly and publiclyidentified and deliberated upon, with input sought from all stakeholders(including private citizens). given the economic costs, the significantdesign and implementation challenges, and the risks to security andprivacy posed by a poorly thoughtout system, prior public review1 isessential.thus the committee believes that proponents of a nationwide identitysystem should be required to present a very compelling case addressingthese issues and that they should solicit input from a broad range ofstakeholder communities.2 the committeeõs own discussion of a nation1for an example of how this might work, consider the publicreview cycle for the advanced encryption standard (aes); see <http://csrc.nist.gov/encryption/aes/>, managedby the national institute of standards and technology.2other stakeholder groups have already commented on the idea of a national identitycard, albeit within varying contexts. for example, in 1995 the cato institute presented anextensive policy analysis of the notion of a nationwide worker registry within the context ofa larger immigration debate (see <http://www.cato.org/pubs/pas/pa237.html>). theamerican civil liberties union offered similar opposition (see <http://www.aclu.org/library/aaidcard.html>); around the same time, privacy international prepared a report describing the use and implications of national id cards from an international perspective (see<http://www.privacy.org/pi/activities/idcard/idcardfaq.html>).ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.concluding remarks47wide identity system, although brief and modest in scope, raised numerous complex questions. it is clear that an evaluation of the potential costs,presumed benefits, and potential drawbacks of any proposed system isnecessary in order to fully appreciate its tradeoffs.care must be taken to completely explore the ramifications of anynationwide identity system not only because of the significant policy concerns and technological challenges but also because afterthefact costsñthe result of revoking, correcting, or redesigning after broad deploymentñwould be enormous. moreover, analysts must give seriousconsideration to the idea thatñgiven the broad range of potential uses,security requirements, and privacy needs that might be contemplatedñno single nationwide identity system is likely to meet the varied demandsof all potential users. undoubtedly many more issues exist that are noteven touched upon here.given the wide range of technological and logistical challenges, thelikely direct and indirect costs, the serious potential for infringing on therights and freedoms of ordinary citizens, and the gravity of the policyissues raised, any proposed nationwide identity system requires strictscrutiny and significant deliberation well in advance of design and deployment.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51acommittee member andstaff biographiesstephen t. kent, chair, is chief scientist for information security atbbn technologies, a division of verizon communications. during thelast two decades, dr. kentõs r&d activities have included the design anddevelopment of user authentication and access control systems, networklayer encryption and access control systems, secure transport layer protocols, secure email technology, multilevel secure (x.500) directory systems, and publickey certification authority systems. his most recentwork focuses on security for internet routing, very highspeed ip encryption, and highassurance cryptographic modules. dr. kent served as amember of the internet architecture board (19831994) and chaired theprivacy and security research group of the internet research task force(19851998). he chaired the privacy enhanced mail (pem) working groupof the internet engineering task force (ietf) from 1990 to 1995 and cochairs the public key infrastructure working group (1995present). he isthe primary author of the core ipsec standards: rfcs 2401, 2402, and 2406.he is a member of the editorial board of the journal of computer security(1995present), serves on the board of the security research alliance, andserved on the board of directors of the international association forcryptologic research (19821989). dr. kent was a member of cstbõsinformation systems trustworthiness committee (19961998), which produced trust in cyberspace. his other previous nrc service includes thecstb committee on rights and responsibilities of participants in networked communities (19931994), the technical assessment panel for thenist computer systems laboratory (19901992), and the cstb secureids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52idsñnot that easysystems study committee (19881990). the u.s. secretary of commerceappointed dr. kent as chair of the federal advisory committee to develop a fips for federal key management infrastructure (19961998). theauthor of two book chapters and numerous technical papers on networksecurity, dr. kent has served as a referee, panelist, and session chair for anumber of conferences. since 1977 he has lectured on the topic of network security on behalf of government agencies, universities, and privatecompanies throughout the united states, europe, australia, and the fareast. dr. kent received the b.s. degree in mathematics summa cum laudefrom loyola university of new orleans and the s.m., e.e., and ph.d.degrees in computer science from the massachusetts institute of technology. he is a fellow of the association for computing machinery and amember of the internet society and sigma xi.michael angelo is currently a staff fellow at compaq computercorporation and runs a laboratory at compaq that assesses biometricsand other securityenhancing technologies, such as smart cards. he isconsidered a subjectmatter expert for security and its associated technologies. his job is to provide technical guidance and input into strategicplanning and the development of secure solutions. in addition, he isresponsible for providing technical assistance to the corporate securityteam. dr. angelo possesses expertise in both biometric and token accessauthentication technology, including technical threat model and implementation analysis, as well as in risk reduction enhancement methodology, applied computer system security, computer forensics, advanceddata protection methodologies, and practical encryption techniques. hisexperience comprises 15 years in designing, implementing, managing,and supporting secure intra and internets, including gateways, firewalls,and sentinels, plus 20 years working at the kernel level of numerousoperating systems, including a wide variety of hardware platforms (frompcs to supercomputers) and software platforms (including several flavors of unix, msdos/windows/nt, and vms). he holds several patents. dr. angelo has been active in a number of trade standards organizations: the trusted computing platform association (tcpa), americansfor computer privacy (acp), the bureau of export administration technical advisory committee (bxatac), the information security exploratory committee (isec), the key recovery alliance (kra), the computersystems policy project, the crossindustry working team security working group, and the national institute of standards and technologyõs industry key escrow working group.steven bellovin is a fellow at at&t research. dr. bellovin received a b.a. degree from columbia university and an m.s. and ph.d. inids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a53computer science from the university of north carolina at chapel hill.while a graduate student, he helped create netnews; for this, he and theother collaborators were awarded the 1995 usenix lifetime achievement award. at at&t laboratories, he does research in networks andsecurity and why the two do not get along. dr. bellovin has embraced anumber of public interest causes and weighed in (e.g., through his writings) on initiatives (e.g., in cryptography and law enforcement) that appear to threaten privacy. he is currently focusing on cryptographic protocols and network management. bellovin is the coauthor of the recentbook firewalls and internet security: repelling the wily hacker, and he is amember of the internet architecture board. he was a member of thecstb committee that produced trust in cyberspace (1999), and he is amember of the national academy of engineering.bob blakley is chief scientist for security and privacy at ibm tivolisoftware in austin, texas. dr. blakley was chief scientist for dascom,inc., at the time of its acquisition by ibm and integration into tivoli.before joining dascom, dr. blakley was lead security architect for ibm,where he was employed for 9 years. in addition to his product designresponsibilities, dr. blakley led the ibm security architecture board andwas the ibm representative to the open group security program group.he also served for 2 years as the chair of the osf dme/dce securityworking group. he is the author of corba security: an introduction tosafe computing with objects, published by addisonwesley. dr. blakleywas also the editor of the open group pki working groupõs òarchitecture for public key infrastructure.ó he has been involved in cryptography and data security design work since 1979 and has authored or coauthored seven papers on cryptography, secretsharing schemes, accesscontrol, and other aspects of computer security. he was designated òdistinguished practitioneró by the 2001 annual computer security and applications conference. he is currently the general editor of the oasissecurity services technical committeeõs saml specification effort. heholds eight patents on securityrelated technologies. dr. blakley cochairedthe acm new security paradigms workshop in 1997 and 1998, and heserved on the program committees for several industry and academicconferences, including the nsa/omg distributed object computingworkshop, ieee security and privacy, and isoc network and distributed systems security (ndss). dr. blakley received an a.b. in classicsfrom princeton university and a masterõs degree and ph.d. in computerand communications sciences from the university of michigan.drew dean is a computer scientist at sri international. he joined srifull time in july 2001; prior to that he was a member of the research staffids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54idsñnot that easyat xerox parc. dr. dean holds m.a. and ph.d. degrees from princetonuniversity and a b.s. degree from carnegie mellon university, all in computer science. he pioneered the systematic study of java security andmore recently has worked across a wide range of areas in security, including cryptography, the theory of access control, and ip traceback. he hasreceived a best student paper award from the acm computer and communications security conference (1997), an outstanding paper awardfrom the acm symposium on operating system principles (1997), and abest paper award from the internet societyõs network and distributedsystems security symposium (2001). dr. dean is a member of the editorial board of springerverlagõs international journal of information security.barbara fox is currently senior architect, digital rights managementand cryptography, at microsoft corporation. she is coauthor of a number of research papers in the application of public key infrastructures topayment systems and, most recently, the ietf/w3c xml digital signature standard. ms. fox also serves on the board of directors for the international financial cryptography association.stephen h. holden is an assistant professor in the department ofinformation systems at the university of maryland, baltimore county(umbc). dr. holdenõs research, publications, and teachings leverage hissubstantial federal government experience in governmentwide policy ininformation technology management and electronic government. otherresearch interests include information policy, electronic authenticationpolicies and practices, and strategic management processes. he recentlyleft the internal revenue service (irs) as a senior executive after a 16yearcareer in the federal career service. while at the irs he served as theprogram executive, electronic tax administration (eta) modernization,reporting to the assistant commissioner. before that position in eta heserved as the national director of electronic program enhancements.during that time he led efforts to develop new eta programs, policies,and egovernment systems for the irs, including the eta partnershipeffort, electronic payments, electronic authentication, and the irs efilepromotional campaign. he also served on the federal public key infrastructure steering committee. prior to going to the irs, dr. holdenworked for 10 years at the office of management and budget (omb),doing a variety of policy, management, and budget analysis work. significant accomplishments at omb included drafting and completing arevision to the information technology management section of circulara130 and overseeing the publication of the first òinformation resourcemanagement plan of the federal government.ó dr. holdenõs career as afederal civil servant began in 1983 as a presidential management intern atids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a55the naval sea systems command. he holds a ph.d. (public administration and public affairs) from virginia polytechnic and state universityand an m.p.a in public administration and a b.a. in public managementfrom the university of maine.deirdre mulligan is director of the new samuelson law, technology and public policy clinic at the university of california, berkeley,school of law (boalt hall). while attending georgetown university lawcenter, mulligan worked on the american civil liberties unionõs privacyand technology project, where she honed her interest in preserving andenhancing civil liberties and democratic values. after law school, shebecame a founding member of the center for democracy and technology, a hightech, civil liberties public interest organization based in washington, d.c. for 6 years, mulligan was staff counsel at the center. she hasworked with federal lawmakers, governmental agencies, the judicial system, public interest organizations, and the hightech business community, with the goal of enhancing individual privacy on the internet, thwarting threats to free speech on the internet, and limiting governmental accessto private data. she has testified in several settings and contributed totechnical standards development. ms. mulligan received her j.d., cumlaude, from georgetown university law center in 1994 and a b.a. inarchitecture and art history from smith college in 1988.judith s. olson is the richard w. pew chair in human computerinteraction at the university of michigan. she is also a professor in theschool of information, the business school, and the department of psychology. her research interests include computersupported cooperativework, humancomputer interaction, the design of business informationsystems for organizational effectiveness, and cognitive psychology. professor olsonõs recent research focuses on the nature of group work andthe design and evaluation of technology to support it. this field combines cognitive and social psychology with the design of informationsystems. she began her career at the university of michigan in the department of psychology, served as a technical supervisor for human factors in systems engineering at bell laboratories in new jersey, and returned to michigan to the business school and the thennew school ofinformation. she has over 60 publications in journals and books and hasserved on a number of national committees, including the national research council committee on human factors and the council of the association for computing machinery. she has recently been appointed tothe chi academy of acmõs special interest group on computerhumaninteraction. dr. olson earned a b.a. in mathematics and psychology fromids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56idsñnot that easynorthwestern university in 1965 and a ph.d. 4 years later in the samedisciplines from the university of michigan.joe pato is currently the principal scientist for the trust, security, andprivacy research program at hp labs and has served as the cto forhewlettpackardõs internet security solutions division. mr. patoõs current research focuses on the trust needs of collaborative enterprises on theinternet, addressing both interenterprise models and the needs of lightweight information appliances representing the interests of the individual.he is looking at critical infrastructure protection and the confluence oftrust, eservices, and mobility. this work recently led him to be one of thefounders of the information technology information sharing and analysis center (itisac). his past work has included the design of delegationprotocols for secure distributed computation; key exchange protocols;interdomain trust structures; the development of public and secretkeybased infrastructures; and the more general development of distributedenterprise environments. mr. pato is currently cochair of the oasis security services technical committee and has participated on several ieee,ansi, and nist standards or advisory committees.radia perlman is a distinguished engineer at sun microsystemslaboratories. she is the architect for a group that does research in network security issues, recently focused on pki deployment. some of thegroupõs implementation will be distributed as part of a reference implementation for java. she is the author of many papers in the field ofnetwork security, as well as coauthor of a textbook on network securityand author of a textbook on lowerlayer networking protocols. she is alsowell known for her work on sabotageproof routing protocols. her workon lowerlayer protocols is also well known and forms the basis of modern bridging, switching, and routing protocols. this expertise is crucial tounderstanding the technology behind such things as providing internetanonymity. she has about 50 issued patents, a ph.d. in computer sciencefrom mit, and s.b. and s.m. degrees in mathematics from that institution.she was recently awarded an honorary doctorate from kth, the royalinstitute of technology, sweden.priscilla m. regan is an associate professor in the department ofpublic and international affairs at george mason university. prior tojoining that faculty in 1989, she was a senior analyst in the congressionaloffice of technology assessment (19841989) and an assistant professorof politics and government at the university of puget sound (19791984).since the mid1970s, dr. reganõs primary research interest has been theanalysis of the social, policy, and legal implications of organizational useids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a57of new information and communications technologies. dr. regan haspublished over 20 articles or book chapters, as well as legislating privacy:technology, social values, and public policy (university of north carolinapress, 1995). as a recognized researcher in this area, dr. regan has testified before congress and participated in meetings held by the department of commerce, the federal trade commission, the social securityadministration, and the census bureau. dr. regan received her ph.d. ingovernment from cornell university in 1981 and her b.a. from mountholyoke college in 1972.jeffrey i. schiller received his s.b. in electrical engineering (1979)from the massachusetts institute of technology. as mit network manager he has managed the mit campus computer network since its inception in 1984. prior to his work in the network group, he maintainedmitõs multics timesharing system during the time frame of the arpanettcp/ip conversion. he is an author of mitõs kerberos authenticationsystem. mr. schiller is the internet engineering steering groupõs (iesg)area director for security. he is responsible for overseeing securityrelated working groups of the internet engineering task force (ietf). hewas responsible for releasing a u.s. legal freeware version of the popularpgp encryption program. mr. schiller is also responsible for the development and deployment of an x.509based pki at mit. he is the technicallead for the new higher education certifying authority being operatedby the corporation for research and educational networking (cren).mr. schiller is also a founding member of the steering group of the newengland academic and research network (nearnet). nearnet, nowpart of genuity, inc., is a major nationwide internet service provider.soumitra sengupta is assistant professor in the department ofmedical informatics at columbia university. dr. sengupta has focusedhis work on the challenges of security and privacy in health care, complementing his academic work by service as security officer for the newyorkpresbyterian healthcare system. his research interests are in theareas of distributed systems, their monitoring, management, and securityaspects, and their application in a health care environment. he is interested in the architectural design and engineering concerns of buildinglarge, functioning systems over heterogeneous platforms and protocols.dr. sengupta holds a b.e. from birla institute of technology and science(electrical and electronics engineering), pilani, india, and m.s. and ph.d.degrees in computer science from the state university of new york atstony brook. he was a member of the association for computing machinery(acm) from 1984 to 1994 and the institute for electrical and electronicids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58idsñnot that easyengineers (computer society) from 1984 to1992, and is currently a member of the american medical informatics association.james l. wayman has been the director of the biometrics test centerat san jose state university in san jose, california, since 1995. the centeris funded by the united states and other countries to develop standardsand scientific test and analysis methods and to advise on the use or nonuse of biometric identification technologies. the test center served as theu.s. national biometrics test center from 1997 to 2000. dr. waymanreceived the ph.d. degree in engineering from the university of california at santa barbara in 1980 and joined the faculty of the department ofmathematics at the u.s. naval postgraduate school in 1981. in 1986, hebecame a fulltime researcher for the department of defense in the areasof technical security and biometrics. dr. wayman holds three patents inspeech processing and is the author of dozens of articles in books, technical journals, and conference proceedings on biometrics, speech compression, acoustics, and network control. he serves on the editorial boards oftwo journals and on several national and international biometrics standards committees. he is a senior member of the institute of electrical andelectronic engineers.daniel j. weitzner is director of the world wide web consortiumõstechnology and society activities. as such, he is responsible for development of technology standards that enable the web to address social, legal,and public policy concerns such as privacy, free speech, protection ofminors, authentication, intellectual property, and identification. he is alsothe w3cõs chief liaison to public policy communities around the worldand a member of the icann protocol supporting organizationõs protocolcouncil. mr. weitzner holds a research appointment at mitõs laboratoryfor computer science and teaches internet public policy at mit. beforejoining the w3c, mr. weitzner was cofounder and deputy director of thecenter for democracy and technology, an internet civil liberties organization in washington, d.c. he was also deputy policy director of theelectronic frontier foundation. as a leading figure in the internet publicpolicy community, he was the first to advocate user control technologiessuch as content filtering and rating to protect children and avoid government censorship of the internet. these arguments played a critical role inthe 1997 u.s. supreme court case reno v. aclu, awarding the highestfree speech protections to the internet. he successfully advocated theadoption of amendments to the electronic communications privacy act,creating new privacy protections for online transactional information suchas web site access logs. mr. weitzner has a degree in law from buffalolaw school and a b.a. in philosophy from swarthmore college. his pubids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a59lications on communications policy have appeared in the yale law review,global networks, computerworld, wired, social research, electronic networking: research, applications & policy, and whole earth. he is also a commentator for nprõs marketplace radio.stafflynette i. millett is a study director and program officer with thecomputer science and telecommunications board of the national research council. she is currently involved in several cstb projects alongwith the authentication study, including a comprehensive exploration ofprivacy in the information age and a study examining the fundamentalsof computer science. she is also exploring possible study options forcstb with respect to the issues of open source software development,dependability of complex software systems, and women in computer science. she recently completed the cstb study that produced embedded,everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers. before joining cstb, she was involved in research on static analysistechniques for concurrent programming languages as well as research onvaluesensitive design and informed consent online. she has an m.sc. incomputer science from cornell university. her undergraduate degree isin mathematics and computer science from colby college. her graduatework was supported by both an nsf graduate fellowship and an intelgraduate fellowship. while at cornell, ms. millett cofounded its engineering graduate student association.jennifer bishop is a senior project assistant with the computer science and telecommunications board of the national research council.before moving to washington, ms. bishop worked for the city of ithaca,new york, coordinating the police departmentõs transition to a new sqlbased time accrual and scheduling application. her other work experience includes designing customized hospitality industry performance reports for ithacabased realtime hotel reports, llc, maintaining thepolice records database for the city of ithaca, and handpainting furniture for mackenziechilds, ltd., of aurora, new york. she is an artistworking in oil and mixed media and is currently attempting to make herprofessional debut on the washington art scene. ms. bishop holds ab.f.a (2001) in studio art from cornell university.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bwhat is cstb?as a part of the national research council, the computer scienceand telecommunications board (cstb) was established in 1986to provide independent advice to the federal government on technical and public policy issues relating to computing and communications.composed of leaders from industry and academia, cstb conducts studies of critical national issues and makes recommendations to government,industry, and academic researchers. cstb also provides a neutral meeting ground for consideration of complex issues where resolution andaction may be premature. it convenes invitational discussions that bringtogether principals from the public and private sectors, assuring consideration of all perspectives. the majority of cstbõs work is requested byfederal agencies and congress, consistent with its national academiescontext.a pioneer in framing and analyzing internet policy issues, cstb isunique in its comprehensive scope and effective, interdisciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, and policy issues. beginning withearly work in computer and communications security, cyberassuranceand information systems trustworthiness have been a crosscutting themein cstbõs work. cstb has produced several reports known as classics inthe field, and it continues to address these topics as the fields grow inimportance.to do its work, cstb draws on some of the best minds in the country,inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service. studiesare conducted by balanced committees without direct financial interests60ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b61in the topics they are addressing. those committees meet, confer electronically, and build analyses through their deliberations. additionalexpertise from around the country is tapped in a rigorous process ofreview and critique, further enhancing the quality of cstb reports. byengaging groups of principals, cstb gets the facts and insights critical toassessing key issues.the mission of cstb is to¥respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations,and private industry for advice on computer and telecommunicationsissues and from the government for advice on computer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization, and modernization;¥monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science andtelecommunications, with attention to issues of human resources, information infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, technology,and telecommunications as critical resources; and¥foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing andtelecommunications technologies and other fields, at large and within thenational academies.as of march 2002, cstb activities with security and privacy components address privacy in the information age, critical information infrastructure protection, authentication technologies and their privacy implications, information technology for countering terrorism, and geospatialinformation systems. additional studies examine broadband, digital government, the fundamentals of computer science, limiting childrenõs accessto pornography on the internet, digital archiving and preservation, andinternet navigation and the domain name system. explorations touchingon security and privacy are under way in the areas of the insider threat,cybersecurity research, cybersecurity principles and practices, dependable/safe software systems, wireless communications and spectrum management, open source software, digital democracy, the òdigital divide,ómanageable systems, information technology and journalism, supercomputing, and information technology and education.for more information on cstb, see its web site at <http://www.cstb.org>; write to cstb, national research council, 2101 constitution avenue, n.w., room ha 560, washington, dc 20418; call at(202) 3342605; or email the cstb at cstb@nas.edu.ids  not that easy: questions about nationwide identity systemscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.