detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10355information technology research, innovation, andegovernment168 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309383523 | doi 10.17226/10355committee on computing and communications research to enable better use ofinformation technology in government, national research councilinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on computing and communications research toenable better use of information technology in governmentcomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencesnational research councilnational academy presswashington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy press 2101 constitution avenue, n.w. washington dc 20418notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsiblefor the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national science foundation undergrant no. eia9809120 and by the national aeronautics and space administration. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in thispublication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of thesponsors.cover: photo courtesy of the u.s. department of agriculture photo library.international standard book number 0309084016library of congress control number: 2002105188additional copies of this report are available from:national academy press2101 constitution ave., n.w.box 285washington, dc 2041880062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.educopyright 2002 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americainformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a.wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr. kenneth i. shine is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the nationalacademy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providingservices to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute ofmedicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chairman and vicechairman, respectively, of the national research council.national academy of sciencesnational academy of engineeringinstitute of medicinenational research councilinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on computing and communicationsresearch to enable better use of informationtechnology in governmentwilliam l. scherlis, carnegie mellon university, chairw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstdavid dewitt, university of wisconsin at madisonsusan dumais, microsoft researchwilliam eddy, carnegie mellon universityeve gruntfest, university of colorado at colorado springsdavid kehrlein, governorõs office of emergency services, state ofcaliforniasallie kellermcnulty, los alamos national laboratorymichael r. nelson, ibm corporationclifford neuman, information sciences institute, university ofsouthern californiastaffjon eisenberg, senior program officer and study directormarjory s. blumenthal, director, cstbjane griffith, acting director, cstb (january 1998 throughjanuary 1999)david padgham, research associatejanet briscoe, administrative officerivinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chairdavid borth, motorola labsjames chiddix, aol time warnerjohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstthomas e. darcie, at&t labs researchjoseph farrell, university of california at berkeleyjeffrey m. jaffe, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesanna karlin, university of washingtonbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitydonald norman, nielsen norman groupdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt, chicagokent college of lawburton smith, cray inc.terry smith, university of california at santa barbaralee sproull, new york universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitymarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistalan s. inouye, senior program officerjon eisenberg, senior program officerlynette i. millett, program officercynthia patterson, program officersteven woo, program officerjanet briscoe, administrative officerdavid padgham, research associatemargaret huynh, senior project assistantdavid drake, senior project assistantjanice sabuda, senior project assistantjennifer bishop, senior project assistantbrandye williams, staff assistantvinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacethe emergence of the internet and other electroniccommerce technologies has fundamentally altered the environment in which government delivers services to citizens, businesses, and other government entities. new expectationsñthat government will match the private sector inoffering direct, rapid, roundtheclock access to information and servicesñare cultivating the growth of òegovernmentó: the application ofinformation technology (it) and associated changes in agency practices todevelop more responsive, efficient, and accountable government operations while fostering a more informed and engaged citizenry.the role of government with respect to it research, development, anduse has also been shifting. the private sector has eclipsed governmentleadership in many areas of it adoption and use, even as governmentcontinues in its critical role as the principal agent for longterm it basicresearch and innovation. much like their counterparts in the private sector, many in government are actively experimenting with exploiting thenew technologies to improve operations and the delivery of services. awide range of ideas is emerging from these experiments, contributing totechnology development, the improvement of business practices, a morestreamlined government, and a more sophisticated public. followingseptember 11, 2001, a new mission, homeland defense, is placing newdemands on it capabilities and is heightening interest in such relatedareas as critical infrastructure protection.viiinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefaceas part of its digital government research program, the nationalscience foundation (nsf) requested that the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) undertake a study of how it researchcould contribute more effectively to the activities and operations of government. cstb established the committee on computing and communications research to enable better use of information technology in government to explore promising research opportunities and to identify waysto foster the exchange of ideas among computing and communicationsresearchers and federal managers, including mechanisms for technologytransition from the laboratory to government agencies and ultimately tooperational government systems.the first phase of the committeeõs work focused on two illustrativeapplication areasñcrisis management and federal statistics. in each case,the study committee convened a workshop to facilitate interaction between stakeholders from the individual domains and researchers in computing and communications systems and to explore research topics thatmight be of relevance throughout the government. the initial workshopin the series, held in december 1998, convened it researchers and crisismanagement professionals from all levels of government and the privatesector. the second workshop, held in february 1999, explored how itresearch could contribute to more effective collection, processing, anddissemination of federal statistical data. this second workshop was conducted in cooperation with the national research councilõs committeeon national statistics (cnstat).the second phase of the study, culminating in the preparation of thisreport, combined what was learned in the two workshops with the resultsof previous cstb reports and other efforts to examine it research and egovernment.1 to supplement what was learned in the workshops, thecommittee held two other meetings that included datagathering sessions.staff and individual committee members augmented the information obtained from these meetings by interviewing government officials working on egovernment initiatives. in july 2001, the committee issued aletter report to the national science foundation laying out the rationale1this information included three workshop reports commissioned by the national science foundationõs digital government program: sharon dawes, peter bloniarz, kristine l.kelly, and patricia d. fletcher, 1999, some assembly required: building a digital governmentfor the 21st century, center for technology in government, state university of new york atalbany, march; herbert schorr and salvatore j. stolfo, 1997, towards the digital governmentof the 21st century (a report from the workshop on research and development opportunities in federal information services), june 24; and national center for supercomputingapplications (ncsa), university of illinois, 1999, toward improved geographic informationservices within a digital government, ncsa, urbanachampaign, ill., june.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixfor involving computer science researchers in egovernment work (seeappendix b in this report). in completing the second phase of the study,the committee was mindful of the increased emphasis in 2002 on criticalinfrastructure protection (both within and outside government) as well asa variety of initiatives to harness or develop it capabilities for homelanddefense and counterterrorism.while a number of other reports have addressed the significant challenges in better deploying todayõs technologies in government, thiscommitteeõs final report distinguishes itself by focusing primarily on therelationships between it research and government it applications. itsrecommendations are intended to foster connections between it researchand egovernment innovation and to help catalyze the involvement of itresearchers in defining and realizing egovernment programs. thecommitteeõs findings and recommendations are presented in the òsummary and recommendationsó chapter of this report; subsequent chaptersprovide supporting material.the committee appreciates the encouragement and support of larrybrandt and valerie gregg of the national science foundation. they provided vision and a wealth of information, and they gracefully accommodated a long schedule.the committee thanks karen sollins for her contributions to the earlystages of the work, prior to her accepting an assignment at the nationalscience foundation. she contributed valuable ideas, energy, and organizational skill.the committee also thanks the participants in the two major workshops, as well as the many individuals who responded to its requests forbriefings and discussions. the committee expresses its appreciation toandrew a. white, director of the national research councilõs committeeon national statistics, which cosponsored the second workshop convenedfor this project, for his support and assistance.the committee also acknowledges the effective support provided bythe computer science and telecommunications board and staff. in particular, the committee appreciates the valuable suggestions offered byboard members during the review process. the study was supported byseveral cstb staff members, in capacities ranging from organizing committee meetings and the major workshops to assisting in researching andediting of the several reports. in particular, the committee thanks janegriffith, for getting the project off to an excellent start and making manysubstantive contributions to the effort, and marjory blumenthal for guidance and encouragement. david padgham provided significant researchsupport to this project. finally, the committee thanks study director joninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefaceeisenberg for his perseverance and professionalism in seeing the projectthrough to completion. he provided careful facilitation of the process,and he made fundamental intellectual contributions to the product.william l. scherlis, chaircommittee on computing and communications research toenable better use of information technology in governmentinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs report reviewcommittee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candidand critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness tothe study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remainconfidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wishto thank the following individuals for their review of this report:renny dipentima, sra international,kenneth l. kraemer, university of california at irvine,bruce w. mcconnell, mcconnell international,john ousterhout, interwoven inc., androbert sproull, sun microsystems laboratories.although the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the reportbefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by sam fuller,analog devices inc. appointed by the national research council, he wasresponsible for making certain that an independent examination of thisreport was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures andthat all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility forthe final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committeeand the institution.xiinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentssummary and recommendations11vision for itenabled enhancement ofgovernment21elements of the vision, 29satisfying expectations for customer service, 30increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of governmentoperations, 33providing effective access to information, 33providing access to a full range of transactions online, 34increasing participation in government, 35meeting expectations for trustworthiness, 35meeting special challenges in governmentunique areas, 36technical and process challenges to advancing egovernmentprograms, 36why now?, 38technology foundations for egovernment in place, 38growing awareness and demand, 40egovernment policy initiatives, 41government it research for electronic government, 43xiiiinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontents2special considerations in egovernment:why government leads in demand for certaininformation technologies45ubiquity, 45access for everyone, 46access everywhere, anytime, 48trustworthiness, 48access and confidentiality, 52structural constraints, 53it in support of government functions, 54crisis management and homeland defense, 54federal statistics, 55military applications, 58archiving, 583technology levers61the role of research in meeting it needs, 61some egovernment research areas, 64information management, 65humancomputer interface, 70network infrastructure, 73information systems security, 75ecommerce and related infrastructure services, 79models and simulation for decision making, 81software technologies, 82largescale systems, 84middleware, 85organizational and social issues, 864technology transition and programmanagement: bridging the gap betweenresearch and impact88strategies and models for program management, 94leverage in the supply chain model, 97will industry do it?, 100dimensions of risk, 103evaluation risk, 105solutionconcept risk, 107problemconcept risk, 108integration and adoption risk, 109mooreõs law risk, 112reliability and usability risks, 113planning risks, 114summary, 115information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvappendixesaegovernment scenarios119bjuly 2001 letter report to the national science foundation125cworkshops convened for this project: agendas andparticipants138information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1summary and recommendationsin response to a request from the national science foundation (nsf)for advice on planning for egovernment innovation programs, the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) convened the committee on computing and communications research to enable betteruse of information technology in government. the committee wascharged with examining how information technology (it) research canimprove existing government services, operations, and interactions withcitizensñas well as create new ones. the first phase of the committeeõsstudy featured workshops examining two illustrative application areasñcrisis management and federal statisticsñand concluded with the publication of two summary reports in 1999 and 2000.1 the second phase ofthe project synthesized the results of the two workshops, informationgleaned from other published work on it research and egovernment,and material obtained in the course of two datagathering meetings andsupplemental individual interviews. preliminary results of the secondphase were described in a letter report to the national science foundation1computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 1999. summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis management. national academy press, washington, d.c.; and cstb, nrc. 2000. summary of aworkshop on information technology research for federal statistics. national academy press,washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2it research, innovation, and egovernmentin 2001 (see appendix b). in this òsummary and recommendationsóchapter, the committee presents the final results of its study and offersrecommendations intended to foster increased and more effective collaboration between it researchers and government agencies. chapters 1through 4 provide supporting discussion and analysis.government has done much to leverage it to deploy egovernmentservices, but much work remains before the vision of egovernment canbe fully realized (see finding 1.1, below), whether through adoption ofalreadyexisting commercial technologies and practices (finding 2.1) orthrough targeted research efforts directed at helping government and itssuppliers address challenging new requirements (finding 2.2). this report identifies research challenges related to egovernment and looks atthese challenges in the wider context of government it practice and thetransition of innovative information technologies from the laboratory tooperational systems.the conceptualization, design, development, testing, delivery, andsupport of operational government it systems for agency end users involve an extensive òsupply chainó that includes system integrators, vertical suppliers, major vendors, smaller technology companies, consultants,architects, and researchers. government end users and it researchersare, in some sense, at opposite ends of this supply chain and so may seemto be unlikely allies. but both in fact have a natural shared interest ininnovation and in meeting future needs (findings 3.1 and 3.2). indeed, byworking together, they can conceptualize new technology opportunitiesñand with lower overall risk than if they had been working independentlyof each other. in collaborative efforts, researchers can gain understandingof the real problems that users face, and so can reduce the risks associatedwith the process of selecting research problems to address. working in agovernment setting also provides researchers with access to artifactsñcomputer systems, software, and data setsñto support experimentationand study. government end users gain understanding of emerging technologies and of the feasibility of implementing new operational concepts.in addition, there is mutual reinforcement of the dual roles of governmentas a farsighted customer working with its suppliers to ensure that futuremission needs can be met and as an investor in longterm research withbroad socioeconomic impact (findings 3.1 and 3.3).the establishment of ties between it researchers and governmentagencies does not mean, however, that researchers and end users shouldsomehow shortcircuit the supply chain in developing new systems, orthat the government will incur risks of early adoption as a result of entering into this kind of collaboration. the consequence, rather, is less risk forthe governmentñbecause it is better informed in doing its job of definingrequirements for its interactions throughout its supply chain. indeed,information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations3success in this overall model requires care and thought regarding technology transition at all stages of the supply chain (findings 2.3 and 4.2).the opportunities and challenges of egovernmentfinding 1.1.early efforts have demonstrated the potential of egovernment, though much work remains before that potential can befully realized. achieving that potential will require addressing abroad set of interrelated issues regarding organization, policy, technology development and transition, systems architecture, and engineering practice. in addressing these issues, the government willbenefit from collaboration with the computer science research community.the emergence of the internet and other technologies for electroniccommerce has led naturally to the development of òdigital governmentóor òegovernmentó servicesñthe application of information technology,combined with changes in agency practices, to develop more responsive,efficient, and accountable government operations. during the 1990s, federal legislative and executive branch initiatives and state and local government efforts added impetus, fostering experimentation and new programs. early government web sites were the pioneering creations ofenterprising individuals and groups. today government agency and organization web sites get attention from the highest levels of governmentand the most senior officials. underscoring the importance of government it capability, in 2002 the federal government appointed a chief technology officer, whose mission includes coordination of efforts in egovernment. egovernmentñwhich has diverse constituencies that includecitizens and other individuals; businesses; nonprofit organizations; andthe many federal, state, and local agenciesñis envisioned as providingsome of the following key benefits:¥more accessible government information;¥faster, smoother transactions with government agencies;¥enhanced ubiquity of access to information and transactions;¥greater effectiveness in meeting the needs of specific groups ofusers;¥increased participation in government by all people, fostering amore informed and engaged citizenry;¥greater ability to meet expectations for advances in governmentunique areas, including challenges in the newly emerging homeland security mission; and¥more efficient internal government operations.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4it research, innovation, and egovernmentideas from early experiments in egovernment have contributed bothto technology development and to the improvement of government practices. a tremendous amount of experience already exists in creating anddeploying egovernment capabilities. this experience resides in state andlocal government as well as in a broad span of federal agencies. increasingly, the best practices emerging from this experience are being adoptedby many government agencies.from the citizenõs perspective, among the most visible enhancementshave been new means for the public to access government information,the development of taskoriented crossagency portals (such as seniors.gov and students.gov), and the recently launched governmentwide portalfirstgov.gov. other visible illustrations include computerbased tax filingand inquiryresponse services that are provided by multiple agencies,each accessed through a taskoriented web portal.the benefits to business have also been considerable, includingbroader access to government data, more rapid and efficient interactionwith regulatory agencies (such as electronic filing of diverse requiredreports and comments on proposed regulations), and streamlined acquisition and procurement processes. in addition, administrative burdensassociated with initiating and managing small and startup businesses arebeing reduced through online resources.much work remains if government is to fully realize the ambition ofbroadening egovernment services from information access to transactionsupportñservices that enable citizens, businesses, and other governmententities to submit information to, engage in financial transactions with, orotherwise interact with government organizations. much also remains tobe done in enhancing systems used for information management andcollaboration among government officials and agencies. in these realms,issues such as confidentiality, data integrity, information management,and usability can present significant obstacles. these issues mix technology and policy, and they can be difficult to address without appropriatecollaboration between the technology and policy communities.also apparentñfrom briefings and workshops organized by this committee and in news accounts from across the countryñare difficultiesexperienced by government agencies seeking to deploy new capabilities.the committee identified a number of challenges to the governmentõseffective exploitation of it. these challenges, which encompass a mix ofresearch and implementation issues, include the following:¥ensuring the interoperation and integration of diverse systemsused by different departments and agencies with multiple stakeholdersand a significant legacy base;¥adapting organizational structures so as to maximize their effecinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations5tiveness in concert with itbased innovation, which tends to be harder ingovernment than in the private sector;¥improving trustworthiness, including guarantees of informationsystems security as well as assurances regarding user privacy and systemavailability;¥bridging significant gaps between current practices and bestavailable practices; and¥meeting specific technology needs related to government missions.recommendation 1.1.government should continue to improve itssupport for transactions with individuals, businesses, and organizations. in doing so, it should emulate, where possible, the commercial trend toward integration of services to improve usabilityfor customers. this means, for example, that government shouldcontinue the transition from program or agencycentered serviceofferings to usercentered services, which can imply aggregatingservices from multiple government agencies and potentially fromprivatesector third parties.a number of major government online services display a mature realization of informationaccess technology. future steps are likely to bemuch more technically challenging. for example, functionality will expand from emphasizing information access to providing comprehensivesupport for the multitude of transactions between government and users(citizens, businesses, and other organizations), which significantly lagsinformation access today. correspondingly, modalities will expand beyond peopleõs interacting with web browsers to include routine onlineaccess to government information and services through common programming interfaces and access through devices other than desktop computers. as these services evolve, governments will have to figure outhow best to leverage it as part of overall customer service strategies. partof the process has been adopting a customer service perspective on interactions with citizens, businesses, and othersña trend that began evenbefore the widespread use of the internet.to better meet customer needs and serve particular customer groups,such as small businesses or students, businesses are participating in therapid coevolution of ebusiness technology and commercial processes.today, improvement in customer focus is often accomplished by reorganizing corporate structure to aggregate information and transaction services in ways that better serve specific market segments. although theprocess can be organizationally difficult and technically challenging, business organizations have often been able to reorganize internally to matchthe procedural flows appropriate to the new òportaló technologiesñforexample, by restructuring to bypass intermediaries in relationships. govinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6it research, innovation, and egovernmenternment has been taking some initial steps in this direction as well, asevidenced by multiple governmentinformation portals (firstgov.gov,fedstats.gov, seniors.gov, and others) that aggregate information fromindividual agency web sites and early efforts to aggregate transactionservices from multiple agencies. in deciding whether to provide integrated capabilities, an organization must weigh the potential benefitsagainst the technical challenges. integration is hard and the results tendto be fragile (a change in one of the systems being integrated may causecascading effects).as alluded to above, one complication special to the government setting is that integration is fraught with legal and structural challenges.legal constraints can significantly inhibit rapid, wholesale structuralchanges in government structures (at both inter and intraagency levels).for example, legal and regulatory barriers to sharing information havebeen established to protect citizen privacy. at the same time, the stovepiped appropriations processñin which agencies compete for resourcesand appropriations that are determined by separate congressional committeesñmakes crossagency collaboration to build more integrated systems very difficult. explicit authorization and resources to undertakecrossagency efforts is an important element of a solution. also, as notedabove, governments differ from businesses in their inherently comprehensive scope. finally, the desired span of aggregation can include stateand local governments as well as federal agencies.one option for building integrated useroriented services is the use ofintermediary software that draws on data from multiple sources to formulate a set of smaller queries that can be separately dispatched to databases operated by different government entities. for example, an augmentation to fedstats.gov could be devised to support an increasing rangeof aggregate queries that combine statistical data held by individual agencies.intermediaries might be operated commercially as well as by government. indeed, a competitive market of commercial services that conducttransactions with multiple separate agencies could result in improvedaccess to government services, suggesting that government should explore this opportunity. for example, a commercial service might interactwith government transaction services to undertake all of the actions required to register a new small business. an interesting challenge withrespect to commercial services is how to provide the expected level ofconfidentiality and integrity of information, especially as the point ofaggregation shifts from government to third parties. meeting this challenge will require codevelopment of both policy and technical safeguards.for example, some of the data that government collects from individualsinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations7is subject to legislative or regulatory safeguards designed to keep anyonebut the individual from combining the information.at present, much of the thinking about egovernment focuses on whatcan be delivered with todayõs technology; this is reflected in the foregoingfinding and recommendation. but it is also essential that, in lookingahead, planners contemplate how both technology and user expectationswill evolve. this is another element of the rationale for direct collaboration and interaction between technology innovators and end users.government information technology practicethe delivery of new digital government services depends on access toadvanced information technology, the right management strategies andprocesses within organizations adopting the new technology, and effective, ongoing evaluation of new service concepts and goals.technologies and practicesfinding 2.1.many aspects of egovernment development can andshould follow the marketplace in selecting technology and associated practices.recommendation 2.1.government should adopt commercial ecommerce technologies and associated practices wherever possible.government can make considerable progress toward the egovernment vision even without new research results. businesses (and government) have made significant strides as they have made use of rapidlymaturing internetbased information technologies and responded to thecorresponding growth in user expectations. because the technologies andprocesses that underlie digital services in government are in most respects similar to those used in ebusiness, government obviously benefitswhen it can exploit offtheshelf components, infrastructure, systems, andsuccessful practices already used in the private sector. in many cases,government can and should follow the example of business with respectto service concepts, technical standards, infrastructural components, andinterface design. recognition of this point is reflected in more than adecade of movement toward increasing use of commercial offtheshelftechnology for government applications. (of course, for some specificapplications and systems, there may be no offtheshelf option.)when government systems exploit widely used standards and technologies, government can òride the curvesó of performance growth andenhancement that are characteristic of the broader it marketplace. proinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8it research, innovation, and egovernmentgram managers must balance these benefits in cost and capability withthe added uncertainty that they can experience in the management ofsystems whose evolution is less under their control compared to that ofsystems custombuilt for specific purposes.finding 2.2.although government should maximize the use ofcommercial technology as it builds egovernment capabilities, government requirements sometimes differ from those found in thecommercial world. with respect to requirements for such capabilities as ubiquity (and others listed below), government is a òdemandleader.ó targeted research in computer science, coupled with effective technology transition strategies, can contribute significantly tothe development of such capabilities.although it can generally build on the technologies and servicesemerging in the ebusiness marketplace, government leads demand inseveral areas. research in these areas can help government agenciesbetter accomplish their missions and alsoñwith the right researchmanagement strategiesñstimulate commercial interest and development.successful stimulation of the commercial marketplace could enable government to move more rapidly away from acquisition of expensive custom systems, whose full lifecycle costs government must bear, to the useof less costly offtheshelf commercial capabilities. as the result of suchinvestments in the past, government now can make use, for example, ofcommercial operating systems with enhanced security (e.g., better process separation), multimedia databases, and packetswitched networkingequipment. in the experience of mission agencies such as the u.s. department of defense (dod), national aeronautics and space administration(nasa), and u.s. department of energy (doe), this strategy has beeneffective not only in areas where government leads demand, but also inareas where aggressive requirements for innovation are shared by government and the commercial sector.important areas of leading demand (discussed in more detail in themain text of this report) include these:¥ ubiquity. governments must provide services to all citizensñtheycannot, in general, opt to serve only the easiesttoreach customers orparticipate only in particular market segments. nor can citizens choosewhich government they will deal with. the breadth of service providedby government must encompass a wide range of individualsõ physical,cognitive, and language abilities as well as their education, income, andgeographic location. nearuniversal communications access is providedtoday primarily through telephone and postal mail interactions, but email, the world wide web, public information kiosks, and other itbasedinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations9approaches are providing new opportunities to expand the range andaccessibility of services. research in areas such as humancomputer interaction, information retrieval, language translation, and speech recognition and synthesis can help increase the ubiquity of such services. achieving usability and accessibility requires that systems be evaluated inrealistic settings, and government applications may provide a range ofcontexts in which researchers can frame their efforts.¥ trustworthiness. citizens expect government to provide assurancesof securityñincluding confidentiality (protection of personal and business information), integrity of information and systems, and availabilityof information and systemsñthat are generally stronger than those expected of the private sector. but what is expected or desired may bebeyond what technology and practice can actually offer. conventionalbusiness practice incorporates risk management, in which the costs ofimplementing security measures are balanced against the consequencesof not having them, and these calculations sometimes show that certainlevels of exposure can be tolerated for certain applications. (credit cardfraud is an example.) government agencies, however, are expected toadhere to a higher standardñno improper disclosure of personal information contained in statistical data, tax filings, social security records,and the likeñeven though government is also charged with releasingcertain kinds of information, which may be derived from sensitive personal or corporate information that it collects, and making it uniformlyavailable to all.trust in public systems is essential for citizensõ compliance with government mandates (e.g., paying taxes, completing census forms); equallycritical is trust in the safety and reliability of systems on which peopleõslives may depend. in military applications, requirements for trustworthiness have led to efforts to promote òhighassuranceó technologies forcritical systems; similar requirements apply to it in the transportationand health arenas, in which government is often in partnership with theprivate sector. in the wake of the september 11, 2001, attacks, there isincreased attention to protection of critical infrastructure, including bothgovernment and private sector infrastructure. addressing issues relatedto trustworthiness involves intermingled considerations of policy, organizational behavior and culture, and technology. computer science research can contribute tools and approaches for facilitating disseminationof information without compromising confidentiality, as well as for designing and developing systems that provide appropriate, comparativelyhigh overall levels of trustworthiness (as is the intent of the federal interagency high confidence software and systems research program).¥ information heterogeneity and semantic interoperability. like otherlarge entities, governments confront significant organizational and techinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10it research, innovation, and egovernmentnical challenges when they seek to use information drawn from multiplesources. integration is especially difficult in ad hoc situationsñsuch aswhen federal, state, and local agencies must establish an òinstant bureaucracyó to respond to a crisis and support recovery efforts. but integrationis difficult in preplanned situations as wellñsuch as when agencies seekto serve customers through aggregation of services (see next bulleteditem) or to share information in order to comply with legislative or administrative directives (e.g., mandates to exchange state welfare data or tomonitor visa status and u.s. border crossings). because agency information systems are generally òstovepipedóñthat is, they employ differentand often incompatible conventions for data format and semanticsñsuchinformation sharing and data fusion can be difficult. (on the other hand,there can be privacy risks when fusion can be easily accomplished, as isdiscussed in chapter 2, in the subsection òaccess and confidentiality.ó)organizational barriers, including a frequent reluctance to share information across agency boundaries, further complicate matters. technologicalresponses include efforts to employ prevailing commercial standards, develop common standards, and develop improved capabilities to translateinformation across systems.¥ providing software interfaces to services. the provision of applicationprogramming interfaces (apis) or structured data representations (as inuse of the markup language xml) can enable third parties to engagegovernment services on behalf of clients. the internal revenue service(irs), for example, now allows commercial taxpreparation firms to filereturns electronically. health care researchers, as another example, areactively creating xml representations in order to more readily exchange,combine, and analyze clinical trial data. more generally, appropriateinterfaces would also enable citizens and businesses to use software thatdirectly connects with government services. a number of technical challenges exist, though, including protocol design, development of information representations and metadata standards, security and authentication, and development of digital library systems. government hashistorically provided data in electronic form, but often the design of theformats makes it infeasible for all but a few specialized contractors toexploit the data readily. achieving òlightweightó protocols or standardscan be difficult, however, because of the oftenlarge number of specificcases that must be handledñfor example, those relating to seeminglysimple data items such as names and addresses.¥ building largescale systems. many problems associated with largescale systemsñincluding delays, unexpected failures, and inflexibility incoping with changing needsñexist in government at all levels. budgetary constraints also dictate the development of systems that can be susinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations11tained at low cost. continued research activity, involving case studies ofparticular systems as well as methodology research on architecture, techniques, and tools, is needed to address the difficult challenges, technicaland nontechnical, posed in realizing these systems.finding 2.3. in building egovernment systems and the supportingdigital infrastructure, government faces significant nontechnicalchallenges in the way it acquires it capabilities.best practices in government acquisition already recognize the iterative nature of systems development, due to the simultaneous evolution oftechnology capability, user requirements, and the environment in whicha system is used. for example, the information technology managementreform act of 1996 (the clingercohen act) promotes iterative processesin mainstream it systems acquisition. contracts with system integratorsthat were built around a traditional waterfall acquisition modelñin whichone first defines the full set of requirements for a system and then buildsa system that complies with those specificationsñare widely understoodto be inadequate except for systems whose requirements are well understood at the outset, and for which there is a corresponding base of experience in design and operation. a characteristic of iterative processes isthat lifecycle requirements and/or the engineering design space may notbe fully understood at the outset. iterative processes are also appropriatewhen unexpected changes in the operating environment are likely.in electronic business, the frequency of iteration can be very rapid,with consequently high demand on capability for acquisition and engineering management. this fast pace of ebusiness evolution is shapingexpectations for the delivery of government services, creating pressurefor an even more rapid pace of evolution in capability and scope. thisplaces even greater demand on governmentõs ability to manage its relationships with its technology supply chain, including system integrators,vertical suppliers, vendors, startup technology companies, and researchers. for it systems, a particular challenge is that there are rapid changesboth in underlying technologies and in the expectations of customers.users seek to avoid getting locked in to rapidly obsolescing technologiesand practicesñwhich implies that nontechnical, marketbased decisioncriteria can be significant. incentives that promote risk sharing betweenvendors and the government in the development of innovative solutionsare also helpful. complicating the situation is the persistent challengefaced by government in attracting, retaining, and rewarding programmanagers who can effectively articulate and negotiate the governmentõslongterm interests in contracts with system integrators and other vendors.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12it research, innovation, and egovernmentwhy egovernment research?sustaining the it technical base and addressing government needsfinding 3.1.by leveraging its dual roles as a user of it and a longterm investor in it research, government can increase its awarenessof the opportunities afforded by it advances and influence thedevelopment of it that can help to meet its own needs. this synergy can be stimulated by government through investment throughout the technology supply chain and through the development ofrelationships with all appropriate segments of the it research, development, and vendor communities.like all major it customers, government has an interest in the management of its future, which includes maintaining both awareness andinfluence throughout its it supply chain. this suggests that there is valuefor government in developing relationships with diverse segments of theit research, development, vendor, consultant, and integrator communities.government has an additional role, however, as a longterm, patientinvestor in it research, particularly with respect to research results thathave broad value (finding 3.4). in this role, the government creates public goods with broad and significant socioeconomic valueñsuch as newalgorithms, conventions enabling interoperation, measurement methods,shared testbeds, and the like.finding 3.2.a cooperative alliance between researchers and agencyend users in defining requirements for new itbased capabilitieshas benefits for both groups. researchers gain a better understanding of the real challenges and obstacles, along with access to dataand artifacts that can inform or validate design. agency users, especially those that lack inhouse research capability, gain understanding of emerging and future technologies. by collaboratingdirectly, the two groups can more rapidly converge on requirementsthat meet real needs and that are technologically achievableñandthat may not have been expected by either party in advance of thecollaboration.interaction between researchers and end users on problems of mutualinterest has become increasingly important to progress in many areas ofit. working on government it problems in particular offers researchersa number of potential benefitsñan important one being access both tosubjectmatter experts and to associated artifacts that are needed in computer science research. a government setting gives researchers access toinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations13applications with a richness and texture typically lacking in the laboratory, and it may also provide a less constrained environment as it is lesssubject to proprietary considerations that are often associated with workin the private sector. the national science foundationõs digital government program, which funds collaborative research between computerscience researchers and government agencies, has begun to demonstratethe potential of such collaborations.for government agencies, benefits stemming from research can extend well beyond the research results themselves. while there is no substitute for inhouse it talent, interactions with researchers are a usefulway to tap additional technical expertise, especially topcaliber researchtalent that is unlikely to be obtainable inhouse or through the usualadvisory mechanisms. in addition, sustained involvement by a researchcommunity in a mission area helps define the metaphors and problemsthat drive that community. this is evident among researchers who haveworked over long periods with dod, doe, and nasa, for example.some of the most significant benefits of government mission researchinvestment can be indirect, because research results can have considerable value beyond the particular application area and because research onhard and longterm problems sometimes leads to unanticipated breakthroughs. although it is very difficult to do a precise evaluation, theseadditional indirect benefits have to be considered when assessing theultimate impact and value of government research programs. finally, aclose collaboration between researchers and agency users can create anenvironment for stimulating creative solutions to challenges, for example,through rapid iteration of prototypes. (see chapter 4, òtechnology transition and program management: bridging the gap between researchand impact.ó)finding 3.3.a sound foundation for egovernment and other applications of information technology throughout society depends on acontinuing, broad, federal computer science research program.the historical record shows that broad and sustained federal investment in it research has nurtured the development of computer technology and the it industry. many it research programs not only reachedtheir intended goals, whether mission or scientific, but also stimulatedcommercial products, companies, and indeed industries. they also contributed fundamentally to the training of researchers and practitioners,who often transferred technologies to the commercial sector through employment or entrepreneurship. illustrations can be found, for example, indistributed transaction processing, raster displays, verylargescale integrated circuit design, and data mining.indeed, the rapid rise of ebusiness in the 1990sñand subsequent einformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14it research, innovation, and egovernmentgovernment developmentñwas based on a variety of information technologies that were developed incrementally over a period of many decades, eventually reaching a point of maturity, scale, and usability thatallowed them to be incorporated directly into the infrastructures of commerce and government. the rapid growth in the past decade was alsobased on the acceptance of an evolving set of common standards thatenabled scaling up, competition, and interoperation. the development ofthe internet suite of protocols, along with the establishment of processesfor evolving them, is perhaps the most widely recognized example. asignificant portion of these technologies and standards resulted directlyfrom ongoing, farsighted government investment by a number of researchagencies. indeed, without this investment, it could be argued that theinternet phenomenon would not have come into existenceñit was by nomeans an inevitable development.when mission goals are approached strategically, new thinking canbe infused into a mission agencyõs supply chain of vendors and technology developers, which can yield major dividends for government. forexample, products or standards that address government needs can beacquired off the shelf rather than by developing more expensive customsystems. of course, these products or standards might have emergedwithout government investment, but quite possibly at the cost of considerable delay.finding 3.4. in areas of research whose benefits cannot be fullyretained by the investorñareas in which the private sector may notbe able to justify investmentñgovernment investment can be critical to creating new technology capabilities and opportunities for allparticipants, including government itself.universities and some private sector research laboratories have longled in the development of the core technical underpinnings of ebusiness,in the education of the it workforce, and in many aspects of the creationof new technologies and technological commonalities. building in parton past research results, the u.s. information technology industries haveseen tremendous growth. even with this growth and success, government investmentñboth from research and mission agenciesñin it research and education continues to enhance the overall competitive position of the u.s. information technology industry. the government role inaddressing longterm issues continues to be unique and critical.this special role of government in it research investment can beunderstood in the light of typical industry returnoninvestment calculationsñwhich generally (but not always) preclude innovations that arefundamentally long term in character or that have broad and nonspecificinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations15impact. in the language of economics, many of these innovations arenonappropriableñthe results of the research diffuse broadly into the technical community and cannot successfully be retained by a single sponsoring organization for its exclusive use. similarly, particular innovationsmay be competitionneutral or their impacts may be unpredictable; suchinnovations, though they could be of broad benefit across the industry,are therefore not in a companyõs selfinterest to support. (see the discussion of nonappropriability in the subsection òwill industry do it?ó inchapter 4.)among the products of such research innovation in diverse technicalareas are internet protocol standards, algorithmanalysis techniques, programminglanguage foundations, and, to a great extent, technologies forinteroperation. government investments leading to such broad benefitsnot only serve the sponsoring agenciesõ needs but also have much widerimpact by creating new technologies that can be used by all participants,public and private.finding 3.5. there are a number of broad technical areas wheregovernment investment in it research would be particularly likelyto have an impact on the creation of more advanced capabilities inegovernment.enhancements to a number of classes of technologies would greatlyfacilitate the building of advanced egovernment capabilities. these include, for example:¥information infrastructure and ecommerce technologies, which providethe foundation for ebusiness outside and inside government;¥information management technologies, which permit search and retrieval from the very large volumes of information held by governmentsand allow integration of diverse sets of heterogeneous information systems;¥middleware, which provides common services and capabilities thatòglueó software components together into larger systems;¥humansystem interfaces, which provide òeverycitizenó usability;¥modeling and simulation, which are important tools underlying government planning and decision making (such as in crisis management);and¥software technologies, which permit construction of more robust,largerscale, interdependent software systems.details of each research area are provided in chapter 3 of this report.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16it research, innovation, and egovernmentrecommendation 3.1.the federal government should continue toparticipate actively in developing a full range of information technologies. at the same time, government should leverage its role asa longterm supporter of it research to embrace egovernment challenges within its broad research programs and to stimulate moretargeted technology development to meet particular needs.egovernment research encompasses targeted research to meet particular mission needs, research in technical areas where government leadsin demand (finding 2.2), and broad research of benefit to egovernmentand elsewhere (finding 3.5). in each case, government research programscan take steps to stimulate a broader commercial response as well as meetgovernment needs. a historical example of this kind of governmentstimulus is the development of distribution and security support for operating systems. to meet the demand for largescale and reliable distributed computing in the department of defense, the government invested over a period of many years in underlying technical approachesand engineeringprocess concepts. the resulting technologies not onlyaddress specific government needs but also have formed the basis ofmainstream commercial systems.stimulating information technology innovationand transition into operational systemswithin the federal government, some mission agenciesñincludingdod, nasa, doe, the national institutes of health (nih), and the environmental protection agency (epa)ñmaintain research capability thatsupports both intra and extramural research in innovative it. government also has a number of mission areas, such as federal statistics andcrisis management, that are supported by multiple entities and for whichexplicit coordination mechanisms have been devised (such as the cooperation between federal statistical agencies and the office of managementand budget [omb], the lead role played by the federal emergency management agency [fema] among federal agencies in crisis management,or the emerging coordination potential of the new office of homelandsecurity). in addition, mechanisms within government coordinate research and development activity in certain key technology areas such asgeographic information systems and highperformance computing. government is taking action to ensure that its longterm needs are addressedin these areas of shared mission, shared reliance on aggressive technology, or both.the sections above considered basic research and exploratory development that contribute to understanding of core concepts and key designinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations17issues. the next subsections consider additional success factors in thisinnovation process.stimulating innovation in systems buildingfinding 4.1.most government agencies have limited capability (ormandates) to manage it research programs or to undertake exploratory it development or aggressive prototyping programs. whilesome agencies would benefit from developing this capability, forothers it may be more effective, with respect to cost and risk, tocollaborate with agencies facing similar challenges.to address their technological needs, most federal, state, and localagencies must choose between acquiring offtheshelf products and building custom systems. in the former case, costs may be low, but the agencycustomer has less control over product capability and can exert influenceon vendor product plans only in proportion to its (relatively small) shareof the market. in the latter case, the agency customer defines the capability but must also bear the total costs of ownership over the lifetime of thesystem, including explicit management of system evolution andinteroperation.recommendation 4.1.consideration should be given to providingspecific mechanisms, such as a centrally managed crossagency itinnovation fund, as incentives to enable government organizationsto undertake innovative and risky it projects.agencies, particularly in their acquisition activities, may need explicitincentives and process models in order to stimulate and exploit leadingedge technologies. in many cases, early digitalgovernment capabilityemerged primarily as a result of imaginative, independently entrepreneurial federal employees taking initiative and accepting risks, but thisapproach does not scale. agencies are normally driven by prudence tomake conservative decisions in setting requirements and establishing incentives for contractors to deliver within cost and schedule constraints. acentrally managed innovation fund can provide funding resources thathelp òbuy down the riskó for a wouldbe innovator and a group of experts who can work with contractors to help them develop innovativesolutions. such a fund can also provide opportunities for sharing bestpractices, experimental integration, scaling up of prototypes, and creationof evaluation testbeds. nsfõs digital government grantmaking programhas demonstrated the concept on a small scale.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18it research, innovation, and egovernmentbuilding the bridge between research, systems development, andgovernment innovationfinding 4.2.success in the development of innovative systems depends not only on underlying technical capability but also on researchmanagement strategy. in particular, the transition of newtechnologies into operational systems remains one of the areas ofgreatest risk and difficulty.even assuming that there are sufficient incentives and rewards forinnovation in it development, huge challenges remain in moving newtechnology into government operationsñfrom research to prototype development and operational experimentation. this òmiddleó set of technology development stages is central to successful realization of the vision of digital government, and it can be the most problematic and leastcontrollable portion of the overall process of innovation. there is more tothe story than simply understanding the tensions between the riskaverse,operationally focused culture of the acquisition system and the risktolerant, futurefocused culture of the it research community.in particular, managing this set of transitional stages can mean working across the entire supply chain of it innovation, recognizing that eachof the participantsñgovernment system integrators, vertical applicationdevelopers, vendors of major components such as databases and operating systems, technologyfocused startup companies, and university andlaboratory researchers, among othersñhas its own unique set of incentives and interests.one of the greatest challenges is how to escape from the òspecificationfirstó acquisition model, which one sees even in some prototypingprograms that were meant to be exploratory and to undertake risks. effective innovation in systems development requires simultaneous commitment to developing new technology and to defining new concepts ofoperation. in this model, iteration (in the sense of the spiral model fromsoftware engineering, in which a sequence of prototypes of increasingfunctionality is created) is undertaken both with respect to definition ofoperational concept and development of the technology. ironically, adoption of the spiral model may increase overall programmatic risk (for development projects) unless it is carefully managedñwhich is one reasonthat sequential models are often adopted even when incentives exist touse iterative approaches.regardless, exploratory it development and prototyping programsare an important mechanism for better exploiting new it. such appliedresearch allows agencies to evaluate potential new capabilities and toassess their implications for operational concepts.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations19recommendation 4.2.the federal government should developmore effective means for undertaking multiagency collaborativeefforts that support aggressive prototyping, technology evaluation,and technology transition in support of egovernment.the recent emphasis in government on homeland security, includingthe development of new science and technology in support of thecounterterrorism mission, has fostered new attention to crossagency activities related to information technology. the appointment during thebush administration of a federal chief technology officer and development of an associate director for information technology and egovernment within omb reinforces both the need and the potential for crosscutting activity. circumstances have become more propitious thanexpected at the outset of this study for the kind of crossagency programdevelopment that the committee believes is required and appropriate.government agencies that lack robust inhouse it research capabilities should explore research partnerships with agencies that do have them.several agencies currently manage it research programs that aim both toconduct it research in support of agency mission requirements and tostimulate it innovation more broadly. these agencies include nsf, thedefense advanced research projects agency (darpa), doe, and nasa,as well as the national institute of standards and technology (which ischarged with addressing measurement, standards, and interoperabilitychallenges). each of these agencies has inhouse capabilities, an it research culture, and existing relationships with the it research communitythat could prove useful in egovernment innovation programs. nsf hasalready established research partnerships on a modest scale through itsdigital government program, which could be expanded to include moregovernment partners. others might also explore development of suchprograms where there is a natural alignment of existing missions withcommon requirements. given these various options for supporting egovernmentrelated research, it would appear more appropriate for agencies lacking inhouse it capabilities to tap some combination of theseexisting capabilities (possibly adding some coordination mechanisms)than to create a new entity to manage egovernment research.recommendation 4.3.to ensure success in the development andtransition of new technologies, explicit attention should be given toprogrammanagement practices. research program managersshould be cognizant of the complexities of technology development and transition processes, and aware, in particular, of the rangeof programmanagement models and strategies that could be employed.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20it research, innovation, and egovernmentby facilitating collaboration among mission agencies and governmentresearch organizations, it may be possible to address areas of shared concern, such as security, more effectively. crossagency attention is evidentin omb, the federal chief information officers council, and in congressional activity, but it has only infrequently translated into longlived relationships being established to do research or to undertake prototypingstudies. details of various programmanagement strategies are providedin chapter 4 of this report.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.211vision for itenabledenhancement of governmentgovernment expenditures on information technology (it) are substantial. in fiscal year 2001, the total annual federal it investment wasroughly $44.5 billion.1 this level of spending reflects governmentõs greatreliance on it systems in carrying out its diverse missions. the emergence of the internet into the mainstream, along with the growth of otherelectroniccommerce technologies, is fundamentally altering the environment in which government delivers services to citizens, businesses, andother government entities. these innovations in technology and businesspractices have given rise to the concept of òegovernment,ó which refersto the adoption of electronicbusiness practices in government.estimates of the fraction of this spending that goes toward egovernment vary, depending on what criteria are used to distinguish egovernment initiatives from other it programs. the consulting firm gartnergroup recently estimated that federal, state, and local spending ongovernmenttogovernment, governmenttobusiness, and governmenttocitizen initiatives was roughly $1.5 billion in 2000 (with the projectionthat this sum will grow to more than $6.2 billion in 2005),2 while the1office of management and budget (omb). 2001. òclingercohen act report on federalinformation technology investments.ó omb, executive office of the president, washington, d.c., april 9. available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/final53.xls>.2gartner group. 2000. ògartner says u.s. egovernment spending to surpass $6.2 billion by 2005ó (press release), april 11. available online at <http://gartner11.gartnerweb.com/public/static/aboutgg/pressrel/pr041100c.html>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22it research, innovation, and egovernmentmarket research company input estimated the current expenditures atabout $7.2 billion.3at the same time that government is seeking to apply it in new waysto fulfill its own particular obligations, the role of government with respect to broadbased it development and use is also shifting. in recentdecades, the private sector has surpassed government leadership in manyareas of it adoption and use, even as government continues to play acriticalñsome would say increasingly criticalñrole as a principal agentfor longterm it basic research and innovation.much like their counterparts in the private sector, many in government are actively experimenting with the harnessing of new internet andother information technologies to improve operations and the delivery ofservices. a wide range of ideas is emerging from these experiments,contributing to technology development, the improvement of businesspractices, a more streamlined government, and a more sophisticated public. traditionally, formal paperbased information dissemination wasundertaken by specialized documentdistribution services such as thegovernment printing office and the national technical information service. with the rise of the world wide web, agencyspecific sites thatprovide access to a range of documents and databases have been developed over the past several years. complementing the development ofweb sites available through the internet, agencies such as the u.s. department of housing and urban development (hud), the general servicesadministration (gsa), and the office of personnel management (opm)have also developed kiosk systems, using web technology, to provideaccess to information resources in public locations.the federal government now offers a number of information portals,which aggregate and present government information for access by customers in particular òmarket segmentsó (such as students, workers, orsenior citizens) and provide links to commonly performed transactions.in 2000, a federal governmentwide portal, firstgov.gov, which provides asearch engine across federal web sites along with a directory of commonly used sites and services, was launched;4 a number of other, moretargeted, federal portals also exist (see box 1.1).with these efforts, a rapidly increasing corpus of governmentgener3william mathews. 2000. òegov leads it spending forecast.ó federal computer week,december 8. available online at <http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2000/1204/webegov120800.asp>.4generally hailed as a promising next step, the web site is not without controversy.concerns include the management structure and relationship between the private foundation responsible for the search engine component and whether the search engine returnsthe most relevant, useful results.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government23ated information is available directly to users via the internet, and it isbeing exploited to deliver government services in new ways, includingthe use of the internet to conduct transactions that previously requiredpostal mail or an inperson visit.indeed, various agencies and programs were early adopters of webtechnology, and some level of online presence, albeit with varying degrees of sophistication, is the norm for government today at the federaland state levels. at the same time, inputs received by the committee oncomputing and communications research to enable better use of information technology in government, over the course of two workshopsand during additional discussions with informed individuals, suggestthat the federal government generally continues to lag behind the privatesector both in adopting presentday technology and in addressing its ownspecial needs. the committeeõs indepth examinations of two areasñfederal statistics and crisis managementñsuggest that while a good dealof experimentation is occurring and considerable experience is beinggained in implementing a range of sophisticated capabilities, many systems significantly lag behind the state of the art. for example, thecommitteeõs consideration of the federal statistical agencies revealed thatwhile fedstats.gov, coordinated by the federal interagency council onstatistical policy, was of one of the earliest implementations of interagencyportals, there was also an instance in which the bureau of the census hadonly recently retired an obsolete univac computer system. the inquiresof the committee also revealed cases of government bodies having veryspecific technology needs that have not been adequately addressed. theseinclude, for example, software to support the complex surveys administered by the federal statistical agencies and a number of crisis and consequencemanagement applications.according to a recent report from the national association of stateinformation resource executives, many states have also made the transition from presenting a simple directory of agencies to a portal design inwhich available information is organized around the needs of specificuser segments. several states planned to develop portals in partnershipwith an outside vendor, with an expectation that the vendor would becompensated through transaction fees.5 a number of these portals represent a fairly mature realization of presentday informationaccess technology, but considerable scope for improvement remains. box 1.2 provides several examples of state egovernment services.5national association of state information resource executives (nasire). 2000. preliminary survey of the digital government landscape. nasire, lexington, kentucky. availableonline at <http://www.nasire.org/publications/digitalgovernmentreport2000.pdf>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 1.1examples of federal government information portals¥firstgov <www.firstgov.gov>. the portal firstgov was established as a jointproject of the federal government and the private fedsearch foundation, which oversees the siteõs search engine. funded in 2001 and 2002 from the general servicesadministration (gsa) and 22 federal agencies, firstgov is managed by gsaõs officeof firstgov.1 the web site provides a search engine that uses an index of web pagesgovernment wide as well as a directory of commonly accessed information resourcesand services.¥access america for seniors <www.seniors.gov>. a government informationportal dedicated to the needs of seniors, access america for seniors exemplifies asite that attempts to make the resources of multiple agencies available to a particularuser group. it was developed through the cooperation of the national partnership forreinventing government (npr) and several other interested organizations, includingthe social security administration, the administration on aging, the u.s. department of housing and urban development, the u.s. department of veterans affairs,and the american association of retired persons.¥access america for students <www.students.gov>. as with access americafor seniors, access america for students was created to serve a specialized group ofusers. developed and maintained through the cooperation of npr and the u.s. department of education, the site offers links to information about planning an education, financial aid, career development, community service, travel, military service,and more. it also contains an array of links to legislative, executive, and judicial websites.¥fedstats <www.fedstats.gov>. fedstats is maintained by the federal interagency council on statistical policy to provide users with easy access to the fullrange of statistics and information produced by more than 70 participating government agencies.2 funding is provided by inkind donations of services and smallcontributions from 12 federal statistical agencies to support hardware and softwareprocurement and dedicated manpower. participating agencies host their own statistics on their own servers; fedstats provides an efficient gateway to their information.for instance, if one selects the crime link in the subject index, fedstats forwards theuser to the u.s. department of justiceõs bureau of justice statistics web site. also,fedstats contains a feature called mapstats, through which users can locate statistical information about particular u.s. states or counties by clicking on a series ofmaps.¥u.s. consumer gateway <www.consumer.gov>. u.s. consumer gatewaywas created by the federal trade commission (ftc), and the ftc continues to maintain it with the participation of the securities and exchange commission, the consumer product safety commission, the food and drug administration, the nationalhighway traffic safety administration, the environmental protection agency, theu.s. department of agriculture, the u.s. department of the treasury, the federalcommunications commission, and the federal deposit insurance corporation. the1for more on the history, funding, and management of firstgov, see <http://www.firstgov.gov/about.shtml>.2see <http://www.fedstats.gov/agencies> for a full list of participating agencies.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government25site is designed so that users can locate government consumerrelated information bycategory (food, health, product safety, money, transportation, and so forth). eachcategory has further subcategories to direct users to areas within individual federalweb sites containing related information. for instance, the product safety categoryincludes links to product information from the consumer product safety commission, the national highway traffic safety administration, the food and drug administration, and the ftc, among others.¥code talk <www.codetalk.fed.us>. code talk is a federal interagency nativeamerican web site that provides access to a wide range of information for nativeamerican communities. it is hosted by the office of native american programs ofthe u.s. department of housing and urban development. code talk contains sections concerning òcurrent issuesó and òkey topicsó among native americans, andmajor subject areas include housing, health, the arts, children, and the environment.within these broad areas, users will find links to relevant government agencies andprograms. selecting the link to environmental information, for instance, takes usersto the major source of government information on this topicñthe american indianenvironmental office (<http://www.epa.gov/indian>) of the u.s. environmental protection agency (epa). the site also contains links to a host of other federal web sites(e.g., the bureau of indian affairs, the indian health service, the senate and thehouse of representatives, the government accounting office, and the office ofmanagement and budget) and provides links to other resources and tools, includinginformation on training and employment, laws, and taxes.¥the federal commons <www.cfda.gov/federalcommons>. the federal commons is an internet grantsmanagement portal serving the grantee organization community. coordinated through the interagency electronic grants committee,3 thesite is working toward offering all grantees (state and local governments, universities,small businesses, and so on) fullservice grantsprocessing across all functions in thegrant life cycle. the siteõs main feature is a subjectoriented directory to grants information; the subject categories include agriculture, health, business and commerce,energy, and natural resources, among others. these broad categories are furthersubdivided into topics under which links to relevant grant information (generallyhosted on another organizationõs web site) are listed. in the future, the federal commons plans to expand its grant transactions section to offer the capability to searchfor grantfunding opportunities across the federal government, and to apply for andreport on federal grants.¥federal business opportunities (fedbizopps) <www.fedbizopps.gov>. fedbiz opps (formerly known as the electronic posting system) is a governmentwideinternetbased information system for announcing government acquisitions. it servesindustry vendors by allowing them to search for government acquisition opportunities. it also serves government buyers by providing them with the capability to postsolicitations on the internet. the site was designed to be a single entry point forvendors to search government acquisition opportunities across all departments andagencies. the project was begun as a joint effort of the general services administration, the u.s. department of transportation, and the national aeronautics and spaceadministration, among others.3see <http://www.financenet.gov/iaegc.htm> for further information about the interagencyelectronic grants committee.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 1.2examples of state online activitiesfor citizens¥texas. the web site of the state office of the attorney general allows citizens to file consumer complaints with the office electronically. individuals simplysubmit an online form with all the necessary information (e.g., contact informationfor both parties, a statement of the complaint, and a description of what the citizenthinks would be an acceptable resolution) to begin the complaintresolution process.the system also allows users to submit copies of scanned supporting documents (intif format) via email.1¥illinois. the state offers citizens the capability to file their state income taxesonline through the stateõs web site. the advertised benefits to filing tax forms in thismanner include faster processing of refunds (10 days), accuracy (as the system doesall the calculations), and availability of the system 24 hours a day.2¥new york. the department of motor vehicles allows citizens to purchasevanity and custom license plates online, as well as to submit registration renewals.one can search the departmentõs database to check whether or not the desired combination of letters, numbers, or spaces is available, and then purchase the plate online with a credit or debit card. the site even features a rendering of what the userõsplate will look like with the chosen characters.3for businesses¥washington. in march 1999, the state launched a system through which businesses (some of which must pay on a monthly basis) can pay their excise taxes1see <http://www.oag.state.tx.us/consumer/complain.htm>.2see <http://www.revenue.state.il.us/electronicservices/ifilefacts00.html>.3see <http://www.nydmv.state.ny.us/cplates.htm>.this range of experience exists in local government as well; a substantial fraction of municipal and county governments have established somesort of online presence.6 still, the committeeõs examination of crisis management suggests that while some local governments are in a position tolead in the use of it, there is large variation among them with respect to6a survey conducted for the international city/council management association(icma) found that among the roughly half of municipal and county governments thatresponded, more than 80 percent had established web sites. see donald f. norris, patriciad. fletcher, and stephen h. holden. 2001. òis your local government plugged in? highinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government27technology capabilities. for some, both financial and itmanagementresources are very limited.altogether, hundreds of egovernment initiatives are taking place atthe federal level alone. a recent survey found that most federal departments and agencies were engaged in such activities, and more than 1,300initiatives were reported. nearly 50 percent were identified as deliveringonline. the webbased electronic filing (elf) system offers users a fast, simple, customizable, and accurate way to calculate and pay the tax they owe. using detailedhelp screens, the system guides users through the appropriate filing processes, eliminating the need for tax filers to wade through large amounts of irrelevant information. the system also offers the capability to postdate filings and payments to betteraccommodate usersõ schedules. payment of taxes is accomplished through the use ofan electronic funds transfer (eft) debit arrangement between the userõs bank andthe department of revenueõs bank.4¥california. the california business portal,5an initiative of californiaõs secretary of state, provides information for users who are starting business entities, and itallows them to file related information with the state online. intended as a òonestopshop,ó the site provides access to information on filing requirements and variousstate forms, and it combines resources from several government agencies and privatesector organizations. one of the siteõs main features is a stepbystep guide to starting a business, offering suggestions on everything from selecting a name for thebusiness to formulating a business plan; a detailed checklist to help users manageeach step of the business creation process is provided as well. among the siteõs moreadvanced features is a pilot project that gives businesses the capability to file theircorporate òstatement of officersó form electronically using a secure server and acredit card. the site also allows users to search through existing corporate records. alink to calgold, <www.calgold.ca.gov>, another california state web site that presents businesses with information on permits and other requirements of californiaagencies at all levels of governmentñincluding addresses, telephone numbers, andlinks to agency internet web pagesñis also provided.64see <http://dor.wa.gov/index.asp?/elf/elfcontent.htm>.5see <http://www.ss.ca.gov/business/business.htm>.6for more information, see <http://www.ss.ca.gov/executive/pressreleases/2001/01006.htm>.lights of the 2000 electronic government surveyó (prepared for icma by public technology inc., university of maryland, baltimore county), february 27. available online at<http://www.icma.org/download/cat15/grp120/sgp224/egov2000.pdf>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28it research, innovation, and egovernmentinformation and services to citizens and about 85 percent as making useof the web.7in this shift toward egovernment, commercial third parties are alsoplaying an important role. for instance, the internal revenue service (irs)accepts electronic tax returns through taxpreparation software vendors.still, the opportunities and challenges associated with using it in government are just starting to be addressed. and as it innovation in the privatesector continues apace, the gap between private sector and governmentpractices appears to be growing.congressional hearings, reports of the federal chief information officers council, agency analyses, and similar activities at the state levelattest that governments are aggressively exploring how to shape theirpolicies and practices to leverage it technologies most effectively and tostimulate ongoing innovation and experimentation. for example, thefederal government recently established a new central point of responsibility for information technology within the office of management andbudget (omb). following september 11, 2001, government efforts ininformation collection, aggregation, and analysis may well expand on anumber of fronts, placing corresponding demands for enhancement andflexibility on institutional it capabilities. at the same time, analyses suchas those from the general accounting office (gao) have raised questionsabout the management and execution of a number of it programs.8this report examines several questions related to it research and theuse of information technologies in government operations. these questions are raised primarily from the perspective of the relationship between it research and government it applications. the aim is to identifyapproaches that support government in building ebusiness capabilitiesanalogous to those being developed in the private sector, and in advancing government it applications such as crisis management and federalstatistics. in keeping with its charge from the sponsoring agency, thecommittee emphasizes in its report the role of it research, how to structure fruitful interactions between government and the it research community, and how the research community can help address the leadingchallenges of egovernment. the committee recognizes, however, that a7from a summary prepared by the general services administration, office of intergovernmental solutions, of its egov initiatives inventory. summary is available online at<http://www.policyworks.gov/intergov/oisegovinventory.htm>, and the inventorydatabase is online at <http://www.policyworks.gov/intergov>.8see, for example, government accounting office (gao), 2001, electronic government:challenges must be addressed with effective leadership and management (gao01959t), gao,washington, d.c., july 11.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government29significant part of the egovernment challenge relates to management andimplementation challenges associated with deploying todayõs technologies in government.9 but engagement with researchers offers government an opportunity to better understand where opportunities for innovation lie and to observe and influence the development of thetechnologiesñproviding insights that can help government cope withmanagement and implementation challenges.the scope of this report includes characterization of research needsand opportunities, identification of pertinent research topics, consideration of researchmanagement methods and technologytransition approaches, and aspects of government it practice that affect the delivery ofegovernment services. while the focus of the report is the role of thefederal government, most of the ideas discussed could apply equally wellto state and local governments.10 the committee also expects that thebenefits resulting from the federal governmentõs involvement in and support of it innovation will likewise apply to all levels of government.elements of the visionstimulated in large part by widespread adoption of the internet andthe associated phenomenon of electronic commerce, a broad consensushas emerged in the past several years that governments at all levels canexploit it to deliver information and services more efficiently and to make9the general accounting office (gao) has written numerous reports related to moreimmediate implementation challenges associated with egovernment programs. see, forexample, gao, 2001, electronic government: challenges must be addressed with effective leadership and management (gao01959t), gao, washington, d.c., july 11. academic workexamining these challenges includes work by the strategic computing program atharvardõs kennedy school of government (e.g., jerry mechling and thomas m. fletcher,1996, information technology and government: the need for new leadership, may), the centerfor technology in government at the state university of new york at albany (e.g., sharons. dawes et al., 1999, four realities of it innovation in government, center for technology ingovernment, albany, n.y.), and the center for research on information technology andorganizations (crito) at the university of california at irvine (e.g., kenneth l. kraemerand jason dedrick, 1996, òcomputing and public organizations,ó working paper #urb092, crito, irvine, calif.).10that research efforts should encompass state and local as well as federal egovernmentinnovation was underscored in sharon dawes, peter bloniarz, kristine l. kelly, and patriciad. fletcher, 1999, some assembly required: building a digital government for the 21st century,center for technology in government, state university of new york at albany, march.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30it research, innovation, and egovernmentimprovements in other functional areas. the nature of these opportunities and challenges has been considered by government bodies, advisorygroups, information technology consulting firms, and the like. box 1.3lists several of these. some express the grand view that it is a principalmeans for fundamentally reshaping government and democracy, whileothers focus more on shorterterm opportunitiesñto enhance the servicesdelivered to citizens and to facilitate enhanced interactions between citizens and government. somewhere between these two views, there appears to be a general consensus that egovernment is a means to suchends as a more informed and engaged citizenry and a more responsive,efficient, and accountable government.this vision can be captured in terms of a set of generally acceptedelements or basic goals. these elements, which underlie the argumentsand technical agenda presented in this report and are described below,include the following:¥satisfying customer service expectations,¥increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of government operations,¥providing effective access to information,¥providing access to a full range of transactions online,¥increasing participation in government,¥meeting expectations for trustworthiness, and¥meeting special challenges in governmentunique areas.presented in appendix a are several specific scenarios developed bythe committee to illustrate the potential impact of egovernment on thedaily lives of individuals.in keeping with the general wisdom that it should be developed anddeployed with all users in mind (internal employees, vendors, and customers), this report considers it requirements and research needs acrosseach of these user groups.satisfying expectations for customer servicebusiness features such as telephonecalling centers and ebusinesstechnologies have given rise to high expectations. many consumer services are available 24 hours per day, 7 days per week or can be usedasynchronously via email and web communications (that is, with noneed for roundtheclock staffing by the service provider). thus government services, at the very least, are also expected to overcome barriers oftime and distance and to be customeroriented.one element of responsiveness includes providing citizens with eninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government31box 1.3a sampling of egovernment objectivesgoals contained in the chief information officers councilfy 2001 strategic plan1goal 1. all citizens connected to the products, services, and information of theirgovernmentgoal 2. interoperable and innovative governmentwide it initiativesgoal 3. a secure and reliable information infrastructure that the customer canaccess and trustgoal 4. it skills and resources to meet mission objectivesgoal 5. collaborations between the public and private sector to achieve bettergovernmentguiding principles developed by the egovernment excellenceinitiative of the council for excellence in government2what should egovernment be?1. easy to use2. available to everyone3. private and secure4. innovative and resultsoriented5. collaborative6. costeffective7. transformationalegovernment objective outlined in the bush administrationõs2002 budget blueprint3use the internet to create a citizencentric government: the explosive growth ofthe internet has transformed the relationship between customers and businesses. it isalso transforming the relationship between citizens and government. by enablingindividuals to penetrate the federal bureaucracy to access information and transactbusiness, the internet promises to shift power from a handful of leaders in washington to individual citizens. the president believes that providing access to informationand services is only the first step in egovernment. in order to make government trulyòcitizencentered,ó agencies will have to work together to consolidate similar functions around the needs of citizens and businesses. citizencentered government willuse the internet to bring about transformational change: agencies will conduct transactions with the public along secure webenabled systems that use portals to linkcommon applications and protect privacy, which will give citizens the ability to goonline and interact with their governmentñand with their state and local governments that provide similar information and servicesñaround citizen preferences andnot agency boundaries.1chief information officers (cio) council. 2000. òstrategic plan: fiscal year 20012002.ó ciocouncil, washington, d.c. october. available online at <http://www.cio.gov>.2council for excellence in government. 2001. òegovernment: the next american revolution,ó washington, d.c., p. 5. available online at <http://www.excelgov.org/techcon/egovex/index.htm>.3executive office of the president (eop). 2001. a blueprint for new beginnings: a responsiblebudget for americaõs priorities. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., february28, section ix, government reform. available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/usbudget/blueprint/budix.html>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32it research, innovation, and egovernmenthanced ways of locating information and performing transactions. automated phone systems and web sites able to handle routine informationrequests and transactions are common in the private sector and are finding increased use in government. but when there are exceptions to theroutine, it may be necessary to locate an individualñsomeone with therequired knowledge or authority to make a decision or respond to a particular query. it can help locate the right individual as well as facilitatecommunications with that person. sites may use email to permit theexchange of messages with a customerservice representative, facilitatingasynchronous resolution of some problems. these sorts of capabilitiesare especially important for efficient, effective handling of exceptionalcircumstances whose resolution requires more than straightforward application of procedures.it is also now a common practice for commercial web sites to offersmooth transitions from webbased interactions with customers to telephone interactions (or chat sessions) with human service representatives.this approach offers advantages to both the site operator and the customer: the customer can rapidly acquire information available on theweb site and, having established context, proceed to click a button on theweb page that provokes a telephone call from a service representativewho has knowledge of the state of the customerõs interactions with thesite. the resulting conversation can thus immediately focus on particularquestions without devoting additional time to reestablishing context.another element of a responsive service is inprocess visibilityñanalogous to the intransit visibility that deliverers of express packagesofferñwhich allows one to determine the status of a particular transaction or claim at any given time, thereby making government agency processes more transparent.customer orientation also means delivering services in ways thatalign with the concerns and processes of customers, rather than accordingto government organizational structure or some other framework that isarbitrary from the customerõs perspective. for example, web sites operated by state and municipal governments offer services for small businessoperators that present a uniform, businessoriented interface, even thoughthis requires integration of interactions with separate government entities. business owners, for example, are then freed from having to maintain comprehensive and detailed working knowledge of the roles of thevarious agencies with whom they must interactñthe web site embodiesthis knowledge for them. a possible extension of this model would spanfederal, state, and local governments and even thirdparty service providers (see box 1.4).information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government33increasing the efficiency and effectivenessof government operations although the most visible manifestation of egovernment may be inenhancing interactions between government and its customers, the egovernment vision also extends to internal operations. across the politicalspectrum, it is believed that appropriate use of it provides a basis formore effective government programs, more efficient work within government agencies, and decreased total program costs. important it applications include reducing collection of redundant information, enhancinggovernment workersõ access to information required for decision making,and improving workflow management. these interests are reflected inlegislation, implementing regulations, and other government initiatives(see the subsection on òegovernment policy initiativesó in this chapter).providing effective access to informationin carrying out their various missions, government entities collectand retain a great deal of informationñinformation about individuals,businesses, demographic or other statistical data, and material regardingtheir own activities, rules, and decisions. government has multiple andoccasionally conflicting responsibilities with respect to such information.first, it is charged with keeping a comprehensive historical repository,including longterm preservation of federally generated data and federaldecisions. it also has responsibility for providing citizens with access tomost government information, though access to certain information isbox 1.4an enhanced òstarting a businessó portalwhat capabilities could a portal dedicated to òstarting a businessó provide tofacilitate that process? to help determine the feasibility and best site for a new business, the portal would provide access to such things as econometric, demographic,and trade data; geographic information systems and satellite imagery; information onfederal, state, and local regulations for that type of business; and state and localgovernment investmentincentive programs. to help with establishing a business,the portal would permit checking and registration of trademarks and copyrights andonline business registration. once the business was launched, the portal would support payment of withholding for state and federal taxes, social security, unemployment insurance, and the like. such a portal might also include links to thirdpartyservices that could help a business to start up quickly, such as banking, payroll, andtax services.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34it research, innovation, and egovernmentlimited by confidentiality rules and other considerations (regarding classified, proprietary, and other sensitive information).it is useful to classify access to government information in three categories, each of which entails different technical requirements:¥effective access to public information. online presence or searchabilityof information is only a first step. òeffectiveó means that tools and capabilities exist to allow relevant targets to be located in the wealth of governmentsupplied information. it should be possible to search for appropriate information and resources across government agencies and levelsof government without the boundaries being apparent.¥access by individuals to information about themselves. citizens shouldbe able to review and request revision of personal information with theassurance that only authorized people have access to their records. forexample, individuals might examine their own social security and taxrecords or uniformly update contact information, but this informationshould be kept private from people other than authorized governmentpersonnel.¥specialized access to governmentgathered or governmentheld information, under controlled circumstances. for example, administrative and statistical data are made available to researchers with the aid of technical andnontechnical measures that limit the disclosure of confidential data.providing access to a full range of transactions onlinecitizen and business interaction with government involves an enormous number of different transactions. many fall into the categories ofòvery simpleó (e.g., purchase a publication) or òroutineó (e.g., renewing acar registration or filing a tax return), but interactions with governmentcover a broad range of complexity. the longterm vision expressed bymany (and called for in the government paperwork elimination act of1998; see more details in the subsection òegovernment policy initiativesó in this chapter) is to make it possible to conduct all governmentbusiness online. this involves more than simply converting all existingsystems into electronic ones, which alone would be a substantial undertaking, given the myriad functions that government supports.indeed, a key element of the egovernment vision is to provide onestop portals that integrate across multiple government agencies and levels of government. the goal is to allow users to interact with a wide rangeof government agencies and officials in seamless fashion, with interactions based on function rather than on organizational details. this canhelp free users of government services from the daunting task of trackingall government agencies with which they must interact in order to cominformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government35ply, say, with business regulations or taxreporting requirements. another aspect of this goal is that users avoid having to reenter informationacross multiple transactions or sessions. such elimination of redundancyis not a trivial issue for the user; consider, for instance, how much ofincome tax reporting involves copying data from one form to another.nor is the goal trivial for government to implement. achieving it will, forexample, depend heavily on improving capabilities for protecting privacy, integrating or establishing appropriate authentication capabilities,and providing other safeguards with respect to access to governmentheld information.increasing participation in governmentinformation technology is also a way of providing new means forinteractions between citizens and governmentsñboth to improve the interactions and to engage people who have not participated in the past.providing facilities for enhanced interaction does not ensure greater participation, but it is a logical and fundamental step. at the simplest level,such facilities involve email, web forms, or chat systems to complementthe usual mail and telephone channels for communicating with government offices and officials (people might use such means to comment onproposed decisions, inquire about the status of a pending action, and thelike). longterm, the vision extends to enabling new structures that permit greater dialog and more direct involvement with the decisionmakingprocess: how can citizens communicate with government officials andwith each other to support effective and informed governance? this goalalso includes enhancing the electoral process (e.g., by decreasing barriersto voting), while maintaining and improving the accuracy and trustworthiness of elections.meeting expectations for trustworthinessit is widely acknowledged that preserving public confidence in thesecurity of government systems is a cornerstone of effective egovernment. this was a recurring theme in the workshops convened by thecommittee and in discussions with individuals within and outside government. the challenge is how to accomplish this goal while expandingand easing access in a rapidly evolving internet and personalcomputinginfrastructure. information requests and transactions often involve theexchange of sensitive informationñbetween individuals and government,between private organizations and government, within government, andamong governments at different levels. protecting the privacy, confidentiality, and integrity of this information against unauthorized disclosureinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36it research, innovation, and egovernmentor modification is essential. at the same time, government systems aresubject to attack, whether by hackers, terrorists, or nations, which dictatesserious attention to informationsystems security. with increasing attention to critical infrastructure protection, government interest in trustworthiness will continue to span both government and private sector systems.meeting special challenges in governmentunique areasfor many services, government can build on technologies and processes, already established in the ebusiness marketplace, that have lowered the barrier for organizations seeking to establish an electronic presence. most commercial efforts, however, address broadly identifiedmarket needs that may not satisfy the requirements of government applications. such requirements include providing for exceedingly stringentprecautions (e.g., for national security or for protecting individual taxrecords), providing for indefinite persistence of certain archival records(such as those retained by the national archives), and providing ubiquitous accessibility to certain critical government services (related to socialsecurity records, for example). the committee explored two areasñfederal statistics and crisis managementñin which a number of governmentunique requirements are concentrated. each was considered through anindepth workshop that brought together domain specialists, particularlythose serving in operational roles, with it experts. (detailed results ofthese workshops were published in two separate volumes; 11 the conclusions drawn in this report build on those results.) in both cases, thecommittee found that specific governmentunique requirements presented a mix of longerterm research challenges and shorterterm, moreapplied r&d challenges.technical and process challenges to advancingegovernment programswhile in many instances egovernment programs can simply build onexisting technology and ebusiness practices, in some areas governmentleads in demand for it. chapter 2, òspecial considerations in egovern11for further details, see computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council (nrc), 1999, summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis management, national academy press, washington, d.c.; and cstb, nrc,2000, summary of a workshop on information technology research for federal statistics, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government37ment,ó discusses several specific mission areas for which this is true;chapter 3, òtechnology levers,ó discusses a number of more genericresearch areas where it capabilities could enhance egovernment programs.as an illustration of the sorts of technical challenges that arise withmore aggressive egovernment programs, this report considers what isneeded to extend interactions with government from information delivery to support for transactionsñconsolidated services (sometimes knownas portals) that enable citizens, businesses, and other government entitiesto provide information to or engage in financial transactions with multiple government organizations. some agency web sites already supporta variety of basic transactions with citizens, many analogous to thoseoffered by ecommerce sites. systems that permit residents to renewdriverõs licenses and vehicle registration online have been a common areaof state focus, reflecting the servicesõ nearubiquity, the relief from thehassle associated with traditional renewal at state motorlicensing bureaus, and the relative ease of implementing these systems.building interagency portals presents numerous technical and management challenges, including these:¥a legacy of information systems supporting numerous government functions, many of which were not designed for interoperabilitywith other systems or for webbased access (a challenge not unique togovernment);¥interoperation challenges arising from working across organizational stovepipes;¥rules constraining the nature of information sharing across government agencies and programs;¥funding new online systems while maintaining existing ones;¥difficulties in identifying and maintaining funding for what areinherently crossagency activities; and¥resolving technical issuesñsuch as protocol design, informationrepresentation, and security and authentication measuresñassociatedwith interfaces that would enable third parties to operate portal sites thatinteract with government services on behalf of citizens and businesses,permitting third parties to use software that directly connects their owninformation systems with government services.areas of innovation and continuing technical challenge extend wellbeyond the more visible information and transaction portals. for example, although government has historically provided a great deal ofdata in electronic formñsometimes directly to the public in easytouseformats and sometimes in more esoteric formats that only a few specialinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38it research, innovation, and egovernmentized contractors can useñone area of current exploration relates to technology for supporting thirdparty provision of egovernment informationand services. the relative roles of the government and private sectors inrelation to providing data and information products have long been asubject of controversy. this report does not take a position in this debate,but the committee does note that it would be possible to provide capabilities that more easily permit nongovernment parties (commercial or noncommercial) to provide access to government information and services.complementing more traditional electronic data interchange technologyfor interactions between government and larger businesses and organizations, a number of systems for online procurement and grant or contractprocessing have been rolled out. finally, there are challenges associatedwith increasing intragovernment information management and collaboration and with performing such functions across levels of government.in these realms, technical issues such as confidentiality, data integrity,and information management also present significant obstacles.why now?multiple factors have driven expectations that governments will aggressively exploit it. the most obvious of these factors is the widespreadadoption of technology and related practices in the commercial sector,contrasted with their less pervasive though growing adoption in government. on the demand side, use of the internet (and other informationtechnology) among the general population has resulted in a rising level ofcomfort and familiarity with the technologies in other contexts; this fuelsexpectations that governments will provide services analogous to those inthe commercial sector. this growing demand is mirrored in a series ofpolicy initiatives and legislative efforts.technology foundations for egovernment in placethe recent and rapid growth in ebusiness is the direct result of twomutually reinforcing factors: (1) a number of technologies reaching pointsof maturity, scale, and usability at which they can be incorporated directly into the infrastructure of commerce (and government); and (2) theemergence of business practices that can effectively employ these technologies to advantage. a brief review of these technological underpinnings is useful from two perspectives: (1) it illustrates the role that pastresearch efforts have played in providing the foundation for todayõs ecommerce and egovernment, and (2) it illustrates the multitude of technologies that have come together to permit ecommerce and egovernment systems to be built.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government39the most visible technology supporting ebusiness is the internet,which has quickly made the transition from research network to criticalsocietal infrastructure. the internet provides a nearubiquitous, generalpurpose interface across diverse communications links and multiple computing platforms. the world wide web, built on top of the internet,provides hyperlinking among information resources and a uniform userinterface for accessing resources located throughout the network. butbehind the web interface, which together with email is the way that mostend users experience ebusiness, lie a number of information technologiesthat have been developed incrementally over periods of years or evendecades. examples include these:¥distributedprocessing technologies that support scaling up to verylarge numbers of users;¥approaches to facilitating data interchange, including mediator andwrapper techniques (which allow legacy systems to be integrated intonewer systems) and the webinspired xml standard for describing data;¥capabilities for remote service invocation across the network, which arecurrently being developed and standardized;¥safe mobile code capabilities, which enable code to be downloadedand run on enduser computing platforms;¥database/transaction capabilities, most notably the development ofreliable, largescale relational databases (and more recent object extensions); capabilities for ensuring integrity and consistency of databases;and the emergence of a standard language, sql, for querying databases;¥multimedia technologies, including techniques for compressing audio and video, that support streaming or downloaded content and realtime interactions;¥graphical web browsers, which made internet services accessible togeneral users and across a wide range of hardware and software platforms;¥search engines, including indexing, query interfaces, and spidersthat build indexes of web content;¥data mining, which allows patterns to be inferred and relevant datato be identified from very large data sets;¥improved understanding of humancomputer interface issues, rangingfrom page layout and navigation design to ecommerce transaction support and online collaboration;¥publickey and other cryptographic security capabilities that provideconfidentiality and integrity of intransit and stored data, nonrepudiationof transactions, and the like; and¥other security capabilities, including authentication of users, network monitoring, and intrusion detection.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40it research, innovation, and egovernmentgrowing awareness and demandconfirmation of growing public interest comes from a january 2001hartteeter poll conducted by the council for excellence in government,which found that about threequarters of americans believed egovernment should be a top priority for the thenincoming bush administration;and from market research by deloitte consulting that projected significant growth in customer demand over the next two years.12 actual demand has also been growing, as illustrated by the inclusion of the internalrevenue serviceõs web site, <www.irs.gov>, in jupiter media metrixõsfebruary 2001 òtop 50 web sitesó ranking.13with image and economic development at stake, competition amonggovernments at the state and local levels to deliver improved services ishigh, a point emphasized by the thendirector of the washington statedepartment of information services, steven kolodney, in his remarks tothe committee. internationally, a number of other nations are developingand deploying egovernment services. these efforts are at varying levelsof maturity, with the more advanced featuring national egovernmentportals designed to offer a single point of access to both informationresources and transactions.14as these pressures result in more services being deployed, conflictingdemands will arise for increased reliability; for anywhere, anytime, anydevice access; for accuracy and timeliness of information; and for privacyand security of confidential information (these tradeoffs are discussed inchapter 2, òspecial considerations in egovernmentó).finally, interest in egovernment is also driven by the desire to increase efficiency in government. everpresent budgetary pressures, especially on the socalled discretionary portion of the federal budget, haveprompted legislators and those in the executive branch alike to seek ways12deloitte consulting and deloitte and touche. 2000. at the dawn of egovernment: thecitizen as customer, march 1. for more information, see <http://www.deloitte.com/vc/0,1323,sid=2228&ar=&cid=3446,00.html>.13jupiter media metrix. 2001. òjupiter media metrix announces u.s. top 50 web anddigital media properties for february 2001ó (press release). available online at <http://www.jmm.com/xp/jmm/press/2001/pr031301.xml>.14for example, building on earlier efforts to make information and forms available online,france launched its <mon.servicepublic.fr> portal in late 2001. development is slated tocontinue through 2005. see rory mulholland. 2001. òfrench bureaucracy takes onlineleap.ó bbc news, november 14. available online at <http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/sci/tech/newsid1655000/1655820.stm>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government41of leveraging information technology to decrease the costs of providingcustomer service and administering government programs.15egovernment policy initiativeswith growing awareness of egovernment, it is becoming a focus oflegislation. building on the paperwork reduction act of 1980, enacted todecrease burdens on the public from information collection and reportingrequirements, and on its subsequent amendments, the government paperwork elimination act (gpea) of 1998 (p.l. 105277) requires federalagencies to provide individuals or other entities the options of submittinginformation to or transacting with the agency electronically and of maintaining records electronically when practicable. the legislation sets atarget date of 2003 for implementation throughout the federal government.gpea provides that electronic records and their related electronicsignatures not be denied validity merely because they are in electronicform, and it encourages the federal government to use a range of electronic signature alternatives. the clingercohen act of 199616shifted responsibility for it acquisition from the general services administrationto individual agencies. it established the role of chief information officer(cio) in executivebranch agenciesñgiving the cios both strategic andoperational responsibility for all it programsñand it gave the office ofmanagement and budget responsibility for setting overall policies andreviewing agency it programs through the budget process.a number of additional legislative measures have helped propel egovernment. for example, the fy 1999 department of defense authorization act requires dod to establish a defensewide electronic system forordering supplies and materials, and the electronic benefit transferinteroperability and portability act of 2000 (p.l. 106171) requires the u.s.department of agriculture to establish a national standard for electronic15while this effect is widely accepted as an article of faith, economists have struggled tosubstantiate it. in recent years, some economists have reported that this failure may havebeen an artifact of the measures selected. for instance, some of them may not have adequately captured any productivity growth manifested in increased output quality ratherthan quantity. there is a general sense that productivity depends on careful execution of itprograms, often in conjunction with businessprocess changes. this issue is discussed incstb, nrc, 1993, information technology in the service society: a twentyfirst century lever,national academy press, washington, d.c.; and cstb, nrc, 1998, fostering research on thesocial and economic impacts of information technology, national academy press, washington,d.c.16formally, the information technology management reform act (p.l. 104106).information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42it research, innovation, and egovernmentfoodstamp benefit transactions. a series of hearings on egovernmentissues were held in the 106th congress, and new egovernment legislationhas been under consideration in the current, 107th congress. legislativeproposals being actively considered as of this writing include establishment of a fund for innovative crossagency it programs.the executive branch has also been the locus of a number of initiatives aimed at advancing egovernment. the clinton administration initiative called the national partnership for reinventing government (originally named the national performance review, or npr), which had thestated goal of increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of government,placed considerable emphasis on leveraging information technology inmeeting that goal. the access america initiative, in part an outgrowth ofnpr activities, included several instances of crossagency collaborationand resulted in the establishment of several targeted portals aimed atparticular population segments. executive branch policy making withrespect to egovernment has included a presidential memorandum thatcalled on federal agencies to, among other things, make available onlineby the end of 2000 the forms associated with the top 500 governmentservices. this action resulted in the implementation of the web site<www. fedforms.gov>.17another offshoot of the npr initiative was the information technology innovation fund (itif), which was operated from 1995 to 2000, expiring with the end of the federal telephone system2000 (fts2000) program. funded through a 1 percent setaside from fts2000 chargesassessed to agencies, the itif provided about $30 million for some 70programs.18 a 1996 executive order established the chief informationofficers council, an organization of cios of the largest 28 federal agencies and two representatives of the smaller agencies, to address it issueson a governmentwide basis.19 in addition to setting up an egovernmentcommittee in 2000, the cio council worked on a variety of issues that17executive office of the president. 1999. òmemorandum for the heads of executivedepartments and agencies (subject: electronic government).ó december 17. availableonline at <http://www.govexec.com/links/121799memo.htm>.18projects were selected by a committee of representatives from the interagency bodyadvising the general services administration on the federal telecommunications system(the interagency management council) and another interagency it group (the governmentinteragency technology services board). gayle gordon. 2000. òinformation technologyinnovation in the federal governmentó (unpublished).19executive office of the president (eop). 1996. executive order 13011. eop, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vision for itenabled enhancement of government43included y2k, privacy and security, governmentwide strategic planning,and a number of shorterterm problems.attention to egovernment has continued in the bush administration.the presidentõs 2002 budget blueprint includes a small egovernment fundfor interagency initiatives, with a proposed budget of $10 million in 2002and total of $100 million over 3 years. the presidentõs proposal wouldhave the fund allocations made by omb.20 in october 2001, omb, withthe approval of the presidentõs management council, identified 23 priority crossagency egovernment projects.21 the usa patriot act of2001,22 which is replete with new it programs and initiatives in suchareas as border security, immigration, and airline security, underscoresthe critical role that it capabilities are seen as playing in homeland security efforts. in 2002, omb released a report, which builds on the work ofa federal task force convened in 2001, that maps out an egovernmentstrategy and identifies priorities for implementation.23government it research forelectronic governmentit research and development programs exist across the federal government, and many agencies have development programs aimed at creating egovernment capabilities. the digital government program, an initiative of the national science foundationõs computer and informationscience and engineering (cise) directorate, is a program that supportsresearch at the intersection of the it research community and the operational needs of the government. it aims to help agencies improve internal,interagency, and intergovernmental operations and governmentcitizeninteractions. in particular, the program supports joint research programsbetween academic researchers and government agencies and requires that20see executive office of the president. 2001. a blueprint for new beginnings: a responsible budget for americaõs priorities. u.s. government printing office, washington, d.c., february 28. available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/usbudget/blueprint/budtoc.html>.21diane frank. 2001. òomb sets egov agenda.ó federal computer week, october 29.available online at <http://www.fcw.com/fcw/articles/2001/1029/newsomb102901.asp>.22uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism act (usa patriot act) of 2001, p.l. 10756.23office of management and budget (omb). 2002. egovernment strategy: simplifieddelivery of services to citizens (implementing the presidentõs management agenda for egovernment). omb, executive office of the president, washington, d.c., february 27. availableonline at <http://www.cio.gov/documents/egovreport.pdf>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44it research, innovation, and egovernmentat least one government agency be a partner. it encompasses work at thefederal, state, local, and international levels. partner agencies are expected to contribute resources to the collaborative efforts, with the expectation that the programõs funding will increasingly leverage additionalresources from participating agencies.24launched in 1998, the digital government program has issued grantstotaling roughly $30 million to fund more than two dozen researchprojects and a number of planning grants and exploratory workshops.funded proposals involve more than 30 federal departments and agencies, some 60 universities and nonprofit organizations, and a handful ofcommercial firms, and have attracted more than $4 million in matchingsupport from the participating government agencies.25 stimulated inpart by the availability of federal and state research support, several universitybased research centers examining egovernment issues have beenestablished.an offshoot of the digital government program is the digital government consortium, a grouping of agencies partnering with it researchers and/or interested in pursuing future research collaborations. amongother activities it publishes òdg online,ó a quarterly that presents newson digitalgovernment developments and related it research, and maintains the web site <www.diggov.org>. another offshoot of the nsf program is an egovernment fellows program conducted by the council forexcellence in government that is intended to help create awareness of thestrategic benefits of and opportunities for collaborating with the academicresearch community on the part of midlevel government program managers. in addition, the interagency working group on information technology r&d has established a program, called the federal informationservices and applications council (fisac), with the goal of transitioningresearch results from federal agencies that conduct it r&d to missionsand systems across the federal government. fisac carries out these activities through several working groupsñthe it for crises management,federal statistics (fedstats), nextgeneration internet applications, anduniversal access teamsñand through engagement with the nsfõs digital government program.24national science foundation (nsf), directorate for computer and information scienceand engineering. 1999. òdigital government, program announcement nsf 99103.ó nsf,arlington, va. available online at <http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/1999/nsf99103/nsf99103.pdf>.25updated from information provided in briefing slides presented to the committee bylarry brandt, digital government program director, august 3, 2000, and the digital government program announcement, cited in footnote 24 above.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.452special considerations inegovernment: why governmentleads in demand for certaininformation technologiesalthough government can generally build on the technologies andservices emerging in the ebusiness marketplace, special requirementsarise in certain areas, reflecting the nature of the governmentõs operatingenvironment. this chapter briefly discusses several areas where government leads in demand for technologies used for egovernment services.ubiquitygovernments must provide services to all citizens. unlike the privatesector, they cannot opt to serve only the more profitable customers, norcan they select particular market segments in which to participate (thoughgovernments obviously do target specific populations to achieve theirpolicy objectives). nor can citizens choose which government they wishto deal with.in the context of egovernment, òservicesó should not be taken toimply only interactions resembling commercial transactions. in government, important services may involve provision of information, for example, or interactions with elected representatives, or commentary fromcitizens, businesses, and organizations on proposed regulations. serviceis provided today primarily through inperson, telephone, and postal mailinteractions; but email, the web, kiosks, and other forms of it are providing new opportunities to expand the accessibility of services and makeinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46it research, innovation, and egovernmentthem available ubiquitously. ubiquity has three dimensions: access foreveryone, access everywhere, and access anytime.access for everyonethe challenge of providing ubiquitous access to all citizens has several elements. first, it involves overcoming geographical and financialbarriers. much of the excitement associated with egovernment is akin tothat associated with ecommerceñonline access from the home meansnot having to trek to a government office or find the time to place atelephone call during normal business hours (often only to be put onhold).but home access is constrained by such factors as the affordability ofcomputer equipment and whether internet or other telecommunicationsservices are available and affordable in a given area. while the cost ofcomputers has dropped significantly over the years and the penetrationof computers and internet access has reached roughly onehalf of u.s.households, the hardware cost is still greater than that of many otherconsumer appliances; thus penetration lags significantly behind that oftelephone service (which is nearly ubiquitous). similarly, although dialup internet access is available from a number of providers in most parts ofthe country through a local call, there are areas where dialup access iseither not available or only available from a single provider.1helping provide for those without home access, a growing number oflibraries and other community institutions offer public internet access,supported in part by several federal programs.2 residential broadbandinternet service provides much higher data rates that support faster download times and the use of richer multimedia content, but its availability isspotty. as this availability continues to grow, there will be concerns aboutwhether those limited to dialup access will be at a disadvantage similarto that experienced earlier by people without any form of internet access.even if affordable and available, todayõs technologies and services present1thomas a. downes and shane greenstein. 1998. òdo commercial isps provide universal access?ó available online at <http://www.kellogg.nwu.edu/faculty/greenstein/images/htm/research/tprcbook.pdf>.2the erate program, established under section 254 of the telecommunications act of1996, uses a levy on interstate and international telecommunications providers to supportdiscounts on eligible institutionsõ purchases of telecommunications and internet servicesplus internal networking, with discounts varying with location (e.g., highcost, lowincome).communitybased internet access is also supported by the u.s. department of housingand urban developmentõs neighborhood networks program and the u.s. department ofeducationõs community technology center grants.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.special considerations in egovernment47significant usability barriers for those less adept with computers and theinternet. the frustrations of trying to use present generations of systemsand software are widely acknowledged to have the effect of discouraginguse, especially among lesscomputerliterate segments of the population.therefore, at least for the foreseeable future, many people are likely to optnot to adopt these technologies, though they still want access to government services. at a minimum, these gaps suggest that there will of necessity be a long transition period during which new itbased services willcomplement but not replace more traditional forms of interaction withgovernment.with respect to disability or language barriers, computerized servicesinvolve both advantages and disadvantages. they present additional barriers to those with vision or motor impairments, given the high degree ofdependence on visual communication and the fine motor skills that characterize todayõs keyboard and mouseinteraction paradigm. but the technologies may also provide the most effective tools to enhance access:online interactions can substitute for visits to a government office, therebyfacilitating access to information and services for those with mobilityimpairments.where adequate provisions have been made, it is possible to installmodifications or use adaptive software (e.g., texttospeech or voice recognition) to compensate for disabilities. recent operatingsystems releases and web software standards contain provisions for this sort ofaccess (such as hooks that allow screen readers or alternative input devices to work with them), and the world wide web consortiumõs webaccessibility initiative has developed both technology and usabilityguidelines. to maximize the extent to which such techniques are used,legislation was enacted in 1998 that mandates improved access both forfederal employees and the public.3 in addition, rules developed by theelectronic and information technology access advisory committee arein the process of being implemented by agencies.4 when implemented,they will ease, though not eliminate, access issues.ubiquity also implies that important information be presented to citizens in a useful and meaningful manner. simply offering access to government documents is not very effective without some means of conve3section 508 of the workforce investment act of 1998, p.l. 105220, which amendedsection 504 of the rehabilitation act, 29 u.s.c. ¤ 794d. the americans with disabilities actof 1990 extended similar provisions beyond the federal government.4government bodies working on accessibility include the general servicesadministrationõs center for it accommodation and the u.s. department of defenseõs computer/electronic accommodations program.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48it research, innovation, and egovernmentniently searching them and cataloging the results. similarly, providingdirect and unstructured access to the wealth of statistical data collected bythe federal government does not necessarily constitute meaningful access. for example, one concern of the federal statistics community is thata low level of numerical/statistical literacy in the general populationmakes it especially important to provide users with interfaces that provide the necessary context and make it easier to interpret the information.it is certainly not feasible (nor affordable) for government to provide all ofits information in a form that is understandable to everyone. but for keyinformation and services, there will be expectations that segments of thepopulation not be disenfranchised. one challenge in building systemsthat provide universal access is doing so without forcing everyone into alowestcommondenominator situation.access everywhere, anytimeòubiquityó has another meaning in the information technology arenathat is also relevant to egovernment: it signifies software and infrastructure capabilities that enable individuals to connect and communicate inmore natural ways. the vision, to date unrealized, is that applicationsfrom different organizationsñincluding government agencies and officesñwould work smoothly together and that users would be providedwith effectively seamless access to information and services across various access devices and communications links. moreover, users would beable to obtain information and services from wherever they are located,and they could use a variety of computing devicesñnot just desktopcomputers with wired internet access. in this arena, both the privatesector and government are only in the early stages of exploring potentialapplications and modes of operation.use of it in government applications requires availability and reliability. even for common, nondemanding applications such as renewinga driverõs license, expectations will be high that computer servers andcommunications links are functioning most of the time. particular applications such as emergency services and crisis management demand avery high level of reliability and availability.trustworthinessservices supplied by government have to satisfy high expectations ofsecurity and confidentiality. in this regard, government must provideguarantees that generally exceed those offered by the private sector. individuals simply will not tolerate unauthorized or accidental disclosure ofinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.special considerations in egovernment49personal information contained in tax filings, social security records, andthe like.conventional business practice is to treat trust requirements with ariskmanagement approach in which the costs of implementing securitymeasures are weighed against the consequencesña calculation that indicates what (small) level of exposure may be acceptable, as zero risk isimpossible to achieve. this approach is not easily implemented in a government setting, where the high level of scrutiny leads to a very lowtolerance for failure and where stringent security requirements are thenorm. security in both classified and nonclassified systems has long beenan area of emphasis in government information policy, as reflected in thecomputer security act of 19875 and the security provisions of omb circular a130.6one essential ingredient of a trustworthy system is the ability to authenticate the identity of someone wishing to access it, whether that individual is a citizen seeking to retrieve personal records or engage in atransaction online, or a government employee authorized to openrecords.7 identity theft has already proven to be a troublesome issue inthe private sector, and it is easy to anticipate heightened concerns if itoccurred with egovernment services. the simplest computerbased authentication mechanisms, commonly used in internet transactions today,rely on a shared secret, such as a password. but passwords have a numberof weaknesses; for example, because they are chosen by users, they areoften easily guessed. one way to strengthen such mechanisms is to makethe secrets dynamic, such as by using information contained in recenttransactions or communications, but this approach also has vulnerabilities.publickey cryptography technology provides more robust authentication, though a major challenge is distributing the public keys in a securemanner. a publickey infrastructure (pki), which encompasses technologies, processes, and policies, makes use of certificates that allow the identity of users to be authoritatively associated with their public key. onepki model relies on trusted third parties, known as certificate authorities,5the computer security act of 1987 (p.l. 100235).6office of management and budget (omb). 2000. management of federal information resources. omb circular a130. november 30. omb, executive office of the president, washington, d.c. available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a130/a130trans4.html>.7the importance of adequate online authentication and lack of a good solution was apparent in the 1997 social security administrationõs stumbles in providing online access topersonal earnings and benefit estimate statements (pebes).information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50it research, innovation, and egovernmentwho themselves use publickey cryptography to digitally sign certificatesthat bind the identity of subscribers to a public key. but fullfeatured pkisystems are not yet commonplace in either the government or the privatesector. obstacles to widespread use include the complexity of key management; the need to establish systems and procedures for issuance andrevocation of certificates; the lack of compatibility among different implementations; and the cost, inconvenience, and systemperformance penalties associated with pki systemsõ use. design choices must balance suchtensions as ease of use versus security and accountability versus privacy.several federal agencies are currently working to develop or implement pki systems, complemented by crossagency pki efforts by the chiefinformation officers council.8 for instance, the department of defenseis rolling out the common access card, which uses pki technology toissue certificates to military, dependents, civilian employees, and somecontractors. challenges in implementing pki in government include justifying the cost premiums associated with being an early adopter, enabling the necessary level of interoperability among systems and acrossagencies, developing systems that scale up sufficiently, and funding andsustaining a crossagency effort. government pilots will also provideinsight on important operational issues such as how frequently cards arelost or stolen and how well these circumstances can be handled throughcertificate revocation.in the development of authentication services, technology, policy, andmanagement considerations are tightly intertwined. in the united states,there has been longstanding opposition to governmentissued universalidentifiers, as evidenced by the absence of a national identification card(though the issue resurfaced in 20012002 in the wake of the september11, 2001, terrorist attacks).9 the reality is that each person establishes anumber of different identities for interacting with businesses, organizations, and government bodies, and that each of these organizations limitsthe information that it discloses. for instance, a driverõs license is used fora different purpose and is associated with information different from thepurpose and information related to a voterregistration card, and there is8general accounting office (gao). 2001. information security: advances and remainingchallenges to adoption of public key infrastructure technology. gao01277. gao, washington, d.c., february.9for an assessment of technology and policy issues associated with national identification systems, see the forthcoming computer science and telecommunications board (cstb)interim report on nationwide identity systems. the report will be available from the cstbhome page at <http://www.cstb.org>, as well as the national academy press web page at<http://www.nap.edu>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.special considerations in egovernment51little need for exchange of data between the respective authorities. reflecting concerns about privacy implications, record linkage by government has in fact long been limited by law.with electronic records, however, it becomes much easier to use identifying information (such as name, address, or social security number) tomatch records across multiple identities and different government programs. although there will inevitably be pressures for egovernmentsystems to mirror the complex web of authentication and identity mechanisms found in the paperbased world, tradeoffs will be required. thesepressures must be balanced against increased complexity that could reduce the utility of egovernment systems and compromise their ease ofuse.the committeeõs exploration of crisis management pointed to the needfor dealing with exceptions with respect to who can access informationand systems. in a crisis situation, access to a variety of private and/orgovernment confidential records may be neededñsuch as quick access tothe blueprints of a building that has collapsed in an earthquake or tomedical records needed for emergency treatmentñalthough it would bemore tightly restricted under normal circumstances. with electronicallyprotected records, one needs explicit mechanisms for handling exceptionsin an emergency. simply persuading someone holding needed information of the urgency of a situation, which is how such contingencies aretypically addressed with paperbased records, might not suffice, as thisrequest alone would not permit records to be unlocked. more generally,tools supporting adaptive policies will be needed in order to accommodate crisis situations, for both enabling additional access (to provide adequate response) and shutting down certain kinds of access (to avert newthreats).additional trust issues arise if software agents that purport to act onbehalf of an individual are used. first, if a user grants authority to anagent to act on his or her behalf, what kind of trust can that person havethat the agent will not abuse the authority? this issue requires bothvalidating the code and the environment within which the code will operate with the userõs authority. second, when allowing code to run in oneõsown environment (e.g., downloading code that will do useful things ononeõs own local machine), how does the person trust that the code willonly do what it purports to do and not, for example, gain unwantedaccess to personal information stored on the computer? two approacheshave been developed for trusting code distributed over the internet fromservers to clients: (1) have the source authenticate the code before it is run(the approach used with microsoftõs activex controls), or (2) run the codein a special òsandboxó environment that limits what the code is able to do.of course, there are potential weaknesses in both approachesñsuch asinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52it research, innovation, and egovernmentmisappropriated credentials in the case of activex or bugs in the codeimplementing the sandbox in the case of java. thus, it remains an openquestion whether citizens will trust software agents to provide information and services in such critical areas as tax or health care or feel comfortable running mobile code on their own machines.another dimension of the trust issue relates to the consequences ofinadvertent information disclosure. given the authority associated withgovernment data, premature release of, say, a key economic indicatorcould have significant implications for financial markets. (this was theconcern raised in 1998 when the bureau of labor statistics inadvertentlyposted employment numbers to a bureau web site in advance of thecorrect release date and time.)while such tensions arise in the private sector as well, the long historyof public concerns over the potential ability of government to gather andcorrelate information about individuals means that the government willcontinue to play a key role in how these tensions are addressed. researchalone cannot resolve them, of course, but it can create technologies thatenable greater flexibility. for example, technological tools can enableadaptive policies such as mutually trusted intermediate agents.access and confidentialitygovernment collects some information on a strictly confidential basis(e.g., answers to statistical surveys), and other information is collectedunder the assumption that it will be carefully guarded. both overall andspecific statutory and regulatory restrictions control how such information is used or released publicly, reflecting very strong expectations thatthe promise of confidentiality will be upheld. yet at the same time, government is charged with releasing information and making it uniformlyavailable to all.disclosurelimiting practices and technologies are required when individuals (or organizations) provide data under confidentiality pledgesñpromises that if and when the data are released by the government, theywill be in a form that does not reveal the sourcesõ identities. in certaincases, disclosure can be limited to carefully selected individuals (e.g.,those who have agreed to disclosure terms or who are sworn employeesaccessing the data for internal government purposes). by contrast, anorganization conducting a marketing survey, for example, is not bound tothe same requirements.governments are also expected to protect the privacy of citizensñtoinclude safeguards on what information is collected and how it is used. abasic privacy framework for the federal government is provided by theprivacy act of 1974 (p.l. 93579), which applies principles of fair informainformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.special considerations in egovernment53tion practice to federal agencies. as illustrated by the concerns expressedover government web sites that tracked user behavior by using cookies(small files created by web browsers to preserve information across websessions, providing such capabilities as tracking usersõ access across websites or correlating separate visits to a single web site) and by the subsequent 2000 omb memorandum laying down strict conditions for cookiesõuseñgovernment experiences significant pressures to maximize the privacy accorded to those using government systems and services. an ongoing challenge is providing citizens with assurances that these policies arebeing fulfilled.structural constraintsbusinesses are competing to meet customer needs better and are tailoring their market segmentation (identification of customer groups suchas small businesses or students) accordingly. for electronic services, thisusually means coevolving ebusiness technology and business models.improvement in customer focus is often accomplished by changing processes and organizational structure to support business needs betterñfacilitating in particular the creation of portals for information and transactions that are aggregated around the needs of specific market segments.for example, businesses can reorganize to bypass intermediaries in relationships (socalled disintermediation).government has been taking some initial steps in this direction aswell, as evidenced by multiple government information portals and anincreasing number of aggregate transaction portals. difficult in any setting, modification of processes and organizational structure in government is often significantly constrained by legal and administrative strictures. for example, informationsharing barriers have been legislativelyestablished to protect citizen privacy. a further complication is that thedesired span of aggregation can include state and local governments aswell as federal agencies. these factors raise the possibility that, ratherthan reorganizing itself, government might adopt technology to offer integrated useroriented services. for example, one might create portalsthat aggregate information or services for the customer and dispatch theelements of the query or transaction to the appropriate set of governmententities.significant privacy challenges are also posed by portals for government information and transactions that are operated by third parties.though a competitive market of thirdparty portals could result in improved access to government services, they will face the issue of how toprovide legal and technical safeguards relating to confidentiality and integrity of information that citizens enjoy when interacting directly withinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54it research, innovation, and egovernmentthe government. for example, the privacy (and compliance) of a citizen isenhanced by laws that prevent certain government entities (such as thebureau of the census or the irs) from sharing information with othergovernment entities. this means that potentially no one but the citizenwould be legally able to fuse the multiple data streams provided to thevarious government entities. the issue is what privacy safeguards can beprovided when the citizen presents a broad range of data to a portaloperated by a government entity or a third party, in order that the portaloperator may appropriately transact on the citizenõs behalf with multipleseparate agencies.it in support of government functionsthis section provides a brief overview of two areasñcrisis management and federal statisticsñexplored by the committee, and it also takesnote of several other government application areas in which governmentleads in technology demand. this presentation is not intended to be comprehensive. rather, it is meant to provide an illustration of the sorts ofunique requirements that arise in the government sector.crisis management and homeland defensecrises include natural disasters (e.g., hurricanes, earthquakes, floods,and fires) and manmade disasters (e.g., industrial accidents, infrastructure failures, and terrorist attacks). crises can put lives at risk and posesignificant economic threats. the escalating costs (both human and economic) of natural disasters, reflecting in part the increased populationliving or working in areas at risk, underscore the importance of enhancing òcrisis managementó capabilities. the september 11, 2001, attackshave led to greater attention to preventing, detecting, and responding toterrorist attacks. crisis management encompasses crisis responseñtheimmediate activities in the wake of a disasterñas well as the longertermòconsequence managementó activities associated with addressing disasters past, present, and future to improve planning, preparedness, mitigation, and recovery efforts.by its nature, crisis management is a very challenging process. itdraws on the capabilities and resources of multiple organizations, including national, state, and local government, nongovernmental organizations, and the private sector (and, depending on the location and scale ofthe disaster, on international organizations and other national governments). efforts may encompass many functional areas, including transportation, communications, public works and engineering, firefighting,law enforcement, mass care, health and medical support, urban searchinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.special considerations in egovernment55and rescue, hazardous materials management, food supply, and energysupply. information technology needs include telecommunications, information management, geographic information systems, remote sensing, and models and simulations.as explored in more detail in the committeeõs earlier report on aworkshop examining crisis management,10 governmentõs particular technological needs include these:¥robust, highperformance communications infrastructure that canadapt to changing demands, manage traffic congestion, and permit priority overrides for emergency usage;¥temporary infrastructure that can be quickly deployed when extensive damage has occurred;¥data management and delivery mechanisms that can function evenwhen the communications infrastructure is degraded and that supportunanticipated information needs;¥composition of information and communications systems in adhoc situations, such as the establishment of an òinstant bureaucracyó forcrisis response and recovery (see box 2.1);¥improved interoperation of information systems, including thatamong systems operated by all levels of government and by private organizations (see box 2.2);¥support for effective decision making and coordination in the faceof uncertainty and stress;¥overcoming of language and other barriers to communicating withcitizens;¥enhanced means of warning populations at risk, especially providing information targeted to local circumstances faced by individuals orneighborhoods; and¥adapting of ecommerce technology and practices to accommodate the exceptionhandling necessary in crisis situations.federal statisticsfederal statistics on population characteristics, the economy, health,education, crime, and other factors play a key role in a wide range ofpolicy, business, and individual decisions. the decennial censusesñalongwith related estimates that are produced during the intervening yearsñ10computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 1999. summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis management. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 2.1 òinstant bureaucracyó capability for crisis response and recoveryone way to assist affected citizens in gaining access to needed information andservices in the wake of a crisis might be to provide the means to build, on the fly, aportal that links information and resources from federal, state, and local agencies;nongovernmental organizations; and businesses. in the event of a hurricane strike,for example, such a service might provide individuals with information on evacuation routes and available shelters, allow people to apply for federal disaster assistance, access relief services, file insurance claims, and so forth. at the same time, itwould provide capabilities that support decision making and that coordinate actionsand resources among federal, state, and local agencies and nongovernmental organizations. such a service would be accessible via multiple channels, including theinternet, from kiosks (including ones quickly set up in or near a disaster area), andwireless devices. the technology for òinstant bureaucracyó would take the form of atoolkit for rapid ad hoc assembly of a portal to support response to a crisis. thefollowing would be components of the toolkit:¥software tools for such things as authentication of users, access control, dataintegration, and query across multiple databases;¥standards for data exchange among systems and agencies; and¥personalization/persistence capabilities that would retain state between transactions, thereby permitting users to reuse previously captured information and resume interrupted sessions.drive the allocation of federal funding to state and local governments andthe apportionment of legislative districts. federal statistical data are usedto adjust wages, retirement benefits, and other spending, and to provideinsight into the status, wellbeing, and activities of the u.s. population.the surveys conducted to derive this information are extensive undertakings that involve the collection of detailed information, often fromlarge numbers of respondents. most executive branch departments are, inone way or another, involved in gathering and disseminating statisticalinformation. about a dozen agencies have statistics as their principal lineof workñthe two largest are the bureau of the census in the u.s. department of commerce and the bureau of labor statistics in the u.s. department of laborñand others collect statistics in conjunction with activitiesin particular areas.these federal statistical agencies are characterized not only by theirmission of collecting statistical information but also by their independence and commitment to a set of principles and practices aimed at ensuring the quality and credibility of the information they provide. thus,these agencies aim to live up to the trustworthiness expectations of citiinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.special considerations in egovernment57zens so that people will continue to participate in statistical surveys, andto meet the expectations of decision makers who rely on the integrity ofthe statistical products they use in policy formulation.confidentiality protection and trust take on particular importance infederal statistical data collection: information records are linked and dataare combined across agencies (subject to statutory and regulatory constraints), and the resulting statistical products are made available to thepublic as well as to specialized users. those providing the informationwant assurances that it is properly protected. the federal statistical system leads demand for it in other areas as well. for example, because thedata sources and users are extremely diverse and heterogeneous, onecannot rely on a simple system for retrieval and integration. survey datacollection technologies were another example of government leading demand for it cited at the committeeõs workshop; federal data collectionefforts frequently exceed private sector efforts both in scope and complexity.box 2.2enhanced capabilities for rapid exchange of information acrosslevels of government and with nongovernment organizationsunder the rubric of òhomeland defense,ó a number of cases involve interest inbuilding enhanced capabilities for exchanging information among diverse actors,including government agencies at all levels as well as private organizations. earlydetection of biological attacks, for example, depends on rapid gathering of information assembled by doctors, hospitals, medical laboratories, and local and state healthofficials. detecting misuse of student visa programs to gain entry to the united statesfor illegitimate purposes requires correlating student visa applications, immigrationentry information, and college attendance records. in each of these cases, there istechnical complexity in terms of needing to draw on multiple databases systems thatare operated by distinct organizations and do not necessarily conform to any common standard. also, sensitivities are associated with information exchange in eachcaseñboth medical and educational records have privacy expectations (and specificlegal and procedural safeguards) associated with them. the following technologieswould help enable these capabilities:¥middleware agents that issue standing queries into local databases and sendthe results to a federal agency. for example, agents could periodically pull specifiedstudent enrollment information from university databases and transmit it to the appropriate federal agencies.¥the means for organizations to audit the information transferred to federalagencies, to provide assurance that privacy safeguards are being upheld.¥tools for anomaly detection based on information drawn from multiple databases.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58it research, innovation, and egovernmentmilitary applicationsmilitary applications have been a dominant focus of it research formore than 40 years. the military was, and continues to be, an importantcustomer of it vendors, and militaryfunded research programs haveprovided a considerable fraction of academic research funding. the demanding informationmanagement, analysis, and communications needsof national defense have been reflected in research programs addressingsuch areas as survivability, security, interoperation, lifecycle management, software engineering, embedding, networking, wearable computing, systems research, modeling and simulation, communications (including support for mobility), and highperformance computing. progressmade in these research programs not only has enhanced defense systemsbut also has stimulated advances in the commercial computing sector.archivinggovernment is charged with preserving records of its activities. atthe federal level, the national archives and records administration(nara) has overall responsibility for archiving, and it provides guidanceand assistance to agencies on the creation, maintenance, use, and disposition of government records. each federal agency is responsible for ensuring that its records are created and preserved in accordance with thefederal records act of 1950.11 a combination of pressures to reduce costs,enhance access, increase efficiency, and modernize aging technical infrastructures has contributed to a shift to government information resourcesbeing òborn digital.ó12 nara and the agencies are challenged by theincreasing amounts of material that either originates as or is converted todigital formats. another agency whose central mission faces pressure asmaterials are increasingly born digital is the library of congress.13as elsewhere in government, expectations on the part of both the11federal records act (44 u.s.c. 2904), as described in gao. 2000. national archives: thechallenge of electronic records management. gao/tggd0024. gao, washington, d.c.available online at <http://www.gao.gov/new.items/gg00024t.pdf>.12the answer to whether this shift will realize cost savings, especially in the short term,is not straightforward. major reports still must be published in paper form, and all of thewriting and editorial costs remain the same regardless of format. in addition, there are costsof preparing files for the web and costs associated with maintenance and connectivity ofweb servers. the cost of printing a report may decline as more people use its online version, but it could well turn out that the total cost of providing the report increases.13cstb, nrc. 2000. lc21: a digital strategy for the library of congress. national academypress, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.special considerations in egovernment59general public and specialized stakeholders for archiving are being increased by what is available on the web in nongovernmental contexts.this shift, together with rapid technological change, challenge existingarchival practices and the institutions responsible for providing longterm access to government information.in the past, standardized publication and filing systems were used tomanage at least key documents, facilitating archiving. today, the situation is more informal, with a considerable body of material residing eitheron internal systems or on agency web sites. efforts to establishgovernmentwide systems for such digital information have had limitedsuccess. electronic documents are frequently changed over time, andmethods for tracking changes or validating the authenticity and integrityof archived electronic documents require further development.the advent of digital material also raises many new questions aboutwhat is worth archiving, especially with respect to files with dynamiccontent. web sites come and go (for example, there is no governmentsource for the clinton administrationõs version of the white house website <www.whitehouse.gov>). with paper documents, one might chooseto retain only final documents such as memoranda and not interim documents such as rough drafts and phone logs. with digital information,how does one selectñor even distinguish amongñmaterials forarchiving? technologically, it might be easier to keep all email or alldistinct draft documents rather than to be selective, but to make sense ofthis plethora of material (much of which might be superfluous) wouldplace a greater burden on the archivist. could techniques be developed toautomatically select and archive appropriate content?even when material is selected for archiving, a key challenge is thatwhile some government systems make provisions for upward compatibility, obsolescence of the associated hardware and software and thefragility of physical storage media pose the risk that digital informationwill become inaccessible over time. consensus does not exist at presenton standard formats or standard metadata descriptors, although efforts todevelop and adopt them are underway.the basic technical challenge is how governments can maintain digital material that is vital for their own operations, for public access, or forfuture research. the simplest approach is to create a physical artifact(paper or microfilm printout) of digital materials so that they can be preserved using traditional archival techniques. this does not appear to bean acceptable solution. for example, it takes away the very benefits thatelectronic documents can provide, such as easier search and retrieval.furthermore, important types of information, such as databases or linksamong documents, do not lend themselves to paper representation. oninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60it research, innovation, and egovernmentthe other hand, preservation of digital materials is not a straightforwardmatter in light of media fragility and system and format obsolescence.approaches to preserving digital material include migration of existing digital material to new software and hardware platforms as necessitated by new technology; development of emulators of obsolete hardwareand software systems to permit continued access; and development andadoption of longterm standards and descriptive formats with longer lifespans. once digital material has been archived, another key challenge isto construct search and retrieval systems to facilitate access.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.613technology leversthe role of research in meeting it needsthe federal government has been instrumental in developing the fieldof computing since the early days. one of the first applications of informationprocessing technology in government was the use of punchedcards and mechanical punch cardbased tabulation devices, invented byherman hollerith at the bureau of the census. these devices, used totabulate results of the 1890 census, led to the ubiquitous use of punchedcards as a medium for input, output, and storage for several decades.after world war ii, with the advent of larger computers, demandinggovernment missions including national defense, gathering and analyzing statistical data, and operating the social security system promptedsubstantial federal r&d on both hardware and software. the mission ofpreparing federal statistical data, for example, triggered a number of innovations, including the 1951 delivery of the first univac (remingtonrand) computer to the bureau of the census to help tabulate census results; development of the film optical scanning device for input tocomputers (fosdic) that enabled 1960 census questionnaires to be transferred to microfilm and scanned into computers for processing; and bureau of the census development of the topologically integrated geographic encoding and referencing (tiger) digital database of geographicfeatures covering the entire united states, which served as a foundationaldata set for subsequent geographical information systems. indeed, priorto 1960, the federal government was the dominant customer for computinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62it research, innovation, and egovernmenters.1 this federal dominanceñor at least heavyweight statusñin the itsector was also manifested in governmentõs investment in efforts to establish federal dataprocessing standards, a substantial fraction of which wasaimed at information systems security (reflecting a longstanding federalinterest in this area).as the commercial market for computing grew in the 1960s, federalsupport for it research continued to reap benefits. over time, government lost its position as the leading customer for computers, but becauseinformation technology remained critical to its various missions and because government led demand in many specific respects, federal supportfor it research continued. in the 1980s, the strategic computing program, for example, was launched in the u.s. department of defense(dod) in order to accelerate the development and transition of information technologies critical to defense applications. expanding on defenseadvanced research projects agency (darpa) research aimed at meetingmilitary requirements, and on u.s. department of energy (doe) energyresearch, nasa space research, nsf basic science, and the mission research of several other agencies, the high performance computing andcommunications (hpcc) initiative was created in the early 1990s to helpaddress ògrand challengeó applications in areas of government interestsuch as health, education, libraries, and crisis management, and to accelerate innovation in critical supporting information technologies.the history of federally funded it research shows that problems motivated by government needs, such as networking and parallel processing, when suitably framed in a welldesigned research program haveproved to have wide commercial application (as evidenced by the internet,distributed transaction processing, and data mining). broad goals wereoften pursued in order to infuse new thinking into the technology supplychain of vendors and technology developers for a mission agency. examples of the success of this approach include process separation forsecurity in operating systems (funded by darpa in the 1970s and 1980s),computational science (nsf, doe, and nasa in the 1980s), and customverylargescale integrated circuit (vlsi) chip design (darpa in the 1970sand 1980s).ideas were transferred to the commercial sector through direct sponsorship, or through employment or entrepreneurship of laboratory re1computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 1999. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., chapter 4.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers63searchers. cstbõs report evolving the high performance computing andcommunications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure(also known as the brookssutherland report, after the committeeõs cochairs)2 examined the payoff and key lessons learned from federal investment in computing research. the study concluded that this broad andsustained federal support profoundly affected the development of computer technology and ultimately led to numerous commercially successful applications. in turn, this stimulation of the commercial sector provided the means for government to acquire it to meet its own needs.the importance of continued investment in foundational technologies, by players across the board, should not be underestimated. government in particular has a unique and historic responsibility to help òraisethe flooró by working in critical research areas that need stimulus. theseare areas in which innovation tends to be nonappropriableñthat is, entities cannot retain, or appropriate, the value from an invention, and instead the value diffuses broadly. thus, advances that are nonappropriablemay not directly advance the competitive position of any individual commercial entity, though they may create increments of capability that in thelong run may benefit all users of a technology. an additional effect ofinnovation is that it can create market uncertaintiesñinnovations candisrupt the competitive position of established players, and in unpredictable ways. thus, it may not be in the selfinterest of any commercial partyto support innovation. (this point is discussed further in the sectionòwill industry do itó in chapter 4.)today, as government looks to continue to stimulate it innovationand meet its own needs through it research, three categories of researchare apparent, which might be handled quite differently with respect toresearch management, government sponsorship, and engagement withindustry. the categories are these:1. broad infrastructure. these òplatformó technologies are importantfor all users of it, whether commercial or government.2. governmentwide use. there are important developments that couldbe applied broadly across many government programs but that might notnecessarily apply in commercial settings. many of these technologies fall2cstb, nrc. 1995. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiativeto support the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.an expanded discussion of the lessons from history is provided in cstb, nrc, 2000, funding a revolution: government support for computing research, national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64it research, innovation, and egovernmentin the category of middleware (see the subsection òmiddlewareó in thischapter). dod has made some attempts to develop agencywide technologies in this category (such as the high level architecture [hla] andthe common operating environment [coe]). an example of an unsolved problem here is that of developing one or more authenticationschemes that government agencies can use to authenticate citizens forvarious categories of transactions. where government is successful indeveloping technologies of this sort and stimulating their uptake, widercommercial use may be an important consequence. but the investment isjustified in terms of the government use because there is no establishedmarket.3. missionspecific.  there are many technologies with narrower applicability that address more focused government technical problems. inthe course of the committeeõs workshops examining crisis managementand federal statistics, a number of opportunities were identified wherethe mission interests of federal agencies and the technical interests ofresearchers overlap. government applications provide not only new technical research challenges but also, frequently, texture, richness, and veracity not easily created in laboratory studies. working on this class ofproblems can thus represent a mutually beneficial situation for the researcher seeking to explore an idea and the government body seeking todiscover new approaches to solving a particular problem. researchfunded by the nsfõs digital government program illustrates some ofthese points of intersection, many of them already identified by otherfederal agencies and computer science researchers (see box 3.1). a number of specific appliedresearch opportunities identified in the committeeõsworkshops are described in its earlier workshop reports.all agencies with organic research programs undertake research incategory 3, above. those for which it plays a strategic role also undertakeprograms in category 2. those with a broad stake in the growth of it(such as dod, nasa, doe, and others) also address challenges in category 1, along with the nsf. the nsf digital government program ispositioned to undertake research in all three categories, forming allianceswith mission users in order to identify requirements more concretely,provide access to data and subjectmatter experts, and provide potentialfor early validation of innovative concepts.some egovernment research areasthe research areas discussed in the following subsections are drawnfrom the committeeõs detailed studies of crisis management and federalstatistics, as well as from its lessintensive explorations of other government application domains, reviews of the literature on government it,information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers65and interactions with experts both from within and outside government.the research topics presented in this chapter are intended to provideexamples of the kinds of topics likely to be important to governmentinformation technology. it must be noted, however, that inclusion of a topic inthis chapter does not mean that it is an area of sole or even primary importance togovernment. many of these issues are important acrosstheboardñingovernment and the private sector alikeñthough the government contextmay present especially stringent requirements or particularly novel issues or in some other way lead in demand. in addition, it must be noted thatthis compilation of topics is not a comprehensive research agenda. because theit requirements across government mission agencies are numerous anddiverse, the absence of an area of research from this chapter should not betaken as an indication that it is not worthy of support in the context of egovernment. moreover, lists of pertinent topics will evolve over time asthe state of the art advances, requirements in government are modified orbecome better understood, and other changes occur. nor could a study ofthis scope and level of effort present a comprehensive analysis of requirements and gaps governmentwide.these caveats notwithstanding, the committee intends the compilation of topics presented below to be useful to those seeking to stimulateinnovative projects, solicit proposals from researchers, or engage operational government agencies in it research.information managementgovernment applications present significant challenges for informationmanagement technology. governments hold large amounts of heterogeneous data from a wide variety of sourcesñtextual information,demographic data, geographic data, image and video data, and so forthñand in databases with many different schemas. they also present a heterogeneous computing environment, with numerous types of computerplatforms, database systems, information retrieval systems, and documentmanagement systems, just to cite a few.this diversity of computing systems reflects the substantial scale andlongevity of legacy investment that is typical of government (and oftenfound in the private sector as well), and the large number of departments,agencies, and programs that traditionally have specified and procuredsystems without reference to an overall information or systems architecture. many older systems adhere to obsolete federal informationprocessing standards. more recent systems adhere to prevailing commercialstandards. but agreement on standards is difficult to achieve, compliancewith such specifications is never total, standards do not cover the fullrange of design decisions (especially with respect to semantic issues),information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 3.1research grants funded by the nsfõs digital government program,19992001¥a framework for the dissemination, use, and storage of geospatial imagesfor field data collection¥a multinational investigation of new models of collaboration for government services to citizens and businesses¥a planning proposal: quality graphics for federal statistical summaries¥an ontology for geospatial knowledge¥challenges in statistical digital government: a workshop promotingagencyresearch institution interaction¥citizen access to government statistical data¥criteriabased inference from geospatial data: automating governmentdecision making for genetic food security, crop improvement, and globalgermplasm needs¥defining a motionimagery research and development program¥developing an information technology and organizational design researchagenda for the evaluation and management of research proposals¥digital gazetteer information exchange (dgie)¥bringing government and citizens together: a metadata extension testbedfor the kentucky spatial data infrastructure (kysdi) clearinghouse¥exploratory research on transnational digital government¥digitalization of coastal management and decisionmaking supported bymultidimensional geospatial information and analysis¥geospatial datamining techniques for a multimedia integrated modelingsystem¥heterogeneous reasoning tools for design supportand, perhaps most significantly, standards evolve over time. in short,standards alone are not a solution to the challenges of information sharing and integration.government systems also provide direct support for diverse usersand applicationsñincluding, for example, commonly required transactions at local, state, and federal levels; requests for information aboutpeople and property; requests for historical information (including information retained in official archives); requests for statistical information;researcher requests for various types of information; and governmentworker requests. while some systems are intended as servers or only forexpert users, others are expected to provide meaningful access to abroader user base. and regardless of their role, informationmanagementsystems design must also take into account a basic tension in the government environment: providing access to as much information as possiblewhile protecting system security and individual privacy. this goal can beinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers67challenging to accomplish because there are interactions among systemdesigns even when the systems themselves do not interactñthe results ofqueries to separate systems can be combined externally. these considerations are reflected in a number of research needs, both basic and applied,for systems that access government information:¥capabilities for finding relevant information in text and extractingstructure from text;¥managing unstructured and semistructured data;¥finding relevant information in other types of data, including timedependent data, geographical databases, satellite data, images, video, andaudio;¥providing effective access to heterogeneous information types (e.g.,mixed text, image, audio, and geographical data);¥providing effective access to multilingual information, including¥identifying where technology logging and monitoring for increased securityend and where violations of personal privacy and student records begin¥information technology accommodation research: creating a doorway foruniversal access¥internet voting study¥knowledge management over timevarying geospatial datasets¥nsfcnpq collaborative researchñissues in the development of spatialspreadsheets and browsers¥planning grant for research into the use of internetbased intelligent systemsfor shaping and enhancing citizen participation and service delivery¥regulatory compliance reporting at epa: moving to digital information acquisition, exchange, and dissemination¥citizen agendasetting in the regulatory process: electronic collection andsynthesis of public commentary¥evaluating information integration architectures for a national statistical datainfrastructure¥exploratory research for correlating and datamining flight data from ntsbaccident investigations¥social processes and content in intelink online chat data¥testbed for highspeed òendtoendó communications in support of comprehensive emergency management¥workshop on an urban research agenda¥workshop on biodiversity informaticssource: national science foundation award abstract database, october 2001. availableonline at <https://www.fastlane.nsf.gov/a6/a6start.htm>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68it research, innovation, and egovernmentways of entering queries and searching in multiple languages, includingcrosslingual searches; and¥representing and managing approximation, uncertainty, and inconsistency.a second class of problems is that of metadata and interoperabilityamong data sets and information systems. without agreement on theformat and meaning of data (or a means of reconciling different formatsor semantics), it is not possible to transfer information from one system toanother or combine information from multiple systems. one set of issuesconcerns information about the data or metadata. for example, metadataabout a raw number provides informationñsuch as its scale, accuracy, orunitñthat permits it to be interpreted. interoperation is easier when system designers reach consensus about the metadata. this is primarily asocial process, but it involves the technical dimensions of representationand semantics as well.representation issues include the syntactic/lexical representation ofeach individual data item (e.g., a date or name), the record structure foraggregates of multiple data items (e.g., a set that includes a name, socialsecurity number, date of birth, and employment start date), and the linearbytestream representation of that data for transmission over networksand storage on secondary media. semantic issues include reliability,source, and other attributes related to the quality of the information; theinterpretation of the information; and the consistency relationships ofthat information with other data.the xml òmeta standardó for metadata has been widely embracedbecause it provides an effective approach to achieving commonalities withrespect to the three representation issues just noted. xml itself only provides a language for describing data and relies, therefore, on the successof social processes to obtain consensus on representation within specificdomains of common interest. with respect to semantic issues, there is lessprogress, though the xml standard at least enables communities toòspeakó a standardized language in addressing semantic issues. standardization of the metadata describing the format of databases can beachieved through agreement on xml dtds (document type definitions,which are formal descriptions of what can appear in a document and howdocuments are structured), and while not research per se, this is an areadeserving continued work. a variety of government and industry bodiesare working to develop standards for various application areas.33see <http://www.xml.gov/scripts/efforts.cfm>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers69research on semantic issues is taking place in the areas of knowledgerepresentation and agentoriented computing. while various approacheshave been advanced, including mediators and wrappers that act as translators between the format and syntax of one system and another, semantic interoperability is generally viewed as an unsolved problemñor rather,one that can be solved only in increments. the social process of agreeingon metadata that describe the content or the important topics covered byinformation objects and databases is difficult to standardize but is onecrucial element for integrating information resources. this type ofmetadata is often expressed using a predefined vocabulary, representedas a list of categories or more structured forms such as taxonomies andontologies. common ontologies facilitate semantically meaningful integration of data from diverse information sources.efforts to agree on standard data descriptions, which are more a matter of implementation than of research, should not be confused with workaimed at developing and merging ontologies for describing content, aswell as at tools for ontology building and sharing. many taxonomies already exist in government agencies, and many others are being createdñfor example, in the sectors of human resource, finance, and health care.developing technology to support the development and merging of taxonomies, as well as the application of these taxonomies to informationobjects, is an important research challenge. as part of these efforts, waysmust be found of coping with the evolution of metadata. another challenge is to find ways to address heterogeneous metadata standards, muchas systems must support multiple image or document format standards.a number of other research issues come up in the area of integrating/fusing information from diverse sources. for example, improved techniques for combining results from different systems (e.g., multipletextsearch engines, database systems, geographic information systems) andtechniques for presenting those results would all be of value in a government setting.the design of information systems themselves is an area of ongoingexploration. one recent trend has been the development of centralizeddata warehouses, which contain data extracted from operational transaction systems, to facilitate retrieval or analysis. such warehouses couldprovide shortterm benefits, such as improved understanding of the costof programs and how agencies use resources, and longterm benefits,such as better understanding of the impact of programs and support forenhanced planning of new programs. frequently, information is stored inmultiple systems, which necessitates special techniques for locating andretrieving it. this entails developing improved algorithms for findinginformation resources, selecting the appropriate sources for a given query,representing their content, and merging the results.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70it research, innovation, and egovernmentdatamining techniques offer capabilities for discovering importantbut nonobvious patterns and relationships among and between a widevariety of data types. these include improved algorithms for data miningof conventional structured databases (including data warehouses) as wellas techniques for the data mining of lessstructured text data and morecomplex multimedia data sources.4 the wealth of data in governmentinformation systems presents an attractive opportunity for developingnew datamining techniques, though it will be important to differentiateamong user groups. statisticians or social scientists seeking to explorepatterns in demographic data will have a different set of needs from thoseof nonexperts. interesting questions include how nonexperts might usedatamining capabilities and how one could make these techniques available to them in a usable form.humancomputer interfacecstbõs 1997 project examining everycitizen interfaces to the nationõsinformation infrastructure underscored the opportunity and challenge ofdeveloping technology that could be used easily and effectively by all.5many egovernment systems must provide information and services to arange of users: experts within the government, experts outside government, and the general public. even when the user population is segmented by capability and interest, success in delivering services dependson the development of appropriate humancomputer interfaces (hcis).hci issues are especially important because there is no mooreõs law onhuman perceptual, attentional, or cognitive/problem solving capabilitiesñin other words, peopleõs abilities do not scale up at the same rapidrate that basic computing capabilities do (or, for that matter, the rate atwhich the total volume of information resources is growing). thus, asherbert simon has observed, the scarce resource in humancomputer interfaces is and will remain human attention. this is especially true innonroutine applications such as crisis management.hci is an inherently multidisciplinary research area, drawing on ideasfrom psychology as well as computer science (and related areas such as4for example, in its statistics workshop, the committee hosted a discussion of datamining opportunities using data from the national health and nutrition examination survey, which collects clinical information in text form as well as in xray images.5cstb, nrc. 1997. more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nationõsinformation infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers71information management). a hallmark of the field is the use of iterativeusercentered design (ucd) methods to develop usefulñand especiallyusableñsystems. current ucd methods include early focus on users andtheir tasks, ongoing empirical measurement and evaluation of the system,iterative design and testing, and integrated focus on the endtoend systems that considers the larger social context in which they are deployed.hci professionals are involved early in the design of systems and participate throughout the later stages of system development. existing ucdmethods have been found to work well when there is a limited range ofusers and tasks, which means that accommodating the greater diversityof individuals and applications in government will likely require extension or refinement of the approach.government systems need to be usable by a wide range of individuals and organizations with heterogeneous needs, cognitive abilities, andhardware and software. how can we create systems that allow users,whether they be students, journalists, local community groups, government workers, or policy makers, to access the wealth of government information in a way that is useful to each of them? providing òuniversalaccessó means building systems to work well with a diverse user population and making appropriate facilities available for populations with special requirementsñsuch as disabled citizens, speakers of languages otherthan english, and those located at remote sites. analysis of individualdifferences, and requirements and methods for accommodating them,will play a role. where some users have low skills and/or little experience, for example, systems that have a high tolerance for human error arelikely to be especially valuable.one particular hci problem is that of finding, understanding, using,and integrating information of the diverse types found in the multitudeof government information sources. formulating good queries is difficult, and tools that support this process could be improved. developingadvanced systems requires a better understanding of user requirements,informationpresentation techniques, informationaccess strategies, andthe development of flexible and modular architectures. a challenge thatoften comes up in government for supporting decision making, and ingovernmentõs communications to the public, is how to represent the uncertainty associated with many sorts of data. because uncertainty reflectssampling and systematic errors (such as results from a statistical survey),known limitations in the model being used (such as a model of earthquake damage), and other extenuating circumstances, it often plays animportant role in correctly interpreting and acting on a piece of information.computer systems, including those for information summarizationand presentation techniques, should exploit knowledge of basic humaninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72it research, innovation, and egovernmentperceptual and cognitive skills. because todayõs interfaces rely on a limited set of input and output capabilities, researchers should continue topush the hardware and software envelopes to support new interactionstyles (e.g., richer visualization, perceptual user interfaces, multimodalinput, and support for a range of motor and language capabilities). onepromising approach for environments in which users interact extensivelywith data is to provide tight coupling of user actions to displayed resultsand easily reversible actions. tight coupling implies low latency, whichmeans that careful attention must be paid to how data transfer and processing are divided between the server and the client. advances are required at the cognitive level as well, where peopleõs rich but falliblememories and vast amounts of general and domainspecific knowledgeoften do not match well with the information required by computer systems. a richer range of interaction styles is also important to match theuserõs environment. at the forefront of all design improvements shouldbe the goal of better leveraging and augmenting natural human capabilities. one example is mixedinitiative systems that support both userinitiated (direct manipulation) and agent styles of interaction.while there are many hci challenges related to interactions betweena single user and an information system, many of todayõs systems involvemore than one user interacting with local data and applications. manydifferent communication scenarios of interest exist, including onetoone(such as when a citizen and a government worker interact), onetomany(such as when a population at risk in a crisis is being alerted), and manytomany (such as when a community explores a policy issue). progress oneach of these fronts will require new theories, computing architectures,and design methods to support collaboration, as well as better understanding of the group and organizational contexts of information use. avariety of techniques, such as collaborative filtering, could play an important role.particular government applications will pose their own specific hcichallenges. for example, in crisis management, it is especially importantthat systems be able to support users in carrying out nonroutine tasksand facilitate working in unplanned, ad hoc situations. in the case ofstatistical data, variability in the publicõs statistical literacy poses a particular challenge to effective presentation of federal statistical data. whilean expert is equipped to locate the information necessary for understanding the limitations associated with a given piece of data (such assampling error or the implications of particular definitions used in deriving the data), a lay user may not be so equipped; he or she will benefitfrom hci approaches that make these factors as intuitively understandable as possible.support for decision makers, including systems that help to frame,information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers73interrogate, and anticipate the world in such a way as to effectively assistin the decisionmaking process, is another area for continued hci work.a usercentric view, for example, allows a decision maker to individuallyestablish the context, pose the questions, control the content, and moldthe style of presentation. related applications include interactive teamdecision environments, systems that capture and represent domain expertise, and systems that permit intelligent realtime control.network infrastructurea variety of infrastructure components provide an important foundation for egovernment, starting with basic networkcommunications capabilities. internet technologies are in widespread use, and both government and the private sector continue to press the internet industry toprovide yet moreñgreater capacity, for example, and improved securityand reliability. these demands continue to stimulate research and development, which has already resulted in dramatic increases in networkbandwidths. but because the r&d challenges are largely common to boththe private and public sectors, they are not explored in depth here exceptto note that in government, as elsewhere, the attributes of privacy,scalability, reliability, and accountability, among others, are highly valued.if the communications infrastructure is to be available widely, especially for use in interacting with individual citizens, then lowcost, ubiquitous accessñenabled in part by continued innovationñwill be required.a range of new capabilities might be enabled through the use of theinternet, particularly highcapacity, alwaysconnected broadband access(as opposed to the more typical lowspeed, dialup connections, whichincur a delay each time an internet connection is established). in the shortterm, deployment will proceed using existing technologies with incremental developments to them. looking to the longer term, further research on wireless technologies offers the potential for improved performance; and in the area of fiber optics, research could provide designs andarchitectures with lower deployment costs. the complex economic,implementation, and public policy issues associated with provision ofbroadband internet access to residences have constrained deploymentmore than the state of the technology has.6in contrast to the more routine government functions, domains such6see cstb, nrc. 2002. broadband: bringing home the bits. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74it research, innovation, and egovernmentas crisis management obviously change the normal demands for communications. meeting the information requirements of a crisis depends onan infrastructure that can handle abovenormal loads at just the timewhen large portions of it may have suffered physical damage. whereasfor some applications infrastructure can be brought in from outside adisaster area, crisis response would often benefit from having a moresurvivable infrastructure in situ, and with sufficient headroom for reliable and survivable crisis response.crises require the communications infrastructure to adapt to changing demands by managing unusual trafficcongestion patterns, for example, and permitting priority overrides for emergency usage. such scaling and robustness questions arise in a number of large networks that arekey to public safety, such as airtraffic control; police, fire, and safetycommunications networks; and 911 and other emergency dispatch systems. priorityaccess capabilities are already a feature of the wirelinepublic telephone network. but with increasing use of alternatives to thepublic telephone network comes increased interest in providing priority,scaling, and robustness capabilities in public wireless networks, the public internet, and private networks based on internet technologies.several networkingresearch questions arise from these requirements.networks that are selfadaptive are, for example, able to rapidlyreconfigure themselvesñsay, as wireless infrastructure elementsñin response to a crisis. in particular, networks that could reconfigure themselves quickly under conditions of damage and changes in demand wouldbe of great utility. even in the absence of extensive selfadaptation, it isbetter to have an infrastructure that is able to degrade gracefully as itscomponents are affected by a crisis than a system that completely fails.a research question that addresses the need to prioritize traffic is howto build networks that allow applications to interact with the infrastructure so as to allow the incorporation of capabilities such as priority override features or the recognition and management of information surgesduring a crisis. also, it would be useful to develop interfaces that allowthe combined deployment of private and public infrastructure, therebypermitting crisis responders to exploit whatever infrastructure elementsare available. in any case, efforts should not be confined solely to improving the infrastructure. modifying the applications themselves can permitthem to cope gracefully with lessthanoptimal network performance.designers of applications intended for use in crisis situations cannot assume that there will be large amounts of bandwidth or that connectivitywill be available on a consistent basis. strategies for coping would includeadapting the frequency of updates to the available bandwidth or fallingback to activities that consume less bandwidth (e.g., transmitting textinstead of multimedia data).information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers75finally, there are opportunities to leverage òpushó technologies inemergencies. providing uptodate information to large segments of thepublic is important because it permits people to take appropriate actions,helps prevent panic, speeds remediation efforts, and can prevent followon crises. but widespread broadcasts (whether by television, radio, or theinternet) are not necessarily the best approachñthey provide only limited, situationspecific information and cannot supply details tailored tothe needs of individuals, such as what evacuation route to use. by contrast, push technologies could deliver more focused (and presumablymore accurate) warnings and more detailed advice on what actions totake and could decrease the frequency with which people receive falsealarms (warnings that do not apply to them).one approach identified as worthy of further investigation involvesòreverse 911ó systems, whereby the usual direction of interaction betweencitizens and emergency managers is reversed. òcall by locationó can automatically contact all households and businesses that might be affectedby a fire or flash flood, warn them of the impending danger, and instructthem on what evasive action to take. telephonebased reverse911 systems are already being used in a number of areas. increasingly widespread deployment, as well as the use of alwayson broadband internet,wireless data, and similar new communications technologies, present additional opportunities for providing this kind of service.information systems securitygovernment applications of it often center on the management ofrecords about individuals and businesses. significant savings can be obtained by removing intermediaries and allowing direct access to theserecordsñby the properly identified parties authorized to view them. similarly, the accessed records are subject to change only by those authorizedto make changes. to ensure the security of such systems and promotetrust in them by citizens, several services need to be applied: confidentiality, integrity, authentication, authorization, and audit.confidentialityconfidentiality services prevent the unauthorized disclosure of datawhile the data transit a network or communication link, or while theyreside on disk. these services are intended to prevent an attacker, or anyother unauthorized individual, from bypassing dataauthorization functions. confidentiality of data is usually provided by the use of encryptionñthat is, the scrambling of data so that they can only be unscrambledwith the use of the correct secret information, called an encryption key.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76it research, innovation, and egovernmentsecure sockets layer (ssl) is one widely deployed confidentiality mechanism. it is integrated with web browsers and encrypts data exchangedbetween the user and sslprotected web sites.integrityintegrity services protect data from unauthorized modification. likeconfidentiality services, they often depend on encryption algorithms, augmented by calculation of checksums in order to detect changes. a digitalsignature is a form of integrity protection, as its validation shows that thedata to which the signature was applied have not been inappropriatelychanged. ssl also provides data integrity for the messages sent between aweb browser and a server, preventing an attacker on the network frommodifying the messages, and thus the data contained in them, withoutsuch changes being detected.authenticationseveral ways exist for validating a userõs identity. the simplest is forthe server to keep a list of passwords and require that the user enter his orher password. this approach is not particularly strong, and it is difficultto manage, as the user would have to register in advance with each individual system with which he or she might eventually communicate.authentication can also be accomplished through the use of an authentication protocolñsometimes based on the use of a private encryption key, known only to the named individual, together with a certificateissued by a trusted third party that associates the encryption key with theuserõs identity (digital signatures are one example of this form of authentication). in other cases, authentication is based on other forms of encryption with keys that are also distributed by a trusted third party (kerberosauthentication is an example).the use of third parties for authentication, whether these are certificate authorities in the publickey infrastructure or authentication serversin kerberos, requires that these services be trusted, both by the government systems accepting authentication and by the users whose identitiesare being authenticated. this is where many of the problems associatedwith the establishment of publickey infrastructure have been experienced. there is no single authority trusted by everyone, and as a result,many organizations (for example, banks) require separate registration byusers so that only the bankõs own servers are relied upon.the establishment of a single government authority to authenticateusers presents privacy issues, because this authenticated identity becomesa unique identifier. letting the government rely on authentication auinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers77thorities in the private sector also presents possible security problems,however, as a user might obtain a certificate fraudulently (this is not tosay that users could not do so with a government certificate authority).ultimately, it will likely be the case that multiple authorities are supported and that authorization policies will dictate which ones must beused in particular contexts. when signing up for a service, the user wouldspecify or accept the default for which authorities may be relied upon forsubsequent authentication. this leaves unanswered the problem of howthe user would authenticate his or her first contact with a particularagency.authorizationthe end point of security services is authorization: controlling accessto only those entitled. other security services play supporting roles, either in helping to make the authorization decision (as is the case withauthentication) or in preventing individuals from bypassing the authorization mechanisms to access or modify data through other means (prevented by confidentiality and integrity services). even audit, describedbelow, relates to authorization, as the goals of the audit mechanism are toassure in retrospect that appropriate policies were enforced by the authorization mechanisms and to find weaknesses.while the basic technologies are reasonably well understood, theirdeployment and operation at large scale are not. one example of the sortof poorly understood issue that arises at large scale is policy management, which is one of the hardest aspects of creating secure systems. infact, many security breaches result from either the misapplication of security policies, or the use of security policies that are not appropriate inparticular contexts. writing correct policy requires a thorough understanding of how a system is to be used and how it is not supposed to beused. while creating consistent policies in a single system is hard enough,creating them in government systems is likely to be even harderñespecially when the policies are concerned with the exchange of informationbetween agencies. this is the case because there are likely to be numerouslegislated policies and procedures specifically associated with eachagency, many of which might not be consistent with one another.the whole issue of exception access is another aspect of security policythat must be considered. for example, one might want to create policiesthat allow access to data in certain crisis situations, such as a building fireor medical emergency, that is otherwise not allowed. if the data are storedin a computer system, then these exception policies must be part of thepolicy base enforced by the system, further complicating the problem ofinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78it research, innovation, and egovernmentpolicy management. such policies must allow exception access, but in alimited way, so that the security of the entire system is not compromised.one of the most effective ways to defeat security is the practice ofòsocial engineering.ó for example, a perpetrator calls and explains thatthere is a truly unique emergency, requiring urgent access to the records.this is how many hackers, spies, and thieves gain unauthorized access.so if a system is constructed to simply weaken access policies in an emergency, then as a consequence it can also become easier to intrude throughsocial engineeringñthere is a tradeoff between efficiency of operationand efficacy in crisis situations and security and safeguards. improveone, and the other gets worse. in the end, the weak link is always thehuman elementñnot because humans are faulty, but rather because theprocedures put in place as safeguards often end up thwarting those whomust use them on a continual basis.to date, most support for policy management is done on a custombasis for each application, creating stovepipe security systems that areinflexible, difficult to understand, and present many weak links for anattacker to exploit. work is underway, for example, on the generic security services application programming interface, to create common interfaces for authorization, but the results of such efforts will not be usefuluntil one starts to see integration of these interfaces with a wide range ofcommercial systems.auditaudit mechanisms are important for improving the publicõs confidence in security systems because these mechanisms provide a way torecord the kinds of access that were granted; they allow administrators totake action after the fact when access rights have been abused, and therebyto correct the problem. audit mechanisms will be of particular importance for any exception policies that are used by emergency workers or byothers with authority to override normal access protections. for someonewith exception access, knowledge that his or her use could be scrutinizedhelps deter abuse of such access. to be most effective, the audit mechanism for exception access should generate reports that are submitted tothe person whose data were accessed.audit also applies to the configuration management of systems, whichis the effective monitoring of the integrity of software components, hardware devices, and supporting configuration data. some viruses andworms, for example, exploit vulnerabilities that were created by previousinfections of other viruses and worms. in addition, configuration management can detect failures in upgrading in response to security updates.indeed, many users and systems administrators lack the tools to detectinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers79whether systems software has been compromised or even whether new(and unwanted) software applications have been installed on agency orcorporate systems.ecommerce and related infrastructure servicesebusiness depends heavily on a number of services that run on topof the basic communications fabric discussed above, including these:¥information dissemination services, such as web servers and pushtechnology;¥communication services, such as email and instant messaging;¥directory services, which provide for referencing and retrieval ofcollections of personal information (e.g., name, organizational affiliation,and email address or mailing address) as well as information such aswho is authorized to perform which functions in an information system;and¥security and identification services, which permit information systems to be secured, users of those systems to be authenticated, and accessto be authorized.some of these services, such as web servers, email, and basic directories, are all relatively mature technologies; the government is likely to beable to leverage commercialsector developments in them. one relatedarea in which government generally needs to pay more attention to research, however, is that of how to build a verylargescale authenticationinfrastructure (e.g., a publickey infrastructure that supports all citizens).another is backend informationmanagement challenges related to tyingtogether multiple systems feeding a web site (such as building ontologiesto bridge the stovepipes in different agencies). specific research issueswith respect to these areas are addressed in other sections of this chapter.in addition to enhancing its own transactionsupport capabilities, thegovernment has an opportunity to promote the development and use ofcommon transaction mechanisms to widen access to governmentsupported services. citizens would then be able to select a thirdparty intermediary acting on their behalf to aggregate information from differentgovernment services or to run software on their local computers for directaccess. such thirdpartyprovided portals would be similar to some of theweb services that have become available recently for aggregating accessto multiple email accounts, online banking, brokerages, and other passwordprotected web sites, but without persistent storage of usersõ credentials on the portals. the local application access example is similar toapplications like quicken or money, which pull data from multiple finaninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80it research, innovation, and egovernmentcial repositories and aggregate the data in local reports. governmentrunweb portals could be provided in addition to the base transaction mechanism, but such portals would also access the government service throughthe transaction mechanism.the transaction mechanism would be accompanied by interfaces andmechanisms for communicating with the government portal, collectingthe information, and providing it to the application or thirdparty information portal. the data sent or retrieved through this transaction mechanism would be described by common ontologies and data definitions(e.g., based on xml) to allow this interface to be integrated with higherlevel applications. when access to government services is providedthrough a third party (or even through a common governmentprovidedportal), security may be provided using proxy or delegate credentials.these confer to an intermediary the authority to retrieve data or enter atransaction on behalf of a citizen, but only for specific purposes and for ashort period of time.government has historically provided data in electronic form, butoften in formats that make it infeasible for all but a few specialized contractors to readily exploit the data. applicationprogramming interfaces(apis) would also enable citizens and businesses to overcome this problem by using software that directly connects their own applications running on personal computers with government services. a number of technical issues are related to achieving this òlightweightó capability,however. these include protocol design, information representation andmetadata, security and authentication, and digital libraries.crisis management and similar applications present some novel requirements with respect to ecommerce, including these:¥data escrow services. development of technologies and standardswould enable escrow sites to be established where citizens could storeimportant information that they might need to access in a crisis, as suchinformation might otherwise be rendered inaccessible in their home machines. these escrow sites would, in some sense, be a personal analog ofthe disasterrecovery services already provided by commercial servicesfor businesses, government, and organizations. escrowed data could include medical records, financial data, family contacts, and other essentialrecords. a principal challenge is that the escrow technology must protectthe userõs privacy while improving the survivability and accessibility ofhis or her personal information.¥circumventing normal controls on use of data that might have been collected for other purposes. the serious nature of a crisis may override thenormal desire and practice of not sharing the data. for example, taxrecords might be used to help identify individuals who were working atinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers81companies affected by a disaster. information such as names and homeaddresses would be candidates for release under extraordinary circumstances, while other information, such as income, should not be released.ecommerce systems would need technology extensions that permit controlled release under exceptional circumstances and a means to discernwhen an òexception stateó exists. also, privacy policies and governmentregulations would need to provide a means both for allowing and limiting the extent of such emergency sharing, and for recovery of the data(i.e., forcing its removal) from its temporary uses after the crisis is over.as described above, social engineering is a significant risk that calls for asystematic automating of the emergency access rules. if such rules areimplemented properly, the declaration of an emergency or a particularthreat condition becomes an official action determined under a fixed setof rules, rather than something amenable to convincing some operatorthat such a situation exists. blanket bypass of security measures shouldalso be avoided in favor of a system that switches to enforcing an alternative set of security measures that are defined in advance. modeling toolscan help administrators understand the longlasting consequences (forexample, to privacy) of potential crisismotivated decisions to change security policies.¥enhanced pointofcontact services. the issue here is how one canextend directory servicesñin combination with the push technologiesdiscussed aboveñto provide facilities for locating particular capabilitiesor individuals on an urgent basis.the committee notes, as others have, that the government can play aleading role in promoting certain aspects of ecommerce and ebusiness,especially where the government is in a unique position to support thedeployment of certain technologies, or where specific government services may be leveraged to improve the effectiveness of these technologies.such opportunities include the following:¥government as a certification authority or licensor of such authorities;¥government as a leading player in deployment of other securitytechnologies, such as smart cards; and¥government as a standards adopter.models and simulation for decision makingtechnological advances have made enormous amounts of computerprocessing power available to government agencies. in particular, modeling and simulation technologies being developed today can be used toinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82it research, innovation, and egovernmentapproximate extremely large and complex systems, frequently with hundreds of millions of interacting components. as representations of thereal world, these models are unique in their ability to illuminate the systemsõ inner workings and predict the consequences of particular actions.such models are relatively new additions to our arsenal of methods forunderstanding and anticipating how the world works. making use ofthem for decision making imposes substantive burden of proof upon thedevelopers and requires a confidence level on the part of the users. modelingresearch areas relevant to government applications include these:¥underlying mathematical theory, including mathematical systemtheory, sequential dynamical systems, combinatorial and dynamicalgraph theory, and algorithm theory;¥statistical theory and methods in areas such as statistical analysisof computerbasedsimulation experimentation and modeling, statisticalanalysis of dynamical systems, and integration of statistical decisiontheory with cognitive action analyses;¥computational methods, including optimal representations forhighperformance coupled system architectures and learning and adaptive systems methods; and¥because sensor data provide critical input to models and simulations, techniques for fusion of sensor data and model output,reconfigurable sensor architectures, and adaptive online data acquisition.software technologiesnearly all major information technology systems in government areòsoftwareintensiveó in the sense that the principal design risks relate tothe capability to produce effective and reliable software. software is theprincipal building material for information systems. it is difficult to design, develop, measure, analyze, evolve, and adapt. it is fragile and undependable. the reality is that software engineering remains a largely unsystematic craft, especially for largescale custom systems. fewgovernment softwareengineering projects are completed on time andwithin their initially allocated budget.77these issues are discussed in cstb, nrc, 2000, making it better, national academypress, washington, d.c. this point was underscored by the presidentõs information technology advisory committee in its 1999 report, which, in addition to noting the potential ofinformation technology to transform government, highlighted software as the highest priority for research attention. see presidentõs information technology advisory committee(pitac). 1999. information technology research: investing in our future. pitac report to thepresident. february 24. available online at <http://www.itrd.gov/ac/report/>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers83software research includes not only development of softwareengineering capability and the considerable range of associated activities, butalso the design of systemsdependable software components (such as operating system kernels) and the development of architectural frameworksto support the largescale interconnection and interoperation of components (see òmiddleware,ó below).the culture of the commercial software component marketplace, asevident from typical enduser license agreements, is that the maker of asoftware system or component offers no warranty concerning softwarefunction or quality. the persistent technical challenge of measuring quality promotes continuation of this caveat emptor situation. that is, even aconsiderable improvement in the technology of delivering and assuringhigher levels of quality would not likely be adopted in mainstream software developments until the value of adoption could be measured andquantified. this applies also to largescale custom engineering, in whichchallenges expand to include validation (conformance with actual organizational need) as well as verification (compliance with stated requirements, which may or may not be consistent with actual need).except for highly precedented systems, softwareengineering processes in commercial industry tend to be iterative. major vendors releaseperiodic upgrades to components and systems, often several times peryear. the vendors are thus able to respond to market demand. largescale government customdevelopment efforts often start with a òrequirements elicitationó process, and the validity of the results of that processmay not be understood until well into developmentñoften, years later.for this reason, there has been considerable activity in the acquisition andregulatory community to support iterative models of development, inwhich successive prototypes are deployed in order to allow early feedback on particular facets of concern (òrisk issuesó) relating to requirements, design, or underlying infrastructure. (more discussion on thissubject is presented in the section òdimensions of riskó in chapter 4.)a principal concern in the development of government it systems isthe embedding of commercial offtheshelf (cots) components. this includes adoption of commercial components such as mainstream commercial operating systems and office òproductivityó tools, as well as of opensource components such as the linux operating system, the apache webserver (which is the dominant server in use today), and the mozilla webbrowser. many cots components can be opaque and difficult to analyze, thus thwarting acceptance tests related to reliability and security.they can also be subject to rapid evolutionñthat is, from the standpointof the integration effort, they are on fundamentally uncontrollable trajectories. on the other hand, failure to adopt commercial components maynot only raise development costs and risks unacceptably but can alsoinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84it research, innovation, and egovernmentincur increased training costs (necessitated by unfamiliar and systemspecific human interfaces).with respect to the new generation of egovernment systems, a significant challenge is in the rapid prototyping of new capability so thatfunctionalities and associated engineering issuesñsuch as security,interoperation, and performanceñmay be explored. major new softwarelibraries, both from vendors and opensource communities, are enablingthis kind of capability.largescale systemsa multitude of problemsñincluding delays, unexpected failures, andinflexibility in coping with changing needsñare associated with largescale systems, and government offers notable examples of such systemsand their problems. such problems have occurred, for instance, at theinternal revenue service and the federal aviation administration and innumerous systems at the state and local levels. this situation reflects notonly the size and complexity of some of those systems but the chronicshortages of it expertise in government. the problem is growing withexpanded use of the internet, which has fostered proliferating interconnected systems. more robust systems would also help reduce the costs ofit staffs currently needed to support it systems. and the importance ofthe problem is growing as people come to depend more on such systems.research should address deep interactions among system components and intersystem dependencies, unintended and unanticipated consequences of system alteration, emergent behaviors in systems with largenumbers of components and users, unstable behaviors, properties of federated systems, and other phenomena. in addition to these systemsengineering issues, research must address operational engineering issuessuch as how errors are corrected, how security breaches are detected andremedied, and how backups or other robustness measures are executed.a research program including case studies of particular systems andmethodology research on architecture, techniques, and tools could helpaddress the difficult technical (and nontechnical) challenges posed in realizing these systems.88the case for researchers working on problems of large scale was made earlier in cstb,nrc, 2000, making it better: expanding information technology research to meet societyõsneeds, national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers85middlewareòmiddlewareó is software that provides common services and capabilities that òglue togetheró software components into larger systems.examples of middleware include authentication, journaling, auditing,databasemodeling services, ontological services, indexing, visualization,translation, search and discovery, access control, and electronic commerceservices.9 in effect, middleware is software that reduces enterprise application development time. compared to infrastructure elements such asbasic networking or relational database capabilities, which are more mature, middleware has continued to evolve at a rapid pace. its importancenotwithstanding, middleware has, historically, not been an area wherecomputer science research has focused much attention. how can theresearch community contribute in this areañespecially given that manyof the tough issues are ones of scale, heterogeneity, and integration thatare difficult to address in a laboratory setting?one role is through research that examines the properties of commercial middleware. middleware often comes in the form of uniform òframeworks,ó which embody principles for component interaction. these principles are intended to have useful scaling properties with respect tonumbers of components, distribution over networks, robustness, kinds ofcapability that can be supported, and so on. frameworks in widespreaduse include the common object model family (com, developed bymicrosoft) and enterprise java beans (ejb, developed by sun and ibm).designs for framework systems (such as those just cited) can be analyzedby researchers from a theoretical standpoint. analyses have revealedsubtle flaws and design issues in each of the frameworks mentionedabove, providing useful information to program managers and systemdevelopers seeking to make choices among frameworks.109herbert schorr and salvatore j. stolfo. 1997. towards the digital government of the 21stcentury (a report from the workshop on research and development opportunities in federal information services), june 24. available online at <http://www.isi.edu/nsf/prop.html>.10see, for example, kevin j. sullivan, 1997, òcompositionality problems in microsoftcom,ó available online at <http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~sullivan/standards.html>; robert j. allen, david garlan, and james ivers, 1998, òformal modeling and analysis of thehla component integration standardó [abstract], proceedings of the sixth international symposium on the foundations of software engineering, november, available online at <http://www2.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/able/www/paperabstracts/hlafse98.html>;and j. sousa and d. garlan, 1999, òformal modeling of the enterprise javabeans component integration framework,ó proceedings fmõ99, pp. 12811300, available online at <http://link.springer.de/link/service/series/0558/papers/1709/17091281.pdf>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86it research, innovation, and egovernmentanother role for researchers is in contributing to the development ofmiddleware aimed at specific government niche applications. the department of defenseõs high level architecture and common operatingenvironment are examples of efforts to meet perceived specialized government needs. authentication servicesñboth internally and for interactions with citizensñare another area where government leads in demandand has a role to play in middleware development.middleware is also significant for egovernment research because itcan provide an effective platform for rapid iteration in developing newsystem concepts, both functional and architectural. the library capabilities available, for example, in sunõs java development kit or in microsoftõs.net or in the tools available with most major relational database systems(to cite just three examples) permit skilled developers more quickly toachieve a level of functionality that allows new ideas to be tried out.organizational and social issuesas a complement to research aimed at new technologies, research onthe relationship between organizational behavior and it can also play animportant role in realizing egovernment capabilities. the egovernmentvision outlined in chapter 1 aims to enhance rather than simply automategovernmentõs operations and its interactions with constituencies. indeed,success in implementing new practices often requires simultaneous evolution of organizations and their supporting systemsñit is not a matter ofsystems design alone. in addition, because numerous government activities bring together individuals to share information and collaborativelysolve problems, a better understanding of the social and organizationalaspects of it use is critical. that is, research needs to be done to understand in a precise way the interplay of system design decisions, changesto business practices, changes in the operating environment, characteristics of the user population, and organizational outcomes. these issuesbecome very significant when joint efforts are undertaken involving multiple organizations in order to deliver an aggregated service for a particular customer segment.such a broad perspective is in keeping with increasing appreciationof what cstbõs 2000 report making it better termed òsocial applications.óthat report observed that emerging demand for òmore and better use ofit in ways that affect [peopleõs] lives more intimately and directly thanthe early systems did in scientific and backoffice business applicationsópresents òissues with which the traditional it research community haslittle experience.ó successful work on the social applications of it willrequire new computer science and engineering as well as research that iscoupled more extensively and effectively to other perspectivesñperspecinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology levers87tives from other intellectual disciplines and from the people who use theend results, that is, the goods, services, and systems that are deployed.11the incorporation of a òsocial, economic, and workforceó component tothe nsfõs 1999 information technology research initiative similarly reflects this new emphasis. cstbõs 1997 report fostering research on theeconomic and social impacts of information technology12 explores the richresearch literature on social, organizational, and economic dimensions ofit use and highlights a number of important research areas.some specific organizational and socioeconomic research topics identified by this committee as having particular importance for egovernmentñresearch that naturally complements technology capability developmentñinclude the following:¥understanding the social and economic implications of egovernment.where and how is it applied in government? how can we assess theextent to which it enables improved and new government services, operations, and interactions with citizens? the goal of this research would beto understand general principles rather than to evaluate specific government agencies and operations.¥understanding how to use egovernment strategically as part of overallgovernment service delivery. research could help shed light on how specifictechnology capabilities relate to a broader strategy for how people interact with government.11cstb, nrc. 2000. making it better. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 201.12cstb, nrc. 1997. fostering research on the economic and social impacts of informationtechnology. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.884technology transition and programmanagement: bridging the gapbetween research and impactresearchers, subjectmatter experts, research program managers, andoperational line managers participating in the workshops convened bythe committee all pointed to the challenge of achieving actual impact onmission performance from research programs. even under ideal conditionsñwhen the research results are peerrecognized to be of high quality, when the user agency has a solid understanding of operational requirements, and when there is strong institutional incentive on both sidesto accomplish the transitionñsuccess in bridging the gap between thecreation of promising research results and the realization of effective impact may nonetheless be elusive. this chapter examines how systematicapproaches can help research managers and user organizations collaborate to bridge the gap between conception and use.the gapbridging metaphor should not be taken to imply that thepath from concept to product is linear or predictable. indeed, many majorit innovations have followed paths with duration, complexity, and diversity of players rarely foreseen by the original innovators. this phenomenon was well illustrated in the 1995 cstb report on the high performance computing and communications initiative,1 which offered a1computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 1995. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management89number of examples of wellestablished multibilliondollar it businessesemerging only after many years of research and development, with shifting roles of governmentsponsored research, industry research, and industry development. business areas considered in that report, nearly allof which continue to remain pivotal in the it economy, include graphicsand windows, redundant arrays of inexpensive disks (raid), verylargescale integrated circuit (vlsi) design, and reduced instruction set computing (risc) processors (for an updated display of the links betweenresearch and major it industries, see figure 4.1). in each case, there wassustained government research participation, including both formativeexploratory research and more focused attention to particular technicalchallenges. (of course, not all research has this sort of outcomeñsomesuccessful research has farreaching socioeconomic or mission impact butnonetheless does not lead to billiondollar industries furnishing productsor services.)from workshop discussions and other interactions of committeemembers with researchprogram managers, it is abundantly clear thatgovernment agencies that sponsor major it research programsñsuch asnsf, darpa and military service laboratories, nasa, doe, and thenational institutes of health (nih)ñhave all evolved diverse cultures ofprogrammanagement practice. programs are managed according to management models and practices that are embedded in organizational culture and that may be highly evolved. for example, the dod has a richstructure of technologytransition activities involving diverse contractorsthat enable it to hasten the maturing of critical defense technologies alongthe path from laboratory to operational deployment. this structure can beunderstood, for example, as a systematic addressing of the many riskissues (see the section òdimensions of risk,ó below) that arise along thispath. there are significant differences in management style and approachamong the various mission agencies and programs. (box 4.1 describestwo agency programs in more detail.)in traditional basic research programs, research teams often operateindependently of any particular end user. the nsfõs current digital government program, however, represents an important first step in havingresearchers collaborate directly with potential end users. this kind ofdirect engagement enables researchers to understand requirements better, validate concepts earlier, and accelerate transition into practice. it alsoenables potential users to anticipateñand influenceñemerging technologies. but regardless of whether an end user is present or not, transitionissues must be explicitly addressed, and obtaining an impact in practicerequires careful and flexible management by many parties. the teamingstructure of the nsf digital government program can accelerate this process, but it does not replace it. the right combination of careful manageinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90it research, innovation, and egovernmentlansinternetrings, hubnetethernet, datakit, autonetlans, switched ethernetgraphical user interfacesworkstationsgraphicssketchpad, utahgm/ibm, xerox, microsofte&s, sgi, ati, adobelisp machine, stanfordxerox altoxerox star, apollo, sunengelbart / rochesteralto, smalltalkstar, mac, microsofttimesharingctss, multics / bsdunixsds 940, 360/67, vmsarpanet, aloha, internetpupdecnet, tcp/iprisc processorsberkeley, stanfordibm 801sun, sgi, ibm, hpvlsi designmead/conway, mosisberkeley, caltechmany1965197019751980198519901995200019651970197519801985199019952000client/server computingberkeley, cmu, cernparc, dec, ibmnovell, emc, sun, oracleatari, nintendo, sgi, pixarspacewar (mit),trek (rochester)to world wide webentertainmentfigure 4.1examples of governmentsponsored it research and developmentin the creation of commercial products and industries. source: 2002 update bythe computer science and telecommunications board of a figure originally published in computer science and telecommunications board, national researchinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management91raid / disk serversrelational databasesberkeley, wisconsinibmoracle, ibm, sybaseberkeleystriping / datamesh, petalmany19651970197519801985199019952000world wide webalta vistanetscape, yahoo19651970197519801985199019952000speech recognitioncmu, sri, mitbell, ibm, dragondragon, ibm, l&hbroadband last milebellcoreamati, alcatel, broadcomstanford, uclaportable communicationparallel databasesibm, icltokyo, wisconsin, uclaicl, teradata, tandemparallel computingibm, intelilliac 4, cmu, caltech, hpccm5, teradata, cray t3ddata miningibm, arborwisconsin, stanfordiri, arbor, platocern, illinois (mosaic)berkeley, purdue (cdma)linkobit, hughesqualcommit research areas are ordered roughly according to when they became $1 billion industries.universityindustry researchproducts$1b marketfrom internetcouncil, 1995, evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure, national academy press,washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 4.1research cultures at darpa and nsfdefense advanced research projects agencyfor many years there has been tacit acceptance within the r&d community ofdarpaõs primary national role in certain it areas critical to dod in the long term.these include packetswitched networking, distributed computing, machine intelligence, softwarereliability technology, and computer security. in each of these areas,program managers crafted engagements linking diverse participants in the researchcommunity, industry, and dod according to principles that had been evolvedthrough practice over several decades. this national leadership role enabled dod tocommand the attention of the computer science research community, and indeedmany computer scientists in universities have come to describe their research inmilitary terms such as survivability, decision support, and situation awareness. sincethe early 1990s, the strategic environment has been changing rapidly, prompted bythe emergence of the private sector internet, increasingly widespread computersecurity challenges, greater military emphasis on asymmetric and coalition warfighting, broadening of the base of strong it research universities, and a shift in the locusof innovation for many information technologies. research and acquisition managers have attempted to adapt their strategies in response to these changes (with varying degrees of success).national science foundationat nsf, the principal criteria for research support are scientific quality and longterm socioeconomic impact. perhaps unique to nsf is the emphasis on development of scientific foundations and a long time horizon, though other agencies, suchas the dodõs office of naval research and the army research office, also accept along time horizon when they consider a potential mission impact. in recent years,nsf has increased its emphasis on broad socioeconomic impact yet further, coinciding with the acknowledgment in the policy and legislative community of the emerging pivotal role of information technology in the national infrastructure and in society broadly. this is also a reflection of the increased attention to measuring theeffectiveness of government programs. at the same time that it seeks to better identifythe socioeconomic impacts of the research it sponsors, nsf continues to recognizethat breakthroughs in òcuriositydrivenó basic research in fundamental areas canhave unexpected impacts in practice, and it maintains a broad portfolio of basicresearch in information technology subjects.ment and favorable and even fortuitous circumstances may be needed inthe operating environment of the recipient organization and in the markets for particular underlying technologies. complicating this, the timescales can be very longña decade or more in many casesñpossibly wellbeyond the life span of individual research projects.the nsfõs digital government program illustrates that there is a natuinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management93ral alliance between researchers and end users. both groups seek to identify new ways to address fundamental challenges in capability by stimulating new concepts and accelerating their definition and development.researchers gain access to challenging problems and a realworld contextin which to explore them. end users who participate in this process gaininsights into technology opportunities and thus are better able to influence their future and accelerate the introduction of new ideas into theirproduction systems. despite this alliance, however, the transition fromnew concepts and prototypes to production systems and market acceptance can be lengthy and difficult. below are examples of questions thatmight be raised by a potential technology adopter in considering a promising new information technology. these questions, which apply regardless of whether the technology has been developed within the government, at a university, or by a commercial contractor, illustrate how thechallenges of transition go beyond identifying functional requirementsand solving technical problems:¥can the technology be effectively integrated into existing operations and procedures? can it be packaged to interconnect with relatedsystems? does it comply with the interface standards that are adoptedwithin the organization or by the integrators responsible for other majorsystems used by the organization?¥will it be a costeffective way of meeting requirementsñin termsof both initial acquisition and total lifecycle costs?¥are there fundamental difficulties in adjusting the human interfaces in a conceptdemonstration system to conform better with organizational culture and practices?¥can the new technology scale up appropriately to expected andpotential operational levels? what are the dimensions of scaling, and howcan testing and evaluation be conducted to understand the limitations ofcapacity and performance of the concept?¥what reengineering is needed with respect to the prototype conceptdemonstration system? are certain capacity limits expediently òhardwiredó into the prototype, for example, in order to simplify implementation?¥what are the dimensions of dependability and robustness that mustbe considered in adopting the prototype system? will it respond appropriately, for example, to operator errors or misconfiguration?¥can the prototype system handle the full range of categories ofinputs, or does it handle only a representative set? are there hidden scaling challenges?¥has the prototype been designed to support possible trajectories ofevolution in the requirements it is addressing, in the systems environinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94it research, innovation, and egovernmentment in which it is situated, in the underlying technologies, and in theculture and mission of the organization in which it is used?¥who will be available to respond to questions and provide technical support when problems arise or when adaptation is needed? whatassurances can be provided to enable an organizational commitment tothis new technology?from the standpoint of the researchers exploring a new algorithm orsystems concept, these questions may appear to be significantly less interesting than the more fundamental issues related to overall feasibility ofthe technical approach. this amounts to a division of both expertise andresponsibility: researchers and their sponsors may focus their initial efforton the overall òconceptó or the new algorithmic (or other) idea. but partof the price of success is that once these core conceptual issues are addressed, a diversity of other kinds of expertise must be applied to addressadoptionrelated challenges such as those enumerated above.a successful transition process must address a wide range of concerns beyond the òmerelyó technicalñincluding economic and marketissues, intellectual property and nonappropriability, standards, the òtippingó of the market in favor of a particular product or standard, organizational issues, and engineering and usability issues. at the committeeõsworkshops, in the extensive discussions about the development, evaluation, and transition of new technologies to practice, participants particularly noted the risks and challenges of scaling and integrating new capabilities. but perhaps the most important lesson learned from thosediscussions is that transition cannot occur without broad knowledge ofthe technological and operational environments, including the extent towhich those environments are affected by changing market conditions,standards, and other external forces.strategies and models for program managementhow can researchers, research managers, acquisition managers, andusers develop successful strategies in this complex and changing environment? the sections below present an approach that is based on threeprincipal elements:1.consideration and analysis of past programs, including both positive and negative experiences;2.use of programmanagement models, which facilitate comparative consideration of alternative approaches; and3.identification of proven programmanagement strategies by whichinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management95management decisions can maximize the opportunity for impact withacceptable risk and time horizons.this chaper discusses two models2 in conventional use in programmanagement. also enumerated are several examples of strategies employed by program managers in implementing programs to achieve particular kinds of goals. (the emphasis here is on longterm programs seeking a focused impact; approaches to managing purely exploratoryprograms are not within the scope of this document.)models play an informal but essential role in developing and managing successful longterm research programs. little real data on researchprogram management exist, which means that managers generally planand decide largely on the basis of personal experience and organizationalculture. the models identified here are intended to organize and expressconcepts that are generally already present in the culture of programmanagement in various agencies and organizations. the following twomodels are widely used, often in a tacit way, by researchprogram managers in articulating, developing, and managing their programs.¥the supply chain, or technology food chain, is an identification ofstakeholdersñand the relationships between themñinvolved in transforming a new technical idea into operational reality (see box 4.2). because this model is useful in understanding the respective roles and interests of stakeholders in the process of developing and delivering capability,it can help guide a program manager in identifying potential partners inan innovation process.¥the dimensions of risk are categories of engineering or marketstrategy issues that a program manager must address as a new technology or concept moves through the supply chain from an initial innovative2generally speaking, a model is a conceptual structure used to understand and predictphenomena that may be difficult to observe and influence directly. models are abstract, inthe sense that they omit details in order to facilitate expression and understanding of aspects of the phenomenon. good models are expressive, in that they capture knowledge thatcannot easily be gained by experience except perhaps at great expense or danger or overlong periods of time. the validity of a model is the extent to which it has predictive powerin the domains for which it is designed. engineers, managers, and others may use a diversity of models in a design process in order to understand the various aspects of a problem,the design issues, and the potential consequences of particular design decisions. qualitativeand informal models, such as those summarized here, may be less predictive than a validated scientific model. the validation of these informal management models is necessarilyinformally based, and indeed all variables may not be identified. but for many disciplinesof endeavor, including researchprogram management, this is the best that can be achievedwith present levels of understanding.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 4.2the innovation pipelineit is well understood that innovation does not follow a neat, linear progressionfrom research laboratory to delivered product; rather, innovation involves complexflows of ideas and people among the various organizational participants. nonetheless, it is often useful to view it research, development, and application as constituting an innovation pipeline that includes the following:¥academic and industry researchers develop new concepts and technologies.¥exploratory efforts made in partially realistic settings by industry, academia,and government agencies codevelop concepts and technologies to identify promising new solutions that combine innovations in technology and business practices.¥vendors and tool suppliers develop software and hardware components andprovide them to system integrators or to the agencies directly.¥system integrators, vertical suppliers, and vendors respond to requests forproposals (rfps) and build (and sometimes operate) systems for government agencies.¥government agencies develop and modify programs, issue rfps for information systems, select vendors, procure it systems and services from them, and operateit systems.this is a normative model for incorporating new technologies and practices intogovernment systems and for improving services. as is discussed in this chapter, theinterests and incentives of the actors in this process are not in reality always wellaligned, which leads to a set of challenges for mission agencies and researchprogram managers.idea to deployment in systems. engineering issues include, for example,the scalability of a component or system, usability and adoption issues,and robustness of internal interfaces. market strategy issues include, forexample, whether to focus on adaptation of existing components to provide some new capability or to stimulate a new component market thatpackages the capability. the model for budget management used in thedod for research, development, test, and evaluation addresses the dimensions of risk explicitly by categorizing funds used for programs (e.g.,6.1, 6.2, 6.3a, and 6.5) according to the character of the risk being addressed.the following sections use these two models to elucidate a number ofprogrammanagement strategies and tactics.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management97leverage in the supply chain modelgovernment it systems are acquired in several different ways. if offtheshelf components (see box 4.3) such as operating systems, networkcomponents, and officeproductivity tools can be used, they are obtainedfrom it vendors. if custom engineering is necessary (to fill in where offtheshelf components are lacking), contracts are typically let with largecommercial systems integrators. integrators themselves often have incentives to incorporate offtheshelf components into systems, thereby limiting the extent of new engineering. larger mission agencies such as dod,doe, nasa, and nih do some of this custom work in their own, internalengineering organizations and affiliated laboratories. in some cases, thecustom engineering can be replaced by using vertically tailored productsfrom domain specialists (for example, geographic information systems).finally, in many government agencies, òseat managementó approachesare used in order to provide federal workers with a base level of common,largely offtheshelf services (desktop computer, office automation andother basic software, network connectivity, and support).3 these provideboth a core set of òproductivityó tools and a common platform for customand vertical applications.in any case, the collaboration to develop new agency systems involves more than the immediate integrators and suppliers, because theseorganizations themselves obtain components and technologies from external sources. each of the acquisition paths noted above involves a widerange of playersñincluding hardware and software component vendors,systems integrators, niche technology providers, verticalsolution developers, government researchprogram managers, government acquisitionprogram offices, acquisition regulators, standards organizations, andother nongovernment customersñthat have diverse capabilities and interests. most integrators maintain significant relationships with vendorsin order to assure a future supply of critical technology components thatcan address likely needs. a mission control system developed for nasaspace science, for example, may include offtheshelf commercial hardware in the form of workstations, servers, and network appliances, andcommercial software components such as operating systems, servers, database systems, file systems, graphical toolkits, thirdparty domainspecific (or òverticaló) tools, and networking components. an integrator willdevelop custom software components and òglue codeó to provide theaggregate functionality and enable a flexible integration of components.3see <http://www.gsa.gov/seatmanagement/>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 4.3offtheshelf componentsvery few systems now being developed are entirely custommade. as their dominance of the it arena diminished, federal agencies recognized that they could nolonger afford to have vendors design and build systems òfrom scratch.ó this led tothe notion of purchasing systems fabricated from commercial hardware and softwareñsocalled commercial offtheshelf (cots) technology. the goal with cotsis to employ standard, widely used hardware and software products wherever possible so as to decrease costs and increase the likelihood that systems will be interoperable with other systems. the cots strategy must grapple with a basic tension: evenas government seeks through cots to obtain a greater degree of flexibility that enables future vendor choice, vendors have an incentive to maximize the proprietarycontent of a system in order to increase the likelihood of future sales. agencies thusface the dual issue of selecting an appropriate framework/architecture and managingthe consequences of that commitment. in other words, once an organization hasmade decisions about overall system design, this constrains future decisions andlimits which software products and vendor product lines will be compatible.recent legislation and regulation have created strong incentives for acquisitionprogram managers to aggressively incorporate offtheshelf (ots) components as wellas to support iterative acquisition models, prototyping, product lines, and other processes. such incentives are appropriate in an environment of rapid technologicalchange, shifting requirements, uncertainties in the life cycle, and demanding interoperation requirements.use of ots technologies can improve affordability, reduce training requirements,improve dependability and interoperability, and enable the acquiring organizationto òride the curvesó of performance growth (e.g., mooreõs law) over the life span ofthe system. ots components can be from commercial sources (cots), governmentsources (gots), or open sources (no acronym yet).on the other hand, the acquisition organization may find that it must sacrificesome control in the engineering process in order to accommodate vendor products.in particular, adoption of ots components may force slight shifts in functionalitythat must be accommodated in requirements engineering and validation. in addition,there can be significant risk in verification and validation, since the acquiring organization may not have full visibility into the design or even functionality of the component. the acquiring organization also does not control the trajectory of growth forots components, and may indeed have little opportunity to influence vendors toaccommodate special needs, given the breadth of their customer communities.achieving a suitable balance in the adoption of ots components can be a significantchallenge, especially because the benefits of adopting ots components may beharder to measure (though they may be greater) than the benefits of increased control.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management99the integrator will also employ tools and practices in the engineeringprocess that, while not part of the final product, are nonetheless critical tothe success of the effort. in short, the development of a major systeminvolves a large number of separate but interdependent organizationsñthis is the information technology supply chain.the research manager needs to have a nuanced understanding of therespective roles, capabilities, and interests of participants in the supplychain in order to maximize impact of a missionoriented research program. the innovation enterprises and r&d strategies in the major mission agencies such as dod, doe, nasa, and nih have therefore beenstructured in recognition of the scale, diversity, and depth (beyond firsttier integrators and vendors) of this network of supplychain participantsin providing advanced information technologies. for example, the history and, indeed, continued existence of darpa illustrates the recognition in dod years ago that achieving a desired stimulus over the longterm requires a broad range of relationships across this supply chain ofcomponents and technologies. darpa has developed a number of mechanisms (and made sustained investments) to engage with entities throughout the supply chain in order to ensure that longterm technology requirements can be feasibly addressed. these mechanisms range fromsponsoring the development of underlying technologies and engineeringprocesses to the development of measurement and evaluation methodologies that permit assessment of technology candidates.in this regard, a strong parallel exists with the actions of major itusers in the private sector who work closely with suppliers in order toensure that future needs will be addressed. prudent developers of transition strategies for government research programs thus generally attemptto learn from industry practices and incentives, while keeping in mindthat there are significant differences between government and commercial acquisitionñfor example, with respect to mission, public purpose,planning horizon, organizational structure, acquisition practices, the nature and extent of acquisition oversight, and regulation.mission agencies have an additional interest beyond their immediatemission requirements: taking farsighted steps to realize future missionbenefits and adopting broadbased approaches to achieve broad societalimpact. (a familiar example is dodõs thoughtful investment in the development and deployment of packetswitched networking technologies.4)4it is now well documented that this investment achieved a massive impact that wentwell beyond the immediate nearterm dod requirements. nonetheless, these developments did not fully anticipate their pervasive use in public networks, and thus did notdevote commensurate attention to the full spectrum of security issues.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100it research, innovation, and egovernmentit could be argued that these longterm and broad impacts can be a natural consequence of a combination of factors unique to government research management:¥the technologies were developed without a specific requirementto maintain proprietary constraint on the core enabling technical concepts, which permitted broad scientific engagement with the ideas; and¥the technology approach was designed to be vendorneutral andto address issues of heterogeneity and interoperation from the outset,enabling broad participation from the vendor community.although not unique to government, there were two important additional factors:1.the research plan addressed scaling issues from the outset, in order to address challenges of long system lifetimes and broad spans ofdeployment (potentially scaling up to millions of users within dodalone); and2.managers sustained a focus on longterm vision and impact, spinning off nearerterm capabilities but without compromise to that overallvision.will industry do it?an assumption in government that òindustry will do itó may, forbroad areas of it challenge, be incorrect, despite the rapid pace of industrial it development.5 in industry, the returnoninvestment calculationsgenerally preclude innovations that are fundamentally longterm in character or that have broad and nonspecific impact. in the language of economics, many of these innovations are nonappropriableñthe impact ofthe research results diffuses broadly into the technical community, andcannot successfully be confined to a single sponsoring organization. thatis, the full value of the innovative ideas cannot be retained by any individual partyñthey create value for multiple parties. and because none ofthe parties can retain full value, their willingness to pay for the innovation can diminish to zero. this is characteristic of what economists moregenerally call public goods. information technology innovations of this5see, for example, the presidentõs information technology advisory committee (pitac)report (pitac, 1999, information technology research: investing in our future (pitac reportto the president), february 24, available online at <http://www.itrd.gov/ac/report/>),which observed that òthe it industry expends the bulk of its resources, both financial andhuman, on rapidly bringing products to market.óinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management101character include, for example, development of engineering practices thatmay lead to acrosstheboard improvements in reliability or foundationalsteps in methodology for the development of heterogeneous distributedsystems.a good deal of itrelated innovation yields intellectual property thatcan be packaged and protected; in other words, it is appropriable. but fora wide range of innovations, individual companies cannot make the casefor investment because the value obtained may spread widelyñincluding to competing companies. scientific findings such as mathematicaltheorems or other laws of nature are not generally considered protectableintellectual property, and hence industry investment to develop themwill not likely be justifiable purely from a competitive or returnoninvestment standpoint. some results of this kind can be retained as tradesecrets, though secrecy may not be sustainable once they are employed inproducts and services. examples include advances in the basic conceptsof algorithm analysis, programminglanguage foundations, and performance estimation and measurement techniques.further compounding the challenge for the program manager, thetechnology sources for system integrators and consultant organizationsare generally vendors, and less often, original innovators. competitiveadvantage for a system integrator or other vendor often derives frompredictability, risk management, and process, rather than from aggressive enhancement of capability. indeed, acquisition program managerswhose principal incentive is to achieve predictability of outcome ratherthan enhancement to overall mission capability may make overly cautious choices that do not lead to optimal longterm outcomes.a system integratorõs interest in researchgenerated innovation maythus be limited, as it represents a potentially disruptive influence on thatcompanyõs way of doing business and could even undermine its competitive advantages.6 however, there are numerous collaborative relationships between basic researchers in universities and their counterparts invendor organizations, for such reasons as providing the vendor with previews of new technology developments or better access to educationalprograms and professional talent.universities and other research laboratories actually have a naturalshared interest with the mission organizations at the òtop of the foodchainóñit is in these organizations that unmet needs (and thus interesting research problems) are first identified and, often, best understood.6remarks to the committee by clovis landry, vice president of technology for lockheedmartinõs technology information and services sector.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102it research, innovation, and egovernmentin particular, there is a natural synergy between the government mission to create public goods and the role of university (and federal laboratory) researchers in developing and disseminating ideas and having themevaluated and appreciated by colleagues. this synergy is reflected in thepattern of federal agencies engaging university researchers as agents ofinnovation. while there are natural processes in the supply chain thatenable university innovations to flow into government systems, programmanagers can accelerate and enhance these processes by working at appropriate points of leverage. for example, government can support researchers in creating òprenormativeó definitions for interfaces that canlead to standards for the delivery of new kinds of information services asa way to stimulate innovation.the department of defense, for example, develops its most technologically aggressive concepts by engaging university and laboratory research teams. if the concepts have promise and the risks of further development and scaleup are acceptable, then the dod will stimulatecollaboration between those research teams and vendor or integrator organizations. the dod invests in this participation in order to òbuy downthe riskó of commercial organizations committing resources, assimilatinginnovations, and developing underlying technological infrastructure inadvance of concrete evidence of a market.when university researchers do develop appropriable technologies,they can follow several possible routes to achieving impact, many ofwhich involve moving into the marketplace. one of the most commonpathways (even in difficult economic times) is the creation of startupcompanies that provide vehicles for packaging and proving a technologyand also for evaluating its underlying value in the marketplace. successful startup companies may be acquired by vendorsñor, less often, growinto vendors themselves. the vendor thus acquires the packaged intellectual property, as well as the experience, validation, and contacts withearly adopter customers. alternatively, the intellectual property may bepackaged and marketed directly to vendors by a university. regardless,there are good reasons why a government (or private sector) researchsponsor may promote this kind of commercialization. it can accelerate thetransition of the technology into latter stages of the supply chain and thusinto practice, at lower cost, while reaping the knowledge and skills ofleadingedge researchers.another potential point of leverage for a government agency is toestablish an organization along the lines of an incubator/venturecapitalinvestor that can share financial risks in identifying, developing, and demonstrating new technologies. (this idea motivated the central intelligenceagency [cia] inqtel, which seeks to invest in technology areas whereboth a cia need and commercial interest exist.)information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management103dimensions of riskrisk (or, more accurately, risk exposure) may be roughly defined asthe product of the probability of an unsuccessful outcome with the extentof loss suffered when that outcome is experienced. thus, risk is highwhen either unsuccessful outcomes are very likely, regardless of consequence, or when unsuccessful outcomes are less likely, but with highconsequence of loss.these meanings are distorted slightly in the vernacular of programmanagement. a research program is often referred to as a òhighrisk,highpayoffó activity when it is attempting to achieve a major breakthrough, but with uncertain likelihood of success. longterm basic research programs are generally intended to be of that type, in this positivesense: for researchers, a òhighrisk, highpayoffó program has a higherlikelihood of failure but a larger impact if successful, while a more conservative òlowriskó programñfocused, perhaps, on achieving incrementalgains in an established technology area by following routine scientificapproachesñcarries a higher likelihood of lesser impact. this notion ofrisk is almost always approached in a qualitative manner, as it is rarelythe case that probabilities of failure and consequences of success can beusefully quantified.how can a program manager think systematically about questionsrelated to risk when very few of the variables of interest can be quantifiedand when programs exhibit diverse kinds of risk? in this section, severaldimensions of risk are identified, along with some examples of strategiesthat can be used to mitigate the risks and thereby move innovations closerto adoption. this framework enables program managers to put names torisks and strategies and to identify the risk focus at a particular stage ofprogram execution; addressing too many risk issues at once in a programcan compound overall program risk to unacceptable levels. on the otherhand, sequencing risks necessarily entails some òwilling suspension ofdisbeliefó with respect to typical risk issues later on, such as scaling andintegration.an example of potentially highrisk investment by government is thedevelopment of new concepts for system protocols and architectural interfaces. the risk derives primarily from a combination of achieving thetechnical goals (for example, aggressive improvements in security andscaling for the internet protocol) and achieving acceptance among stakeholders and impact on the mission applications. box 4.4 illustrates howrisk emphasis changes as a technology is evolved.the sections below consider several kinds of risk issues that are relevant to researchprogram management. they illustrate the diversity ofkinds of risk issues and the need, when defining research and transitioninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104it research, innovation, and egovernmentbox 4.4risk and the evolution of the world wide weban example of how risk emphasis can shift over the course of a maturing processis the evolution of the world wide web from its original cern (european organization for nuclear research) design. from an orthodox it engineering standpoint, manyresearchers have long considered the original concept and implementation of theweb to be flawed in a number of technical respects. for example, unlike otherinstitutional informationmanagement systems (such as digital libraries), assets aremutable and identified by location rather than by unique identifiers (i.e., links canbreak). also, html web pages lack sufficient structure to enable effective structuralindexing. and issues of reliability, replication, security, and naming, for example,were not fully addressed at the outset.on the other hand, if the designers at cern had been forced to address all theseissues early on, very likely we would have no web at all. instead, the initial imperfect web showed itself to embody a robust and compelling concept that was successfully bootstrapped into widespread use, even though substantial evolution anddevelopment of both the concept and its realization still lay ahead. this kind ofhistory is an example of iterative development with sequenced consideration of keyrisk issues. a detailed historical analysis would reveal which participants in the innovation supply chain addressed which aspects and when.from the standpoint of program management, all details of the trajectory of anemerging technology from concept to impact cannot be predicted or determined inadvance; the environment is just too complex and unpredictable. however, a deliberate but adaptive strategy for identification and sequencing of risk issues can accelerate the process significantly. in the case of the web, examples of such activitiesinclude development of the mosaic browser at the university of illinoisõs nationalcenter for supercomputing applications and the decision by cern to make the webtechnology freely available.1this bootstrapping is a significant programmanagement issue. the early acceptance of the imperfect web meant that many stakeholders were able to participate inits evolution. this raised the overall cost of the evolution process, but it also distributed that cost and exploited early market acceptance. conversely, overcommitmentto particular requirements early in a process may appear to offer òlower riskó than aniterative approach, but in fact it may raise risk because designers are considering toomany issues simultaneously and so do not have appropriate intermediate evaluationpoints. indeed, in the case of the web, the locus of leadership and managementshifted considerably over time, ultimately diffusing into a community process. anadditional lesson is that the imperfect web evolved to do things that a perfectfromtheoutset web might never have addressed. the imperfect web did not supporttransactions (it had insufficient network privacy to carry credit cards or personaldata) but was evolved to support this capability.1the identification, separation, and sequencing of risk issues is the essence of barry boehmõsòspiral modeló for software development (barry boehm, 1986, òa spiral model of software development and enhancement,ó acm sigsoft software engineering notes, august; and barryboehm, 1988, òa spiral model of software development and enhancement,ó ieee computer21(5): 6172). boehmõs systematic development of this model for software development represented a giant step forward for program managers. iteration without identification of the particular risk issues being addressed can result in what some researchers now call the òdeath spiral.óinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management105programs, to establish the particular risks to be addressed in programexecution. for each risk issue, appropriate management strategies for addressing it are identified.evaluation riskas noted above, evaluation of research progress and ultimate potential for impact can be problematic in earlystage or exploratoryresearchprograms. indeed, some organizations may avoid longterm and exploratory activity altogether because they cannot adequately justify the investmentñthey cannot provide externally verifiable measures of the potential for ultimate impact downstream. this is a perennial problem, asthere are a number of good reasons why a quantitative basis for researchprogram management continues to be elusive. most obviously, many ofthe variables that matter are difficult to measure, and the lag from program conceptualization to impact in deployed systems can be very long,exceeding a decade or longer.7 even when considerable mission impact isachieved, traceability from initial development of concept to mission capability may be elusive.in a number of critical technical areas, in which the measurementchallenges are particularly acute, progress may be thwarted as a consequence. these areas include software reliability, computer security, theeffectiveness of autonomous systems, and the usability of human interfaces. in largescale engineering projects, there can be considerable evaluation risk with respect to lifecycle issues such as interoperation,evolvability, and reuse. in digitalgovernment programs in particular,evaluation risk is present in the definition and development of infrastructure for major information and transaction portals, in the use of advancedcollaboration technologies to facilitate intragovernmental processes, andin the development of software technologies to support and evolve highlydependable systems.more generally, what kinds of approaches can be adopted to enableprogress despite evaluation risk? strategies include these:¥building measurement into research. delaying research until measures are developed may be an inappropriate management response, because the same understanding that yields progress often also yields mea7a mid1980s study by the institute for defense analysis examined softwareengineeringtechnologies and found that it took an average of 17 years for a concept to reach maturationand an average of 7.5 years after initial development of a technology for it to reach widespread availability in industry. s. redwine and w.e. riddle. 1985. òsoftware technologymaturation.ó proceedings. 8th international conference on software engineering, london, august 2830, pp. 189200.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106it research, innovation, and egovernmentsures. indeed, one management strategy often used is to challenge researchers to identify appropriate measures of their own progress as partof the research effort, and to apply those measures on an ongoing basis totheir own and other work. this can include, of course, retrospective analysis of similar projects in order to identify correlates with various aspectsof success.¥benchmarking. in the absence of direct measures, especially in problem spaces of unknown dimensionality, benchmark data sets are usefulsurrogates. this approach has been successfully used in areas such ashighperformance computing, speech recognition, image understanding,and text management. welldesigned benchmark data sets can help reveal the particular elements of capability within a set of òcompetingótechnologies. different approaches to a problemñspeech recognition, forexampleñmay excel in different respects, such as the handling of ambient noise, use of free microphones, speaker independence, extent of system training, and limits on vocabulary and grammatical complexity. thisidentification assists potential downstream adopters because it enablesthem to identify relevant evaluation criteria better.¥testbed. many research programs focused on achieving realism orscaleup along various dimensions create testbed facilities for conductinglargerscale experiments. òscale,ó here, can refer, for example, to the sizeof a database, the number and skills of users, the extent of distribution orinterconnectivity, robustness, performance, and other factors. further, bycreating a facility shared by multiple research efforts, costs can also beshared and experimental results more easily compared and evaluated. inaddition, potential users can participate in the testbed definition andevaluation in order to ensure realism. this approach is widely used inmajor programs (e.g., darpa gigabit networking and dod joint warrior interoperability demonstration programs). the principal risk associated with the approach is defining the testbed project in a way thatachieves realism while enabling research issues to be addressed effectively.¥gentleslope adoptability. one riskmitigation approach is to designprograms that offer a ògentle slopeó with regard to return on investmentñthat is, increments of effort in adopting a technology yield increments of impact. this approach (named by michael dertouzos) can enable researchers working with early adopters both to make midcoursecorrections and to collaborate with the adopters in defining evaluationcriteria.8 the resulting òearly validationó can help reduce evaluation riskeven when objective measures are unavailable.8the idea first appeared in an unpublished darpa study in which dertouzos wrote,òthe gentleslope systems will have a few key properties. first and foremost, they will giveincrementally more useful results for incrementally greater effort.óinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management107solutionconcept riskanother risk issue faced by managers of a problemdirected researchprogram is the extent to which the program should commit to particularsolution approaches. such commitments could include choices for systemarchitecture (e.g., businessrule framework in a threelevel architecture),measurement frameworks, technical approaches (e.g., neural networksversus other decision frameworks), or infrastructural components (e.g.,operatingsystem choice). solutionconcept risk is an issue, for example,in areas such as improvement of information security, textsearch capability, capability to integrate databases, or support for distributed teamworkin some operational domain. underconstraint of solution approach canlead to solutions that are incompatible with the target environment.overconstraint, on the other hand, can exclude development of innovative outofthebox approachesñsuch as raid storage architecture tocomplement development of larger and denser disksñthat may offer superior capability. when early projects were initiated in parallel computing, for example, a diversity of architectural approaches were considered,which yielded a number of different options that permit a number ofdifferent classes of problems to be tackled today.one example of solutionconcept risk in the domain of digital government is the development of technologies to model and remediate unwanted linking of databases (e.g., to prevent revealing identities of medicalresearch subjects). solution approaches could include, for example,development of largescale metamodels of released information, datadithering techniques, and creation of surrogates for zip codes as geographic identifiers. premature commitment to any one of these couldincrease risk. computersecurity research faces a similar challengeñitcan be easy for a program to overcommit to particular threat models orsecurity architectures and thereby be deflected from critical technical areas and a diverse portfolio.strategies for addressing solutionconcept risk include these:¥mixed strategy. this approach for exploratory programs is to adopta diverse portfolio of technical approaches. while it is an obvious response, how to manage it for success is not so obvious, primarily becauseof evaluation risk. that is, a more constrained strategy may reduce withinprogram evaluation risk but increase the overall evaluation risk with respect to the intended impact.¥iceberg model. diversity enables individual efforts to accept greaterrisk while not substantially increasing overall program risk. if there is anexpectation that not all research efforts will yield impactñif local failurescan be toleratedñthen greater risks can be taken, leading potentially togreater levels of innovation. a supporting organizational culture is preinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108it research, innovation, and egovernmentrequisite to success in adopting this model. darpa and nsf, for example, have followed this model in certain critical technical areas, withconsiderable success. these agencies understand that tooaggressivemanagement at this stage could inhibit the exploratory nature of thisactivity and prematurely eliminate promising approaches. this approachmay be adopted by researchers as well as funding agencies: a principalinvestigator may consider many possible approaches to a problem beforeselecting a subset for more focused effort. this approach can be appliediteratively, following a òprogressive deepeningó strategy.¥avoid overmanagement. project managers may be tempted to constrain solution concepts prematurely in order to obtain a more linearprogram execution model with predictable milestones. this optimizationin favor of nearterm predictability may actually increase overall solutionconcept risk because it compresses or eliminates the exploratory phasescritical to the invention or identification of new solution concepts. unlessa solution concept is clearly understood in advance, program managersneed to balance visibility and predictability (and hence measurability)with the fostering of exploratory and creative activity.problemconcept riskoften the perceived gaps in capability are not the actual gaps. anorganization may identify as a technology challenge what is in fact achallenge in process, organizational structure, or technologicallegacymanagement. that is, risk is associated with the correct identification ofrequirements to be addressed (validation). for example, when designinga system to facilitate information sharing in an organization, the real challenge may in fact derive from organizational culture rather than fromtechnological impediment. or, an effective solution may need to addressorganizational culture factors and technological factors.sometimes the difficulty is not in requirements elicitation but ratherin fluidity of requirements. consider, for example, the design of commandandcontrol systems for use in crisis management or military operations. there are important interactions between the capabilities ofavailable communication and collaboration technologies and the processes and physical organization of command posts. if aggressive innovation is sought in commandandcontrol capability, constraining the technical focus to address communications capabilities within existingorganizational and physical structures may fail to deliver sufficiently innovative results and may indeed reinforce older, lesseffective practices.on the other hand, an overly broad focus may not yield meaningful results. identifying the right scope of research focus is thus pivotal in effective program design.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management109examples of areas of potential problemconcept risk in digitalgovernment programs include new commandandcontrol capabilities for crisis management, statisticalanalysis support for nonexpert users of government statistical data, and database interoperation support for rapidlylinking geographical databases to support crisis response.strategies for addressing problemconcept risk include these:¥wizard of oz. even when a research challenge is appropriatelyscoped, there can be significant difficulties in designing a program thatenables rapid and graceful coevolution of technology and its context ofuse. in particular, nałve iterative approaches can yield, at best, long validation cycles and, at worst, divergence from goals. the socalled wizardof oz approach involves the creation of system mockups that do notnecessarily embody real capability but that can nonetheless enable potential adopters to experiment with concepts of operation. the early validation received from experiences with the mockups can reduce problemconcept risk and focus technology development efforts. the mockupsalso help researchers communicate with potential adopters by providinga concrete instantiation of concepts; where appropriate, they may alsoserve as surrogates for formal specification of requirements or technological capabilities. the wizard of oz tactic thus also addresses risks relatedto evaluation, integration, and usability.¥double helix. as potential users gain experience with new capabilities, the problem concept may shift in response to that experience. forexample, the use of collaborativefiltering technologies has had significant effects on concepts of operation for electroniccommerce sites. in thedouble helix approach, a coevolution of operational concepts and technology concepts occurs. close collaboration of technical researchers andsubjectmatter experts may, after several iterations, yield simultaneousinnovation in both operational concept and underlying technology. also,validation can be enhanced through ongoing empirical assessment of suchcoevolution. this approach has been applied with some success in thedarpa command post of the future (cpof) program, particularly inidentifying and evaluating new approaches to visualization and collaboration in midechelon military command posts.integration and adoption riskcan the technologies developed within a program be effectively integrated into an intended systems or organizational context? answeringthis question requires consideration of issues ranging from interoperationto usability. for example, wearable computer systems used in systemsmaintenance applications need to be integrated with evolving practicesinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110it research, innovation, and egovernmentand systems for documentation management and maintenance reporting. this could be called òbusiness process adaptation risk.ó while certain adoption risks must be addressed early in a research effort, addressing too many of them too early can multiply risk and impedeaccomplishment.integration risk is a significant factor for many (and perhaps most)digitalgovernment research projects. many new capabilities must be integrated with evolving commercial components as well as with customintegrated government it solutions. in other words, both the target environment and the base technological infrastructure are rapidly movingtargets.many of the strategies mentioned above are used to address adoptionrisks. in addition, the following specific strategies apply:¥pipeline. the pipeline model, often used in longlived research programs focused on strategic challenges, embraces a portfolio of researchefforts that span a range of levels of technological maturity. achievingthat broad span may entail working with multiple stages of the innovation supply chainñbasic researchers, exploratorydevelopment teams,companies developing new products, and companies integrating systems,among others. this approach was used with success in the darpa strategic computing program in the 1980s. the program followed a òpyramidó model that encompassed simultaneous work on generic enablingtechnologies, multipurpose applications infrastructure, and aggressiveexperimental applications.¥producerconsumer connection. one of the features of the multiagencyhigh performance computing and communications program (hpcc) ofthe 1990s was the direct connection it established between computationalscientists and engineers and the developers of advanced highperformance computing and communications systems. the connection enabledsystem developers to get early validation and feedback from users (seethe subsection òevaluation risk,ó above), and it enabled the users to gainexperience and assess scalability issues for emerging platforms. the program accomplished this by seeding the marketñòbuying down riskó onboth sides, by assisting users in acquiring aggressive systems and assisting developers in maturing concepts so that they could sustain externalevaluation. this is analogous to, but not the same as, the alignment of endusers and innovators in mission programs, including nsfõs digital government program. the distinction is that the producerconsumer model isfocused on building links in the supply chain, while the nsf digital government program emphasizes directly connecting the producer and consumer. producerconsumer connection issues also arise when organizainformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management111tions seek to rapidly acquire technology to support ad hoc needs, as occurs in crisis response (see box 4.5).¥common architecture. interoperation risk can be reduced considerably by adopting common architectural frameworks and interface specifications. when the commonalities are well chosen, system or componentspecific interoperation challenges are replaced by framework compliance.widely adopted frameworksñfor example, mainstream commercial application programming interfaces (apis)ñcan provide significant interoperation benefit in mission systems. conversely, poor choices in frameworks can result in exclusion of mainstream components, high costs ofintegration and, when framework technical characteristics have not beenfully evaluated, high risks both at the component and system levels. because of network externalities, frameworks must be evaluated on the basis of technical criteria, market acceptance, and potential trajectory.9 thebox 4.5using a clearinghouse to assimilate new it in crisis responsehow can the introduction and use of new technologies in the immediate response to a crisis be managed so as to maximize their availability and better use thetalents of emergency staff? one idea that emerged from the committeeõs consideration of crisis management is to attach a clearinghouse function to emergency operations centers that are generally established to respond to crisis situations.a clearinghouse would help systematize the introduction of technology into crisis response activities (an effort that is frequently haphazard today) and help promoteeffective use of information technology by technical specialists and emergency managers during response to and recovery from disasters. the clearinghouse wouldprovide a single point of contact for easy exchange of information among technologycompanies, researchers, emergency managers, and practitioners and provide acheckin and checkout point for all technology vendors and researchers at the incident scene. it would also help direct vendors, researchers, and observers away fromoverburdened local government officials and toward the specific areas of need. theclearinghouse would allow for a more coherent and methodical investigation of alldisaster impacts, the gathering of òperishableó data, and the tracking of all field investigations. it would help ensure that all areas had been thoroughly explored forresource needs. further, it would facilitate documentation of findings and observations and provide all investigators with updated information on damage, throughdaily briefings and reports. the clearinghouse should be as close to the affected areaas possible, while still providing the necessary space and support services. it shouldbe located so that it affords access to the emergency operations center, althoughphysical proximity may not be as important as electronic connectivity.9these economic effects are discussed in depth in carl shapiro and hal r. varian, 1998,information rules: a strategic guide to the network economy, harvard business school press,cambridge, mass.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112it research, innovation, and egovernmentpoint is that the system architecture can itself be a source of risk, which isappropriate when architectural exploration is a program focus.¥framework building. introducing a new protocol or architecturalframework shifts emphasis in a research program from particular realizations of capability to the service interface through which it is delivered.this approach was used in the early days of the arpanet in order toensure that issues of scaling and heterogeneity were addressed from theoutset. it is a risky approach, however, because protocols, interfaces, andother commonalities only have impact if they are widely adopted. inorder to drive down the risks of adoption, specific tactics are used. forexample, both the internet engineering task force and the world wideweb consortium generally require reference implementations to existbefore a commonality can be considered for potential adoption. introduction of service interfaces into existing prototype systems can be a successful strategy to reduce the costs and risks of entry for new participants.this was, for example, the goal of the defense modeling and simulationoffice (dmso) when it introduced the hla protocol in the early days ofthe defense simulation program. the risks of this effort were consideredacceptable because existing prototypes provided evidence of value andcapability, enabling a more direct focus on interoperation and scaling up.in the early days of the international organization for standardizationõsopen systems interconnect (osi) network architecture effort, uptake wasslowed by the absence of compelling evidence of feasibility and value.¥scaffolding. interoperation risk at the system level can be addressedthrough the creation of scaffolded components. in scaffolding, a commontechnique in componentoriented system design, missing components areòstubbed outó with relatively trivial placeholder components that havelimited functionality. this enables partial early validation of compliancewith internal protocols and interfaces (apis).mooreõs law riskseveral years of effort may be required to develop prototypes andevaluation systems that embody a new it concept. few it implementations are insensitive to the performance of underlying technologies. improvements in processor speed, network capacity, storage capacity, manufacturability and economies of scale, and infrastructural reliability canenable significant new approaches, for example, to capability, architecture, and usability. researchers can anticipate the improvements likely tooccur over the lifetime of a research program by extrapolating infrastructural capability according to mooreõs law and its analogs. if the maturedconcept is deployed 3 years after program initiation, for instance, theconventionally deployed platforms at that future time could be more thaninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management113four times as powerful as those generally used when the research program was initiated.to enable researchers to anticipate these changes, researchprogrammanagers sometimes employ a tactic of òliving in the future,ó in whichunusually highperformance platforms are deployed to researchers in order to enable them to gain experience with the targeted future platforms.this is sometimes also called òleading the receiver,ó because of the analogy to a football quarterback throwing the ball to the expected location ofthe wide receiver, even though the receiver may be far from that locationwhen the throw is initiated. the tactic has been applied successfully inprograms for computational science, information visualization, and applications for highperformance networking. in digital government, thisapproach could be used, for example, to experiment with the use by census takers of lowcost wireless handheld devices (now emerging in themarketplace), with speech interfaces for use in crisis management, orwith veryhighperformance network links available in rapidly deployedfield settings for crisis management.reliability and usability risksmany it applications require high levels of assurance of system availability, of data confidentiality and integrity, of design compliance to lawsor regulations, or of correctness of design and implementation with respect to safety or functional properties. this is particularly true for missionspecific government applications, and across a wide spectrum ofgovernment sectors ranging from health care, social security, and statistical data to aerospace, defense, and energy. the experience of highly reliable systems development is that users must sacrifice capability, flexibility, interoperation, and performance in order to achieve high levels ofreliabilityñwhich includes fault tolerance, security, robustness in the faceof component failure, and many other attributes. with improvements inreliability practices, the extent of this sacrifice can be reduced. conversely,requirements for reliability can force program managers to scale backambitions for capability, performance, and even usability. usability posessimilar challenges. all internet users have had the frustrating experienceof attempting to extract information or conduct transactions throughpoorly designed web sites. in applications in which government information and transactions are made available to citizens, the need to providebroad access to a widely diverse population creates enormous challengesin achieving usable designs. usability challenges are also faced in systemsdesigned for internal useñfor example, crisis management applicationsintended for use by professionals who may be in a state of stress wheninteracting with the system.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114it research, innovation, and egovernmentwhen designing a research program that is addressing a particularcapability challenge, an important early decision is when and how to takeon usability issues. there is growing evidence, for example, that the overall architecture of a system can influence the ability to create usable human interfaces.10 in addition, poor usability may deter potential adopters even when the underlying technology has considerable merit.early attention to these issues may not be enough, however. certainproduct attributes, especially those related to reliability and usability, aremultifaceted issues that must be considered at every stage of the engineering process. reliability in particular must be addressed during system conceptualization, design, development, evaluation, integration, andevolution.planning risksthis section on òdimensions of riskó has illustrated and partiallyenumerated the dimensions of risk that might be addressed in a missionfocused research program and some of the strategies and tactics conventionally used to address them. of course, these and other kinds of risksmay be present to different degrees, depending on the particular researchchallenges being addressed. regardless, it is clear that successful program designs incorporate, if only tacitly, an identification of the criticalrisk elements, indicating which ones are the primary drivers and whichothers can be safely deferred for later consideration. a full identificationof risks does not imply that they should all be addressed in the scope of aprogramñrather, it can help a manager understand, and later communicate, how transition steps might be taken by others once results start toemerge from the program.in addition to identification of the risks, the sequencing of risks to beconsidered can also be a risk issue: an overambitious program design thattakes on too many risk dimensions at once effectively multiplies overallprogram risk and lessens the chance of overall success. this challenge ofsequencing the risks may best be addressed by drawing on experience inresearch, engineering, evaluation, and operational settings, where the fullrange of risk issues can be best identified. questions include how the riskdimensions interact, and which risk issues can be addressed in paralleland which must be done sequentially.10leonard j. bass and bonnie e. john. 2001. òsupporting usability through softwarearchitecture,ó ieee computer 34(10):113115.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology transition and program management115summarywhile there can be no recipes for success in program management,this chapter suggests some models and principles that may be usefullyapplied by a program manager in seeking innovation in government applications. most importantly, a program manager may benefit from understanding the challenge of achieving a particular innovation in theframework of the two principal models identified in this chapterñthesupply chain model and the riskidentification model. this understanding may be developed and applied in a process that includes, for example,steps such as the following:¥identify the desired innovation and the stakeholders in successfully achieving it.¥identify the horizon (time available to achieve the operational impact) and the overall risk tolerance for the effort.¥map out the full set of participants in the supply chain that linksoperational end users with innovators. this includes, for example, understanding the readiness of the potential participants and the naturalopportunities for collaboration.¥identify the principal risk issues at each stage and consider appropriate strategies for addressing those risks.¥identify critical points of leverage in the supply chain. understandthe timing considerations and other factors regarding the opportunitiesso identified.¥take action according to the understanding gained in the previoussteps in order to stimulate appropriate participants in the supply chain toachieve the innovation goals. example actions: invest to stimulate exploration or buy down risk, stimulate collaboration, and facilitate new standards.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.119appendixaegovernment scenariosegovernment and the daily life of the citizenonline interactions between citizens and governmentñlocal, state,and federalñare becoming increasingly common as more people andgovernment organizations connect to the internet and the world wideweb. individuals are already doing many different things via the internet,such as renewing vehicle registrations, filing tax returns and paying taxes,exchanging messages with their childrenõs teachers, sending email totheir congressional representatives and to the president, getting information on their social security benefits, and even paying for pet licenses.some of these activities, such as vehicle registration, have simply becomemore convenient with the advent of online transactions; others, such asaccessing government information, have been so greatly facilitated thatthey have changed from being very unusual to being commonplace. suchavailability of government information, transactions, and people has justbegun, however. for a glimpse of the potential impact of a truly digitalgovernment on the everyday life of an average citizen, consider the following hypothetical case.margaret jackson had been quite satisfied with the local public schoolsfor her two children, but one morning at breakfast as she was scanningher personalized summary of the news, she noticed that the school superintendent had announced that french classes were going to be eliminatedat the high school because of budgetary pressures. both of her childrenwere currently taking french and were enjoying it, and she had beeninformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120appendix apleased to see them beginning to develop some fluency in another language. she was sufficiently upset by this announcement that she decidedto look into it further.the first thing that margaret did was to learn the actual cost of thefrench classes by looking up the budget on the schoolõs web site; thistype of statistical information was available for all aspects of local, state,and federal government, and could be retrieved using queries expressedin simple english (and several other languages). she then quickly workedout how much this represented in terms of dollars per year for every localtaxpayer with children. next, for comparison, she found out how muchwas spent on foreignlanguage instruction in similar school districtsthroughout the country.margaret then submitted a general query to all government and newssources for recent stories or reports on the state of foreignlanguage education in the united states. included in the searchõs results were a coupleof news stories in which the secretary of commerce had cited a reportindicating that the lack of fluency in foreign languages was making itharder for american companies to compete with those in the europeanunion. the search also returned the original report that contained thisinformation. armed with the dollar figures and the report, margaret consulted state and federal portals to determine which people in governmenthave an interest in this issue. her query returned the names of threeindividuals: one in the state government who was responsible for promoting exports, one in the u.s. department of education, and a prominent u.s. senator who had taken the issue on as a personal concern. sheimmediately sent mail about her local schoolõs decision to all of thesepeople, copying the school superintendent, the high school principal, andthe state and federal representatives of her district.that evening, margaret received replies from the staff of the stateofficial and the senator. they directed her to some new state and federalprograms that were designed to support education initiatives and thatalso, in some cases, included foreignlanguage education. the senatorõsstaff also mentioned that a pending bill being reviewed by a house committee would focus on providing support for foreignlanguage education.she reviewed this material and found that one of the state programsmight apply to her local school district. she also read a summary of thepending federal legislation and sent a message to the chair of the housecommittee indicating her strong support and giving some of the details ofwhat was happening in her school district. she sent messages as well tothe superintendent and principal, pointing out the existence of the stateprogram. she then went to bed, pleased that her actions that day mighthave made a difference in her childrenõs education.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a121crisis managementscientists have predicted that there is roughly a 70 percent likelihoodthat a major earthquake will occur in the san francisco bay area before2030.1 further compounding the situation, many residents of the bay areahave no direct experience with major earthquakes, since more than 1million people have moved to the region since the 1989 loma prieta quake.what might be possible with aggressive harnessing of information technology capabilities for responding to such a crisis?at 5:45 p.m. on december 14, 2010, an earthquake occurs withoutwarning. the severe event, measuring over 7 on the richter scale, causes30 seconds of intense shaking and extensive damage to the built environment. a poll of sensors located in homes throughout the region obtainsinformation on the intensity and distribution of the quake and indicateswhere the communications infrastructure has been disrupted. highwaycamera and sensor data show that dense rushhour traffic is severelysnarled and indicate that 900 roads and many offramps and overpassesare impassable. the retrofitted and recently opened eastern span of thebay bridge does not collapse, but the eastern approach is impassable.numerous landslides in the hills severely damage buildings; neighborhood roads; and water, gas, and electric lines along the hayward fault.hundreds of people die immediately. several thousand must be rescued,and thousands are seriously injured. the oakland airport is closed. thesan francisco and san jose airports are open, but there is no way to travelto them. railroads are also severely damaged.sarah janello is trapped in a berkeley parking structure, but she has awireless mobile communications device with her. though the voice circuits are jammed with calls, she is able to send a text message informingthe emergency dispatch center of her location, that her leg is pinned downby a supporting beam, and that other people appear to be trapped underthe concrete. a system linking all the information from local governments, state agencies, and businesses tracks the numerous damage andemergency reports, including sarahõs, and matches response capabilitieswith these needs. the priority list is fluid, updated automatically as newdata arrive. several other people in the berkeley structure also report thatthey are trapped, so this location receives a high priority and a rescueteam is quickly dispatched. to minimize the risk to the human rescuers,1u.s. geological survey (usgs). 1999. òmajor quake likely to strike between 2000 and2030.ó usgs fact sheet15299. usgs, u.s. department of the interior, washington, d.c.available online at <http://quake.wr.usgs.gov/study/wg99/index.html>.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122appendix arobots are used to locate the buried people and to bring them water andother needed supplies.while sarah janello awaits rescue, she is able to locate other familymembers. she finds that her husband and children are stuck on the baybridge but unharmed, and they learn in turn that she is being rescued.sarah feels a sense of relief in the darkness as she waits to be rescued.afterward, she is located by her family at a nearby hospital.using sensors and atmospheric models, the emergency operationscenter tracks the dispersal of toxic fumes from the numerous fires thatare burning. when a hazardous situation is identified, the populations atrisk are notified of individually tailored evacuation and shelter optionsthrough a òreverse 911ó system that employs both wired and wirelesscommunications.these sorts of scenarios play themselves out thousands of timesthroughout the bay area that day and in the disasterõs aftermath.citizen access to federal statisticsindividuals want access to federal statistical data. they wish to learn,for example, about where and who people are, the demographics of different areas (e.g., information about schools, cost of living, recreation),what is going on in business and agriculture, what is driving prices in aparticular area, or what to expect with regard to inflation and interestrates.how far have we come today toward realizing this vision? fedstatsprovides a single portal for federally collected data sets and for documents based on them. data sources and documents are organized topically and geographically across all the federal statistics agencies. in manycases, the available data are constrained, owing to confidentiality protection, but summary information and reports may be available. still, onecannot make such queries as, how many people will be displaced if anevacuation at the 100year flood line for manhattan, kansas, is required?or, what would be the economic impact of locating a particular newbusiness in my town?imagine asking fedstats 2020 the latter question. this might trigger aseries of questions back to the user not only to acquire more details aboutthat business but to learn more about that user: his or her quantitative/scientific literacy and visual/verbal/textual/cognitive abilities. then, therelevant data, complemented by additional data sources where needed,would be òcrunchedó with the aid of models and simulations. a responsecontaining the requested information both fully and in userfriendly formwould quickly be returned to the individual making the query.to realize this vision requires it innovation on several fronts, such asinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a123representation of information, archiving and searching, modeling andsimulation, and information integration. subtle but important issues, suchas the underlying integrity of responses, will also become key. for example, when the same basic question is asked by people of varying degrees of quantitative sophistication, answers must be consistent.taking the scenario one step further: imagine being able to get asecond opinion. the local chamber of commerce has contracted with asmall economic modeling company to give you access to a model thatuses a different set of assumptions. running this model using a portal tothe company offered by the chamber, the model accesses the same underlying census and economic data that were used in the governmentõsmodel. the modeling companyõs software is able to access the underlying government databases directly, using an application programminginterface offered by the government to allow nongovernment computerprograms to analyze the data in new or different ways.census 2020the decennial census is carried out, pursuant to constitutional mandate (article 1, section 2), to conduct a precise snapshot of the nationalpopulation every 10 years. this information is required for apportioningcongressional seats and establishing the boundaries of political jurisdictions. many other government programs depend on census data. for example, the voting rights act of 1965 requires data on race and ethnicorigin at a very fine level of geographic detail. although one could contemplate obtaining such information from other sources, no comparableor practical alternative now exists. how might the census be conducted in2020?postal address might no longer be a reliable source in 2020 for locating and contacting the population because other means of communication and identifiers (wireless telephone numbers and email and otherinternet addresses) predominate. new geocodes would be used to replace the master address list used today to find the population. satelliteimagery, coupled with groundbased reporting using globalpositioningsystem data, could be used to locate, geocode, and define every structurein the united states and its territories. that is, a determination of buildings inhabited by humans, along with a distinction between business andliving quarters, could be made.once the geocodes were available, the age, sex, race, and ethnic composition of each geocoded household would need to be determined. assuming that geocodes could be used to link to government administrativerecordsñfor example, records on federal taxes, welfare, property taxes,or social securityñone could retrieve information from these governmentinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124appendix arecords and follow up with more traditional enumeration for householdswithout complete information. also, the linking of this information wouldimmediately identify the government services used by these individuals.an unresolved challenge is what methods might be used to obtain information on homeless and other groups that could not be readily identifiedor located by any of the methods described above.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.125appendixb july 2001 letter report to thenational science foundationjuly 9, 2001lawrence e. brandt, ph.d.program manager, digital government programdirectorate for computer & information science and engineeringnational science foundation4201 wilson boulevardarlington, virginia 22230dear dr. brandt:to obtain input that could help inform planning for future egovernment innovation programs, you requested on june 16, 2001, that thecommittee on computing and communications research to enable better use of information technology in government provide an interimassessment of the potential role of computer science research in theseefforts. the committee was established by the national researchcouncilõs computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) toexamine how information technology (it) research can enable improvedand new government services, operations, and interactions with citizens.the study is funded through the national science foundationõs (nsfõs)digital government program, which supports joint research programsbetween academic researchers and government agencies.the first phase of the committeeõs study featured workshops examining two illustrative application areasñcrisis management and federalinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126appendix bstatisticsñand concluded with the publication of two summary reports.1the second phase of the project, which is currently being completed,synthesizes what was learned in the two workshops, information gleanedfrom other published work examining it research and egovernment,and inputs gathered in the course of two datagathering meetings andsupplemental individual interviews.this letter is based on the committeeõs two previously publishedworkshop reports, as well as other relevant cstb publications on theevolution and impacts of computer science research and the applicationof it in government.2 the committeeõs findings based on this work areas follows:1.realizing the potential of egovernment that has been demonstrated in early efforts will require addressing implementation issues,resolving shorterterm technology issues, and conducting research onlongerterm challenges.2.while government can in many cases build on technology developed for the commercial sector, targeted computer science research isneeded where government leads demand or has special requirements.3.providing a sound foundation for egovernment and other applications of information technology throughout society will depend onensuring a continuing, broad federal computer science research program.4.challenging computer scientists to address realworld problemsin the government sphere can stimulate interactions benefiting researchers, who need access to computer and information artifacts and realisticcontexts, and government agencies, which gain expertise and insightsthat can inform and improve their it acquisition and management andresearch results that can be applied in government and elsewhere.these findings are developed below.1computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999,summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis management, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.; and computer science and telecommunications board,national research council, 2000, summary of a workshop on information technology researchfor federal statistics, national academy press, washington, d.c.2this letter report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives andtechnical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national researchcouncilõs (nrcõs) report review committee. we wish to thank the following individualsfor their participation in the review of this report: john h. gibbons, former assistant to thepresident for science and technology and former director, office of science and technologypolicy; bruce w. mcconnell, mcconnell international, llc; arati prabhakar, u.s. venturepartners; and robert sproull, sun microsystems laboratories. the review of this report wasoverseen by samuel h. fuller, analog devices, and william g. howard, jr., independentconsultant. appointed by the nrc, they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the finalcontent of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the nrc.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b1271. realizing the potential of egovernment that hasbeen demonstrated in early efforts will requireaddressing implementation issues, resolvingshorterterm technology issues, and conductingresearch on longerterm challenges.the emergence of the internet and other technologies for electroniccommerce has given rise to the concept of òdigital governmentó or òegovernmentóñthe application of information technology (it) and associated changes in practices to foster a more informed, engaged citizenryand more efficient, accountable government operations. among the keyfeatures envisioned for egovernment are increasing access to government information, facilitating transactions with government agencies,making access to information and transactions ubiquitous, better meeting the needs of specific groups of users, increasing peopleõs participation in government, and meeting expectations for advances in governmentunique areas.3 constituencies include citizens, businesses, nonprofit organizations, and the diverse agencies of federal, state, and localgovernment.ideas from early egovernment experiments have contributed bothto technology development and to the improvement of governmentõsbusiness practices. among the most visible enhancements have beenaggregated crossagency portals. these web sites provide users withaccess to information and services organized by broad topic and userconstituency rather than by specific government departments or agencies, and often are taskoriented.4 computerbased taxfiling and inquiryresponse services provided by multiple agencies are other publiclyvisible illustrations of positive changes in the way government does itsbusiness. also apparentñin news accounts from across the countryñare difficulties experienced by government agencies seeking new capabilities.53a 1996 report based on a series of cstb projects examining needs at the internal revenueservice suggested similar goals, stating that òbased on its work of the past 5 years, thecommittee strongly believes that the modernization of the irs, including both business reengineering and advanced automation, is extremely important. modernization is necessaryto improve taxpayer service and to allow the irs to operate within an increasingly automated society, both of which ultimately ensure that taxes can be collected efficiently.ó (computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1996. continuedreview of tax systems modernization at the internal revenue service. national academy press,washington, d.c., p. 3.)4one of the earliest portals, fedstats.gov, is discussed in computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2000, summary of a workshop on informationtechnology research for federal statistics, national academy press, washington, d.c.5for example, cstbõs 1996 review of irs modernization efforts cautioned that òthe irshas had serious technical capability problems that, in the committeeõs view, cast doubt on theoverall success of tsm if they are not solved.ó (computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council. 1996. continued review of tax systems modernization at theinternal revenue service. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 4.)information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128appendix bin its examination of it for crisis management and the collection,analysis, and dissemination of federal statistics, the committee identifieda number of challenges to the governmentõs effective exploitation of it.these include ensuring the interoperation and integration of diverse systems used by different departments and agencies with multiple stakeholders and a significant legacy base; accommodating existing organizational structures that are difficult to rework to enable exploiting newopportunities afforded by it; improving trustworthiness, including guarantees of information systems security as well as assurances regardinguser privacy and system availability; bridging significant gaps betweencurrent practice and best available practices; and meeting specific technology needs related to government missions (see finding 2, below).each challenge incorporates a mix of implementation, management,shortterm technical challenges, and longterm research needs.technology transition is an important consideration when researchis needed to achieve desired capabilities. the work of researchers mayfocus primarily on inventing a new capability, but implementation mustaddress the additional challenges of enabling the translation of that invention into a reliable, working product or service.2. while government can in many cases buildon technology developed for the commercialsector, targeted computer science research isneeded where government leads demand or hasspecial requirements.although it can generally build on the technologies and servicesemerging in the commercial ebusiness marketplace, government leadsdemand in some areas. research in these areas could help governmentagencies to better accomplish their missions. moreover, properly managed research in areas of leading demand can stimulate commercial interest and development and thus enable government to move more rapidly away from acquisition of expensive custom systems, whose fulllifecycle costs government must bear, to the use of offtheshelf commercial capabilities. as a result of this process, government now canmake use of commercial operating systems with process separation,multimedia databases, and packetswitched networking gear, amongother capabilities.important areas of leading demandubiquity. governments must provide services to all citizensñthey cannot, in general, opt to serve only the easiesttoreach customers or participate only in particular market segments. nor can citizens choosewhich government they will deal with. breadth of service encompassesthe range of individualsõ physical, cognitive, and language abilities asinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b129well as their education, income, and geographic location. nearubiquitous service is provided today primarily through inperson, telephone,and postal mail interactions, but email, the web, public kiosks, andother itbased approaches are providing new opportunities to expandaccess toñand the accessibility ofñservices. government, which mustcomprehensively address the needs of its citizens, has been a leader inexploring how to make technologies accessible, whereas industry has theoption of focusing selectively to maximize returns. research in areassuch as humancomputer interaction, information retrieval, languagetranslation, and speech recognition and synthesis can help to increasethe ubiquity of information and services. achieving usability and accessibility requires that systems be used, and government applications mayprovide a range of contexts in which researchers can frame their efforts.6trustworthiness. citizens expect government to provide assurances ofsecurityñwhich includes confidentiality (protection of personal andbusiness information), integrity of information and systems, and availability of information and systemsñthat are generally stronger thanthose expected of the private sector. but what is desired may be beyondwhat the technology and practice can actually offer. conventional business practice incorporates risk management, in which the costs of implementing security measures are balanced against the consequences of nothaving themña calculation that certain levels of exposure can be tolerated for certain applications. government agencies, however, are expected to adhere to a higher standardñno improper disclosure of personal information contained in statistical data, tax filings, social securityrecords, and the likeñeven though government is also charged withreleasing certain kinds of information, which may be derived from sensitive personal or corporate information that it collects, and making ituniformly available to all.trust in public systems is essential for public compliance with government mandates (e.g., paying taxes, completing census forms); equallycritical is trust in the safety and reliability of systems on which lives maydepend. in military applications, requirements for trustworthiness haveled to efforts to promote òhighassuranceó 7 technologies for critical sys6òprogress toward developing improved [everycitizen interfaces] will require basic research in theory, modeling, and conceptualization; experimental research involving building, evaluating, and testing of artifacts; and empirical social science research assessing segments of the population and how people actually work with different systems. in all cases,data, methodology, and tools are themselves targets for research or research support.ó (computer science and telecommunications board. national research council. 1997. more thanscreen deep. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 2.)7see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1997,review of the past and present contexts for using ada within the department of defense, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.; and computer science and telecommunications board,national research council, 1999, realizing the potential of c4i: fundamental challenges, national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130appendix btems, and similar requirements apply to it for transportation and health8applications, areas in which government is often in partnership with theprivate sector. addressing issues related to trustworthiness involvesintermingled considerations of policy, organizational behavior and culture, and technology. computer science research could contribute toolsand approaches for facilitating dissemination of information withoutcompromising confidentiality9 as well as for designing and developingsystems that provide appropriate, comparatively high overall levels oftrustworthiness.10coping with structural and legal constraints in government. government,like business, has been working to create portals for information andtransactions to meet the needs of particular groups of users. frequently,this requires spanning organizational boundaries. difficult in any setting, the associated modification of processes and organizational structure in government is often significantly constrained by legal and administrative strictures and may be further complicated by the involvementof state and local governments as well as federal agencies. also to beconsidered are informationsharing barriers established legislatively toprotect citizen privacy. it capabilities such as trusted lightweight intermediaries that aggregate for the customer while dispatching componentsof the aggregate query or transaction to the various government entitiesinvolved in responding can help provide a usable interface to citizensdespite the array of overlapping, partly interconnected agencies found ingovernment.largescale systems. making it better discussed a multitude of problemsassociated with largescale systems, including delays, unexpected failures, and inflexibility in coping with changing needs, and it observedthat notable examples of such systems and problems exist in government.11 many of the publicly acknowledged failures have occurred ingovernment systems, such as those of the internal revenue service andthe federal aviation administration at the federal level and numeroussystems at the state and local level. this situation reflects both the largescale of some of those systems and the shortages of it expertise chronicin government. the problem is growing with expanding use of the8computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.networking health. national academy press, washington, d.c.9this tension is discussed in more detail in computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council, 2000, summary of a workshop on information technologyresearch for federal statistics, national academy press, washington, d.c.10computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999.trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c.11computer science and telecommunications board. 2000. making it better. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b131internet, which has fostered proliferating interconnected systems. andthe importance of the problem is also growing as people come to dependmore on such systems. making it better points to the need for research toaddress deep interactions among system components and intersystemdependencies, unintended and unanticipated consequences of systemalteration, emergent behaviors in systems with large numbers of components and users, unstable behaviors, properties of federated systems,and other phenomena. in addition to these systems engineering issues,research must address operational engineering issues such as how errorsare corrected, how security breaches are detected and corrected, andhow backups or other robustness measures are executed. making itbetter concludes that a research program including case studies of particular systems and methodology research on architecture, techniques,and tools is needed to address the difficult technical (and nontechnical)challenges posed in realizing these systems.examples of government activities posing technical challengesoutside the commercial sectorõs normal purviewcrisis management.12 crises include natural disasters such as hurricanes,earthquakes, floods, or fires and manmade disasters such as industrialaccidents, infrastructure failures, or terrorist attacks. crisis managementencompasses crisis responseñthe actions taken immediately in the wakeof a disasterñas well as consequence management, which encompassesthe longerterm activities associated with addressing disasters past,present, and future, including planning, preparedness, mitigation, andrecovery efforts.computer science research can address the critical need for timely,authoritative, and relevant information in crisis response and management efforts. meeting this need requires (1) a robust, highperformancecommunications infrastructure; (2) the ability to quickly deploy temporary but robust infrastructure when extensive damage has occurred; (3)the ability to access and compose information and communications systems operated by government at all levels and by nongovernmental organizations, sometimes on an ad hoc basis; (4) support for effective decision making and coordination in the face of uncertainty and stress; (5)tools to help overcome language and other barriers to communicatingwith citizens; (6) enhanced means of warning populations at risk, especially by providing information targeted to local circumstances faced byindividuals or neighborhoods; and (7) means for adapting ecommerce12computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999.summary of a workshop on information technology research for crisis management, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.; and computer science and telecommunications board,national research council. 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132appendix btechnology and practices to accommodate handling the exceptions inherent in crisis situations.collection, processing and analysis, and dissemination of federal statistics.13federal statistics play a key role in a wide range of policy, business, andindividual decisions that are based on statistics about population characteristics, the economy, health, education, crime, and other factors. thesedecisions affect the allocation of federal funding to state and local governments; the apportionment of legislative districts; and adjustments towages, retirement benefits, and other spending. the necessary information is collected from a large number of respondents and at a level ofdetail sometimes significantly greater than that queried for in privatesurveys. the federal statistical agencies are characterized not only bytheir mission of collecting statistical information but also by their independence and their commitment to a set of principles and practices aimedat ensuring the quality and credibility of the statistical information theyprovide.14the tasks of protecting confidentiality and ensuring trustworthinessbecome more complex when information based on individual records ismade public and information records are linked across multiple statistical data sets. linking, or the use of information integration technologies,enables answering complex aggregate queries, a capability that can beimportant to domains ranging from crisis response to epidemiology. butlinking also enables the use of multiple databases to obtain informationthat, by policy, should not be divulged because, for example, privacyrules are violated.in addition to it confidentiality protection, the federal statisticalagencies also lead in demand for it that can effectively support userswith diverse interests and capabilities in retrieving, integrating, and interpreting information drawn from the diverse and heterogeneoussources of data that statistical agencies provide, and for technologies thatcan support the scope and complexity of data collection efforts associated with surveys and the decennial census. in addition, governmenthas a strong interest in and may lead demand for relating various kindsof data to geographical information. accordingly, the digital government program has supported work in geospatial information systems.management of nationalinterest electronic collections in the digital age.the federal government is responsible for three major libraries that play13computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.summary of a workshop on information technology research for federal statistics. national academy press, washington, d.c.14committee on national statistics, national research council. 2001. principles and practices for a federal statistical agency, second edition. margaret e. martin, miron l. straf, andconstance f. citro, editors. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b133a leadership role within the national system of libraries and in the international context as well: the library of congress, the national library ofmedicine, and the national agricultural library. cstbõs review of thelibrary of congressõs information systems strategy15 pointed to significant unsolved research challenges related to the libraryõs mission, including how to construct a massivescale, decentralized, robust collection and how to deal with preservation of òborn digitaló and digitizedmaterials whose format and contents are dynamic rather than fixed. thefederal government faces substantially similar challenges in the task ofarchiving government records, an effort led by the national archivesand records administration, which has itself turned to a computer science research team for help in planning for its longterm digital archivingand preservation needs.16 these and other governmental bodies play akey role in preserving national history and heritage, and computer science research can help with such aspects as the development of suitablesystems architectures, automatic indexing, and retrieval of informationin multiple media. that opportunity is reinforced by the multiagencysupport for the digital libraries program coordinated by nsf. relatedand equally challenging needs arise in the management of massive datasets used for scientific research in areas ranging from genome research tospace science.3. providing a sound foundation for egovernmentand other applications of informationtechnology throughout society will depend onensuring a continuing, broad federal computerscience research program.cstbõs evolving the high performance computing and communicationsinitiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure17 examined thepayoff and key lessons learned from federal investment in computingresearch. the study concluded that the sustained, broad federal investment in it research has profoundly affected the development of computer technology and ultimately led to many commercially successful15computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.lc21: a digital strategy for the library of congress. national academy press, washington,d.c.16moore, regan. 2001. òfinal report for the research project on application of distributed object computation testbed technologies to archival preservation and access requirements,ó san diego supercomputer center, san diego, calif.17computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1995.evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c. an expanded discussion of the lessons from history is provided in computer science and telecommunicationsboard, 2000, funding a revolution, national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134appendix bapplications. many it research programs not only reached their intended mission or science goals but also yielded longterm benefits realized in commercial products, companies, and industries and also in thetraining of a cadre of capable researchers. ideas were often transferred tothe commercial sector through employment or entrepreneurship. thehistory of federally funded it research shows that problems motivatedby government needs, such as networking and parallel processing, whensuitably framed in a carefully designed research program, proved tohave wide commercial application (as evidenced by the internet, distributed transaction processing, and data mining). broad goals were oftenpursued in order to infuse new thinking into the technology supplychain of vendors and technology developers for a mission agency. examples of the success of this approach include process separation forsecurity in operating systems (darpa in the 1970s and 1980s), computational science (nsf, doe, and nasa in the 1980s), and custom verylarge scale integrated circuit chip design (darpa in the 1970s and 1980s).the 1990s saw the evolution of computer science research programsto embrace a broadening set of applications and users. cstbõs 1997project examining everycitizen interfaces to the nationõs informationinfrastructure underscored the opportunity and challenge of developingtechnology that could be used easily and effectively by all.18 emphasishas also increased considerably on what cstbõs making it better termedòsocial applications.ó that study committee observed that emergingdemand for òmore and better use of it in ways that affect [peopleõs] livesmore intimately and directly than the early systems did in scientific andbackoffice business applicationsó presents òissues with which the traditional it research community has little experience. successful work onthe social applications of it will require new computer science and engineering as well as research that is coupled more extensively and effectively to other perspectivesñperspectives from other intellectual disciplines and from the people who use the end results, that is, the goods,services, and systems that are deployed.ó1918computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1997.more than screen deep. national academy press, washington, d.c.19computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.making it better. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 201.information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b1354. challenging computer scientists to addressrealworld problems in the government sphere canstimulate interactions benefiting researchers,who need access to computer and informationartifacts and realistic contexts, and governmentagencies, which gain expertise and insights thatcan inform and improve their it acquisition andmanagement and research results that can beapplied in government and elsewhere.working on government it problems offers researchers a number ofpotential benefits, an important one being access to the artifactsñcomputer systems, software, and data setsñthat are needed in experimentalcomputer science research.20 for example, addressing the challenges oflargescale systems can be facilitated by studying real examples of suchsystems found in government,21 and research depending on large, diverse information data sets can tap the wealth of public informationresources generated or held by government agencies. a governmentsetting gives researchers access to applications with a richness and texture typically lacking in the laboratory, and it diminishes the likelihoodof constraints stemming from proprietary considerations that typify workin the private sectorñironically one of the reasons that the private sectorcan benefit from research on government problems, too, since the resultswill be publicly available. in making it better, the study committee citednsfõs digital government program as contributing to the kind of researcherenduser interaction that has become increasingly important toprogress in it, and observed that the government setting also lends itselfto the recommended projectbased organization of research work.for government agencies, benefits stemming from research can extend beyond the research results themselves. cstbõs work on it modernization efforts at the department of defense, internal revenue service, social security administration, and library of congress have allpointed to the critical need for technology expertise and leadership.22while there is no substitute for inhouse information technology talent,20computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1994.academic careers for experimental computer scientists and engineers. national academy press,washington, d.c.21computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.making it better. national academy press, washington, d.c.22this situation was summarized as follows in cstbõs 2000 report on expanding it research: òthe difficulties experienced in getting these systems right show the limitations ofcurrent technology and of the skill base in industry. government agencies would save moneyand improve their productivity and service quality if there were a better understanding ofways to reliably and efficiently design, operate, maintain, and upgrade largescale systemsand social applications of it. research based on government systems would undoubtedlyimprove the knowledge base for privatesector systems as well.ó (computer science andtelecommunications board, national research council, 2000, making it better, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., p. 203.)information technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136appendix bthose studies have all suggested interactions with researchers as a meansof tapping additional technical expertise, especially topcaliber researchtalent that is unlikely to be obtainable inhouse or through the usualcontract mechanisms. thus, egovernment provides an unusual opportunity for mutual benefit.conclusionthis letter provides an overview of key issues and illustrations ofhow computer science research can contribute to egovernment initiatives. technical problems arising from government operations have thepotential to inspire important computer science research, and a wellmanaged research program focused on these problems can have an impact not only in helping to achieve egovernment capabilities, but alsomuch more broadly. the broadening of the computer science researchagenda to encompass user needs and social computing issues argues forresearcher involvement with the sorts of realworld problems found ingovernment. in bringing together computer scientists and governmentagencies to tackle problems of mutual interest, the nsf digital government program has begun to demonstrate that potential.looking forward, a key question is how to leverage the researchmanagement expertise of organizations such as the nsf, as well as mission agency research organizations (such as darpa and nasa ames)ñand the results of the research they supportñto meet egovernmentrequirements. making it better noted particularly that the leadershiprole provided by the nsf is essential for preserving the emphasis onlongterm research and impact that is needed to engage top computerscientists and meet future needs. government agencies, like businesses,have real operating needs that often demand shortterm fixes, and theseare not generally an appropriate target for governmentfunded research.such problems, addressed in typical systems integration projects inwhich the problems and risks are better understood and managed, differcritically from broader, deeper challenges that can be addressed mosteffectively through collaboration with computer science researchers.needs of an unprecedented character are most effectively addressedthrough programs that are carefully managed to engage computer science researchers in advancing the state of the art and participating in thedevelopment of solutions that are both realistic and appropriately aggressive with respect to the likely trajectory of emerging technologies.moving rapidly to address these unprecedented needs requires astrategy that incorporates not only the development of requirements andthe invention of new technologies but also technology transition, organizational culture, and acquisition processes. carefully designed researchefforts can often anticipate these process issues and develop new concepts that are more likely to succeed as they are brought into government systems through acquisition, development and integration, deployinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b137ment, and evolution. finally, finding the right mechanisms fortransitioning technology from research to government it systems is animportant practical challenge that must be addressed to reap the fullbenefits of research. the committeeõs final report will expand on theseresearch management issues (and the other points discussed in this letter) in greater detail.sincerely,william l. scherlis, chaircommittee on computing and communications research to enablebetter use of information technology in governmentinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138appendixcworkshops convened for this project:agendas and participantsworkshop on information technologyfor crisis managementagendatuesday, december 1, 19987:30 a.m.registration and continental breakfast8:30welcome and overviewwilliam scherlis8:45keynote 1g. clay hollister, chief information officer, federalemergency management agency9:15breakinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c1399:45panel 1: case studies on crisis managementpanelists:nuclear/industrial scenario: albert guberearthquake: david kehrleinflash flood: eve gruntfesthurricane: william millermoderator: eve gruntfest12:00 p.m.lunch12:30panel 2: analysis of information technology issuesin the case studiespanelists: avagene moore, thomas oõkeefe, jack harrald,james morentzmoderator: david kehrlein1:30panel 3: information technology contextpanelists:information management: barry leinerdatabases: david maiercomputing/storage: paul h. smithcommunications/wireless: philip karnform factors and wearables: daniel siewiorekmoderator: david dewitt3:00task for discussion sessionswilliam scherlis3:15break3:45focused breakout sessionsinformation as needed (information integration,information management/retrieval, digital libraries,geographical and spatial information, . . .)session leaders: bruce croft and david dewittparticipants: paul bryant, elliot christian, gerraldgalloway, valerie gregg, david gunning, sally howe,david jensen, david kehrlein, david maier, robertneches, edie rasmusen, tom usselman, lou walter,robert winokurinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140appendix cinformation for people (information services at theuser level, humancomputer interaction,visualization, collaboration, wearable computing,sensors and robots, . . .)session leaders: susan dumais and william eddyparticipants: eileen collins, mark deputy, wayne gray,eve gruntfest, ronald larsen, avagene moore, thomasoõkeefe, jean scholtz, daniel siewiorekcommerce and transactions (electronic commerce,transactions, security, privacy, . . .)session leaders: cliff neuman and michael nelsonparticipants: peter bloniarz, larry brandt, melvynciment, stephen crocker, cathryn dippo, clay hollister,frank jaffe, angienetta johnson, michael swetnam,douglas tygarsystems and network infrastructure; modeling andsimulation (software composition and assurance,middleware and infrastructure services, systemintegration and architectural issues, . . .)session leaders: karen sollins and sallie kellermcnultyparticipants: richard beckman, albert guber, philipkarn, barry leiner, joe lombardo, cathy mcdonald,avagene moore, james morentz, paul smith, carl staton,john toole6:00reception7:00 p.m.demonstrationsemergency information infrastructure partnershipvirtual forum, avagene mooretransportation simulation, richard beckmanwednesday, december 2, 19987:30 a.m.continental breakfast8:30focused breakout sessions (continued)10:15breakinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c14110:30keynote 2henry kelly, white house office of science andtechnology policy11:00 a.m.panel 4: principal information technology research12:30 p.m.opportunitiespanelists: bruce croft, sally kellermcnulty, cliffneuman, susan dumaismoderator: william scherlis12:30lunch1:30panel 5: achieving an impact in the crisismanagement communitypanelists: ronald larsen, earnest paylor, albert gubermoderator: bruce croft2:30panel 6: lessons for digital governmentpanelists: john toole, bruce mcconnell, michael nelsonmoderator: michael nelson3:30concluding remarkswilliam scherlis4:00 p.m.adjournparticipantsrichard beckman, los alamos national laboratorypeter bloniarz, center for technology and government, stateuniversity of new yorklawrence brandt, national science foundationpaul bryant, federal emergency management agencyelliot christian, u.s. geological surveymelvyn ciment, potomac institute for policy studieseileen collins, national science foundationinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142appendix cstephen crocker, steve crocker associatesw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstmark deputy, montgomery county urban search and rescuedavid dewitt, university of wisconsin at madisoncathryn s. dippo, bureau of labor statisticssusan dumais, microsoft researchwilliam eddy, carnegie mellon universitygerrald galloway, international joint commissionwayne gray, george mason universityvalerie gregg, national science foundationeve gruntfest, university of colorado at colorado springsalbert guber, department of energy/bechtel nevadadavid gunning, defense advanced research projects agencyjohn r. harrald, george washington universityg. clay hollister, federal emergency management agencysally e. howe, national coordination office for computing,information, and communicationskay howell, national coordination office for computing, information,and communicationsfrank jaffe, bank of bostondavid jensen, university of massachusetts at amherstangienetta johnson, national aeronautics and space administrationphilip karn, qualcomm inc.david kehrlein, state of california, governorõs office of emergencyservicessallie kellermcnulty, los alamos national laboratoryhenry kelly, office of science and technology policyronald larsen, defense advanced research projects agencybarry leiner, corporation for national research initiativesjoe lombardo, applied physics laboratory, johns hopkins universitydavid maier, oregon graduate institutebruce mcconnell, office of management and budgetcathy mcdonald, national coordination office for computing,information, and communicationswilliam miller, u.s. geological surveyavagene moore, av/pm inc., lawrenceburg, tennesseejames morentz, essential technologies inc.michael r. nelson, ibmclifford neuman, university of southern californiathomas oõkeefe, california department of forestry and fire protectionearnest paylor, national aeronautics and space administrationedie rasmusen, university of pittsburghwilliam scherlis, carnegie mellon universityinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c143jean scholtz, defense advanced research projects agencydaniel siewiorek, carnegie mellon universitypaul smith, department of energykaren sollins, massachusetts institute of technologycarl p. staton, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationmichael sullivan, bbn corporationmichael swetnam, potomac institute for policy studiesjohn c. toole, national center for supercomputing applications,university of illinois at urbanachampaignwilliam turnbull, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationdouglas tygar, university of california at berkeleytom usselman, national research councillouis walter, national aeronautics and space administrationrobert s. winokur, national oceanic and atmospheric administrationrich wojcik, applied physics laboratory, johns hopkins universityworkshop on information technology research forfederal statisticsagendatuesday, february 9, 19997:30 a.m.registration and continental breakfast8:30welcomewilliam scherlis8:45keynote addressthomas kalil, national economic council9:15panel 1: case studiespanelists:national health and nutrition examinationsurveys: lewis bermanamerican travel study: heather contrinocurrent population survey: cathryn dipponational crime victimization survey: denise lewismoderator: sallie kellermcnultyinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144appendix c11:00panel 2: information technology trends andopportunitiespanelists: gary marchionini, tom mitchell, ravi s.sandhu, william cody, clifford neuman (moderator)12:30 p.m.lunch1:30panel 3: study design, data collection, and dataprocessingpanelists: martin appel, judith lessler, james smith,william eddy (moderator)3:00break3:305:00panel 4: creating statistical information productspanelists: michael levi, bruce petrie, diane schiano,susan dumais (moderator)6:007:30reception5:308:00 p.m.exhibitstiger mapping system, mable/geocorr; u.s.gazetteer; census ferret; cdc wonder; nationalcenter for health statistics mortality mappingexhibit, display, and demo; westat blaise;consumer price index capi; census capi; fedstatswednesday, february 10, 19997:30 a.m.continental breakfast8:30keynote addresskatherine wallman, office of management and budget9:00panel 5: the consumerõs perspectivepanelists: virginia dewolf, latanya sweeney, pauloverberg, michael nelson (moderator)10:30break10:45breakout sessions1.data management, survey technique, process,systems architecture, metadata, interoperationinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c1452.data mining, inference, privacy, aggregation andsharing, metadata, security3.humancomputer interaction, privacy,dissemination, literacy11:45report back from breakout sessions12:15 p.m.adjournparticipantsrichard allen, u.s. department of agriculture, national agriculturalstatistics servicemartin appel, census bureaudon bay, u.s. department of agriculture, national agriculturalstatistics servicelinda bean, national center for health statisticslewis berman, national center for health statisticstora bickson, rand corporationlarry brandt, national science foundationcavan capps, census bureaulynda carlson, energy information agencydan carr, george mason universitywilliam cody, ibm almadeneileen collins, national science foundationfrederick conrad, bureau of labor statisticsheather contrino, bureau of transportation statisticsrobert creecy, census bureauw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstmarshall deberry, bureau of justice statisticsdavid dewitt, university of wisconsin at madisonvirginia dewolf, office of management and budgetcathryn dippo, bureau of labor statisticssusan dumais, microsoft researchwilliam eddy, carnegie mellon universityjean fox, bureau of labor statisticsjohn gawalt, national science foundationjim gentle, george mason universityvalerie gregg, national science foundationjane griffith, congressional research serviceeve gruntfest, university of colorado at colorado springscarol house, u.s. department of agriculture, national agriculturalstatistics serviceinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146appendix csally howe, national coordination office for computing, information,and communicationsterrence ireland, consultantthomas kalil, national economic councildavid kehrlein, governorõs office of emergency services, state ofcaliforniasallie kellermcnulty, los alamos national laboratorynancy kirkendall, office of management and budgetbill larocque, national center for education statistics, department ofeducationfrank lee, census bureaujudith lessler, research triangle institutemichael levi, bureau of labor statisticsrobyn levine, congressional research servicedenise lewis, census bureaugary marchionini, university of north carolinapatrice mcdermott, omb watchtom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitysally morton, rand corporationkrish namboodiri, national coordination office for computing,information, and communicationsmichael r. nelson, ibmclifford neuman, information sciences institute, university of southerncaliforniajanet norwood, former commissioner, u.s. bureau of labor statisticssarah nussar, iowa state universityleon osterweil, university of massachusetts at amherstpaul overberg, usa todaybruce petrie, statistics canadalinda pickle, national center for health statisticsjoseph rose, department of educationcharlie rothwell, national center for health statisticsalan saalfeld, ohio state universityravi sandhu, george mason universitywilliam l. scherlis, carnegie mellon universitydiane schiano, interval researchpaula schneider, census bureaujames smith, westatkaren sollins, national science foundationedward j. spar, council of professional associations on federalstatisticspeter stegehuis, westatinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c147latanya sweeney, carnegie mellon universityrachel taylor, census bureaunancy van derveer, census bureaukatherine wallman, office of management and budgetlinda washington, national center for health statisticsandrew white, national research councilinformation technology research, innovation, and egovernmentcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.