detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10633beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry andchemical engineering238 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309384636 | doi 10.17226/10633committee on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century; board onchemical sciences and technology; division on earth and life studies; nationalresearch councilbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centuryboard on chemical sciences and technologythe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.edubeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press ¥ 500 fifth street, n.w. ¥ washington, d.c. 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of thecommittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.support for this study was provided by the national research council, the u.s. department ofenergy (deat01ee41424, bes defg0200er15040, and deat0103er15386), the nationalscience foundation (cts9908440), the defense advanced research projects agency (dodmda97201m0001), the u.s. environmental protection agency (r82823301), the americanchemical society, the american institute of chemical engineers, the camille and henry dryfus foundation (sg00093), the national institute of standards and technology (na13410121070 and43nanb010995), the national institutes of health (ncin01od42139 and nigmsn01od42139), and the chemical industry.all opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided supportfor this project.international standard book number: 0309084776library of congress control number: 2003100913additional copies of this report are available from:the national academies press500 fifth st., nwbox 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.educopyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americabeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr.bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. thenational academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william a. wulf arechairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcommittee on challenges for the chemical sciencesin the 21st centuryronald breslow, columbia university, cochairmatthew v. tirrell, university of california, santa barbara, cochairjacqueline k. barton, california institute of technologymark a. barteau, university of delawarecarolyn r. bertozzi, university of california, berkeleyrobert a. brown, massachusetts institute of technologyalice p. gast,1 massachusetts institute of technologyignacio e. grossmann, carnegie mellon universityjames m. meyer,2 e. i. du pont de nemours & co.royce w. murray, university of north carolina, chapel hillpaul j. reider, amgen, inc.william r. roush, university of michiganmichael l. shuler, cornell universityjeffrey j. siirola, eastman chemical companygeorge m. whitesides, harvard universitypeter g. wolynes, university of california, san diegorichard n. zare, stanford universitystaffjennifer j. jackiw, program officerchristopher k. murphy, program officerruth mcdiarmid, program officersybil a. paige, administrative associatedouglas j. raber, senior scholardavid c. rasmussen, program assistantdorothy zolandz, director, bcst1committee member until july 2001; subsequently bcst liaison to the committee in her role as cochair of the board on chemical sciences and technology.2committee membership ended march 2002, following meyerõs retirement from dupont.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vboard on chemical sciences and technologyalice p. gast, massachusetts institute of technology, cochairwilliam klemperer, harvard university, cochairarthur i. bienenstock, stanford universitya. welford castleman, jr., the pennsylvania state universityandrea w. chow, caliper technologies corp.thomas m. connelly, jr., e. i. du pont de nemours & co.jean de graeve, institut de pathologie, li‘ge, belgiumjoseph m. desimone, university of north carolina, chapel hill, and north carolina state universitycatherine fenselau, university of marylandjon franklin, university of marylandmary l. good, university of arkansas, little rockrichard m. gross, dow chemical companynancy b. jackson, sandia national laboratoriessangtae kim, eli lilly and companythomas j. meyer, los alamos national laboratorypaul j. reider, amgen, inc.arnold f. stancell, georgia institute of technologyrobert m. sussman, latham & watkinsjohn c. tully, yale universitychihuey wong, scripps research institutestaffjennifer j. jackiw, program officerchristopher k. murphy, program officerruth mcdiarmid, program officersybil a. paige, administrative associatedouglas j. raber, senior scholardavid c. rasmussen, program assistantdorothy zolandz, directorbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefaceat the start of this project, the committee solicited input from the chemicalsciences community. the request for input was sent via email to a large numberof scientists and engineers, and a general request for information appeared inchemical & engineering news.1 the committee received many valuable ideas inresponse to these requests. additional input from the broader community wasobtained as the committee wrote this report, when individual members of thecommittee consulted with their colleagues to obtain specific and detailed technical input. the committee is pleased to acknowledge all these contributors; a listing of their names and affiliations is presented in appendix c.this study was conducted under the auspices of the national researchcouncilõs board on chemical sciences and technology with assistance providedby its staff. the committee also acknowledges this support.ronald breslow and matthew v. tirrellcochairscommittee on challenges for the chemicalsciences in the 21st century1òyour ideas, please!ó madeleine jacobs, editorinchief, chemical & engineering news, 78(14),april 3, 2000.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the nrcõs report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that thereport meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsivenessto the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:richard c. alkire, university of illinois, urbanachampaignjohn l. anderson, carnegie mellon universityjohn a. armstrong, ibmedwin a. chandross, bell laboratoriespablo g. debenedetti, princeton universitylouis c. glasgow, dupont companylouis l. hegedus, atofina chemicals, incorporatednancy b. jackson, sandia national laboratorieswilliam klemperer, harvard universitytobin j. marks, northwestern universitykathlyn a. parker, suny, stony brookmichael p. ramage, exxonmobil (retired)martin saunders, yale universityrandy schekman, university of california, berkeleygabor a. somorjai, university of california, berkeleybeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xacknowledgment of reviewerskarl k. turekian, yale universitypaul s. weiss, the pennsylvania state universityalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. thereview of this report was overseen by pierre c. hohenberg, yale university, andr. stephen berry, university of chicago. appointed by the national researchcouncil, they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures andthat all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the finalcontent of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xicontentsexecutive summary1grand challenges, 11introduction112the structures and cultures of thedisciplines: the common chemical bond163synthesis and manufacturing: creatingand exploiting new substances andnew transformations22goals, 23progress to date, 25challenges and opportunities for the future, 29why all this is important, 404chemical and physical transformationsof matter41goals, 41progress to date, 42challenges and opportunities for the future, 52why all this is important, 545isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures55goals, 55progress to date, 57challenges and opportunities for the future, 68why all this is important, 70beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontents6chemical theory and computer modeling:from computational chemistry to processsystems engineering71goals, 75progress to date, 81challenges and opportunities for the future, 89why all this is important, 947the interface with biology and medicine95goals, 96progress to date, 105challenges and opportunities for the future, 111why all this is important, 1218materials by design123goals, 124progress to date, 126challenges and opportunities for the future, 138why all this is important, 1469atmospheric and environmental chemistry148goals, 149progress to date, 149challenges and opportunities for the future, 155why all this is important, 15910energy: providing for the future160goals, 161progress to date, 162challenges and opportunities for the future, 169why all this is important, 17011national and personal security171goals, 172progress to date, 172challenges and opportunities for the future, 174why all this is important, 17812how to achieve these goals180chemists and chemical engineers, 181educators, 184beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxiiithe media, 184the general public, 185government and private foundations, 186industry, 189grand challenges, 190appendixesabiographical sketches of steering committee members, 197bstatement of task, 202ccontributors, 203index209who of us would not be glad to lift the veil behind which thefuture lies hidden; to cast a glance at the next advances of ourscience and at the secrets of its development during future centuries?david hilbert, 1900, parisbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarythis report continues the tradition of the last halfcenturyñcarrying out aperiodic examination of the status of the chemical sciences. where are we, howdid we arrive at the current state, and where are we headed? these studies havebeen conducted, at the request of federal agencies, by committees of the nationalresearch council and its board on chemical sciences and technology (bcst).the reports that result from these efforts can be used by students and other researchers, agency officials, and policy makers in setting their own agendas andadvancing the case for the field. the earlier reviews in the chemical scienceswere chemistry: opportunities and needs1 (the westheimer report), opportunities in chemistry2 (the pimentel report), and frontiers in chemical engineering:research needs and opportunities3 (the amundson report).this report, which constitutes the overview for the committeeõs study ofchallenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century, departs from the earlier practice of treating chemistry and chemical engineering as separate disciplines. here, research, discovery, and invention across the entire spectrum ofactivities in the chemical sciencesñfrom fundamental, molecularlevel chemistry to largescale chemical processing technologyñare brought together. thisreflects the way the field has evolved, the synergy and strong couplings in our1chemistry: opportunities and needs, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1965.2opportunities in chemistry, national research council, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1985.3frontiers in chemical engineering: research needs and opportunities, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1988.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2beyond the molecular frontieruniversities between research and education in chemistry and chemical engineering, and the way chemists and chemical engineers work together in industry. thecommittee uses the term chemical sciences, or occasionally chemical sciencesand engineering, to represent the field in which chemists and chemical engineerswork. the disciplinary structures of chemistry and chemical engineering are discussed in chapter 2 to explore their implications for future developments. weconclude that science has become increasingly interdisciplinary, and it is criticalthat the disciplinary structures within our fields not hinder the future growth ofchemical sciences into new areas. interdisciplinary refers here both to the strongintegration from the molecular level to the process technology level within thechemical sciences and to the intersections of the chemical sciences with all thenatural sciences, agriculture, environmental science, and medicine, as well aswith materials science, physics, information technology, and many other fields ofengineering.chapters 3 to 11 of the report then take up particular areas of fundamental orapplied chemistry and chemical engineering. each chapter starts with a specificlist of some important challenges for the future. then the chapter has a section ongoals of the field, a section on progress to date to meet those goals, a section onchallenges and opportunities for the future, and finally a section on why this isimportant.chapter 3 examines synthesis and manufacturing, with an emphasis on theunique aspect of the chemical sciences. a key goal of the chemical sciences is thecreation of molecules and materials that do not exist in nature. just as astronomers endeavor to investigate and understand the inner secrets of the stars, chemists and chemical engineers seek to unravel the fundamental principles that govern the properties and reactions of atoms and molecules. but in the chemicalsciences it is also common to extend the goal beyond what does exist to thesynthesis and study of what could exist, and to the manufacturing of new chemical products. synthetic chemistry combines both aspects. the combined effortsof chemists and chemical engineers can be used to invent new ways to makemolecules and new ways to manufacture themñwhether these molecules providenew substances or just a new source of known substances. the ability to designand synthesize new substances offers the possibility of improvement on what isfound in natureñwith both accomplishments and future opportunities that rangefrom lifesaving drugs to materials that can help to make our lives safer and morepleasant. we conclude that synthesis and process engineering play a central rolein our field. synthesis is the key to creating the substances we study and workwith; larger scale chemical processing is the only way most chemical technologies can be developed and realized.chapter 4 discusses chemical and physical transformations of matter, boththose that occur naturally in the environment and in living organisms and thosethat are invented by chemical scientists. the study of transformations spans therange from efforts to gain a fundamental understanding of naturally occurringbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3catalysts such as enzymes to the design of new catalysts for industrial processes.a century ago, chemists had only begun to interpret chemical transformations interms of atoms, molecules, and chemical bondsñand now they are seeking waysto observe the details of reaction for an individual molecule. dramatic changeshave taken place in the chemical and physical processing of materials, whereproduct properties and flow characteristics can be understood on the basis ofintermolecular forces. this fundamental understanding can be used to designmanufacturing methods with unprecedented reliability. in both synthesis andmanufacturing, biochemical methods are increasingly important.the time scales for which measurements are made also have undergone aphenomenal evolution. a hundred years ago, it was difficult to measure eventstaking place at a time scale of less than a second, and by the middle of the 20thcentury, the limit had changed by only a few orders of magnitude. but as described in chapter 4, advances in the chemical sciences have moved the frontierto the investigation of processes that take place on the femtosecond (10ð15 s) timescaleñthe time scale at which individual chemical bonds are made and broken.we conclude that the opportunities for detailed understanding of chemical reaction pathways and of the mechanisms of physical transformations represent anexciting challenge for the future that will add to the fundamental science of ourfield and to its ability to manipulate reactions and processes for practical applications.the broad topic of analysis is treated in chapter 5, which covers isolating,identifying, imaging, and measuring chemical substances and determining theirmolecular structures. the changes in capability and methodology are astounding.a century ago, jacobus vanõt hoff and emil fischer received the first two nobelprizes in chemistry, respectively, for proposing the theory of tetrahedral carbonand for synthesizing all eight stereoisomers of glucose to corroborate that theory.these òsimpleó determinations of chemical structure required years of work. bythe mid20th century, spectroscopic techniques had made it possible to investigate far more complicated structures, and to detect them at much lower levels.but measurements at the parts per million level were still a challenge, and structure determination was no easy taskñeven when nuclear magnetic resonancebecame available in the 1960s. chemical instrumentation has changed the frontiers for measurement in astonishing ways since then. the speed of measurements has been reduced from hours to small fractions of a second, and measurements can be repeated quickly to provide high throughput for multiple samples.the control of chemical processes in real time is drastically improved with newmeasurement techniques. routine analysis can be done on samples in the range ofmilligrams to micrograms rather than on samples of a gram or more. the size ofmolecules that can be analyzed in detail has grown from organic molecules withmolecular weights of several hundred daltons to proteins and nucleic acid polymers that are millions of times larger. and the sensitivity of modern instrumentshas moved the frontiers of detection from the level of one mole toward that of abeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4beyond the molecular frontiersingle molecule, an astonishing change of more than 20 orders of magnitude. weconclude that the area of analysis and structure determination presents importantand exciting needs and opportunities, challenges such as detecting toxic or explosive materials in the environment, detecting land mines, and making chemicalmanufacturing processes more efficient and environmentally friendly via real timecontrol.chapter 6 deals with computation and theory, from the most fundamentalaspects to the role that this subject plays in manufacturing. the computer revolution has made it possible to approach a number of important goals: predicting theproperties of unknown substances, predicting the pathways of chemical and physical processes, and designing optimal processes for manufacturing useful substances. however, these goals have not yet been fully achieved. when they havebeen, and the challenges in this field are met, we can expect to be able to createand manufacture new substances that have drastically shortened developmenttimes, thus bypassing substantial amounts of empirical experimental work andoptimally meeting our needs in areas such as medicine and advanced materials.we conclude that this area of research has tremendous promise and importance,and that the opportunities should be pursued vigorously.chapter 7 describes the interface of chemistry with biology and medicine,ranging from the basic understanding of the molecular processes of biology,through the contributions of chemistry in modern agriculture, to the importantrole that medicinal chemistry plays in our health. much, indeed most, of theprogress in modern biology has relied on discovering the chemistry that underliesbiological phenomena. among the myriad examples are discovery of the molecular structure of dna and sequencing the human genome. however, we still faceenormous tasks in our efforts to fully understand the chemistry of biological processes. modern medicinal chemists have invented, and chemical engineers havelearned how to manufacture, the medicines that have let us conquer many diseases, but there is still much to do. new technologies such as microarrays forgene sorting are driving biochemical sciences, while others such as engineeringof tissue regeneration are arising from advances at the biochemical frontier. weconclude that this area is extremely important in both the opportunities for fundamental discovery and the challenges and opportunities for curing human diseases.chapter 8 deals with the design and manufacture of materials, an area inwhich chemistry and chemical engineering play the central role; there is considerable overlap with the field of materials science, which is built on chemistry,chemical engineering, electrical engineering, and physics. we are familiar withsuch advances as modern plastics, paints, fabrics, and electronic materials, butgreat opportunities and challenges for the future still remain. as one example,materials with useful superconducting properties will have a huge impact on ourlives if they can be developed in a way that permits practical transmission of largeelectrical currents over long distances without resistive loss. we conclude thatthe opportunities for the invention and production of novel materials with excitbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5ing new properties make this one of the areas of greatest opportunity for futureresearch and development.chapter 9 addresses atmospheric and environmental chemistry, where thereare both fundamental and practical challenges. in the fundamental area, chemists,chemical engineers, and other environmental scientists need to explore the detailed chemistry that occurs on our planetñin the atmosphere, the oceans, thelakes and rivers, and in the earth itself. this is part of the general drive to understand the world we live in. however, there are great practical consequences aswell. we need to learn how we can live in a world with an increasing populationthat needs and desires many of the products of modern technology, while we atthe same time ensure that we do not damage the environment. the goal is asystem that is fully sustainableñthat will safely provide the energy, chemicals,materials, and manufactured products needed by society while neither irreversibly depleting the earthõs scarce raw materials nor contaminating the earth withunhealthy byproducts. we conclude that the basic understanding that will resultfrom meeting the challenges in this area is absolutely critical for the future of theinhabitants of the earth, human and otherwise.chapter 10 deals with energy, including alternative sources and possible approaches to solving problems that have serious environmental consequences. inour quest for suitable sources of energy, appropriate ways to transfer it, and efficient ways to use it, we need to develop an approach that is sustainable and willnot exhaust our resources or pollute our environment. we conclude that the practical challenges in dealing with energy needs are enormously important, and thatwe will need significant new developments in basic science in order to meet thosechallenges.chapter 11 addresses national and personal security, both the role that thechemical sciences can play in dealing with terrorist threats and the other ways inwhich national and personal security depend on current and future advances.there are serious challenges in this area. how can we detect chemical or biological attacks? how can we deal with them when they are detected? how can weprovide improved materials and weapons to our armed forces, and to our civilianpolice? what can we contribute to increase the security of the average citizen?we conclude that this is an area where the chemical sciences are particularlycentral and relevant.the final chapter of this report, chapter 12, provides our view of some of thesteps that might be taken to enhance the effectiveness of chemistry and chemicalengineering in contributing to human welfare and understanding. we concludethat chemists and chemical engineers need to be prepared to work increasingly inmultidisciplinary teams, and that this will change the way we educate futurechemical scientists. we conclude that chemists and chemical engineers must putmuch more effort into effective communication with the media, and with studentsfrom kindergarten up. we also urge that our profession make much more effort toattract women and minorities.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6beyond the molecular frontierwe urge that educators revise undergraduate and high school courses inchemistry to make them broadly appealing to students with a variety of interests,and that teachers in grades k12 invite chemical scientists to speak with theirstudents about the challenges and opportunities waiting for those who choose tobecome scientists. we also urge that students get into research as soon as possible, so they can learn what it is that scientists find so exciting.we urge that we cooperate with the media in explaining the achievementsand goals of the chemical sciences, and that the general public encourage theirsons and daughters to consider careers in science to help solve the challenges wehave identified. we urge government agencies and private foundations to supportthe fundamental research that underlies applied science, in addition to supportingthe applied science itself. we urge that chemically based industry also supportuniversity research and education, and continue progress in green chemistry,with its important environmental benefits.we conclude that the chemical sciences and engineering have not only agreat past but an even more exciting future, but that we will need to communicatemore effectively with our fellow citizens, and will need their support so that wecan indeed make the contributions that we see as possible.the project on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century willproduce a series of reports in addition to this overview. these reports, each written by an independent committee and using input obtained at a correspondingworkshop, also avoid the traditional disciplinary constraints of chemistry andchemical engineering. instead, each workshop is organized around a specific areaof societal needñmaterials and manufacturing, energy and transportation, national security and homeland defense, health and medicine, computing and communications, and environment. these topics were also discussed in the earlierbcst report, critical technologies: the role of chemistry and chemical engineering.4 each report addresses the same set of questions in relation to the particular area of its focus:¥discovery: what were the major discoveries and advances in the chemicalsciences during the last several decades?¥interfaces: what were the major discoveriesñand what are the challengesñat the interfaces between the chemical sciences and such areas as biology, environmental science, electronics, medicine, and physics?¥challenges: what grand challenges exist in the chemical sciences today,and how will advances at the interfaces create new challenges in the core disciplines?¥infrastructure: what changes in structure and support will be required topermit future advances in the chemical sciences?4critical technologies: the role of chemistry and chemical engineering, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1992.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7we believe our report and its sequels will be of value to those who want toknowñand critically evaluateñthe status and future goals of the many importantsectors of the chemical sciences. what are they aiming to do, and how close arethey to some of the goals? how should the chemical sciences be measured, as afield, against some of these goals? the chemical sciences must remain ambitiousif the united states is to maintain its scientific and technological leadership, andif we are to make the maximum possible contribution to human welfare. the fieldwill need to maintain its health and vigor if it is to attract an appropriate share ofthe very best minds. it will be necessary for chemists and chemical engineers toproduce major new discoveries, revolutionary new technologies, and importantnew additions to the quality of life for our society. the chemical sciences andengineering must also stand ready to play a major role in assisting our nation andshaping its policies to benefit all of our population, and indeed all of the world.the report closes with our vision of some grand challenges for the chemical sciences. these are intended not to constrain the activity of research but tochallenge the creativity of practicing scientists and engineers, to stimulate youngpeople to join them in meeting these challenges, and to engender the enthusiasmof decision makers that is needed to support continued efforts of chemists andchemical engineers in their work on the molecular frontier.in this report we have tried to show, illustrating our arguments with a seriesof challenges, that the fields of chemistry and chemical engineering are extraordinarily broad in their range, and that they include many important areas in whichopportunities for research abound. we have purposely not tried to prioritize theseareas and challenges. is it more important to fight terrorism, to cure cancer, or toprevent the degradation of our environment? is it more important to understandthe chemistry of life or to refine theory to the point at which we can predict theexact substance that should be created for some desired property and then predicthow to manufacture it? these all are critical to our future, and all are challengesfor the chemical sciences. thus we hope that the great range of opportunities inthe chemical sciences will resonate with the interests of many young people making career choices, and with a society that needs to encourage their choices.the committee on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centuryhas attempted to view the roles and missions of chemistry and chemical engineering as broadly as possible. as we continue to push forward the frontiers of science, we will increasingly do so by working with our colleagues in other disciplines. in this way, the chemical sciences will be able to contribute in remarkableways to an improved future for our country, for humanity, and for our planet. theastonishing developments in science and engineering during the 20th century havemade it possible to dream of new goals that might previously been consideredunthinkable. a few of these are listed here as grand challenges, building on thechallenges that are listed at the head of each chapter of the report. in some instances they may be realistic immediate goals, while in other cases they may beachieved in a more distant future. we encourage our colleagues in chemistry andbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8beyond the molecular frontierchemical engineering to give serious thought to these challenges, and to producethe advances in fundamental and applied research that will so greatly enhancescientific understanding and human welfare.some grand challenges for chemists andchemical engineers¥learn how to synthesize and manufacture any new substancethat can have scientific or practical interest, using compactsynthetic schemes and processes with high selectivity for thedesired product, and with low energy consumption and benignenvironmental effects in the process. this goal will require continuing progress in the development of new methods for synthesisand manufacturing. human welfare will continue to benefit from newsubstances, including medicines and specialized materials.¥develop new materials and measurement devices that will protect citizens against terrorism, accident, crime, and disease, inpart by detecting and identifying dangerous substances andorganisms using methods with high sensitivity and selectivity.rapid and reliable detection of dangerous disease organisms, highlytoxic chemicals, and concealed explosives (including those in landmines), is the first important step in responding to threats. the nextimportant step for chemists and chemical engineers will be to devisemethods to deal with such threats, including those involved in terrorist or military attacks.¥understand and control how molecules reactñover all timescales and the full range of molecular size. this fundamentalunderstanding will let us design new reactions and manufacturingprocesses and will provide fundamental insights into the science ofchemistry. major advances that will contribute to this goal over thenext decades include: the predictive computational modeling ofmolecular motions using largescale parallel processing arrays; theability to investigate and manipulate individual molecules, not justcollections of molecules; and the generation of ultrafast electronpulses and optical pulses down to xray wavelengths, to observemolecular structures during chemical reactions. this is but one areain which increased understanding will lead to a greater ability to improve the practical applications of the chemical sciences.¥learn how to design and produce new substances, materials,and molecular devices with properties that can be predicted,tailored, and tuned before production. this ability would greatlystreamline the search for new useful substances, avoiding considerbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9able trial and error. recent and projected advances in chemicaltheory and computation should make this possible.¥understand the chemistry of living systems in detail. understand how various different proteins and nucleic acids and smallbiological molecules assemble into chemically defined functionalcomplexes, and indeed understand all the complex chemicalinteractions among the various components of living cells.explaining the processes of life in chemical terms is one of thegreat challenges continuing into the future, and the chemistrybehind thought and memory is an especially exciting challenge.this is an area in which great progress has been made, asbiology increasingly becomes a chemical science (and chemistry increasingly becomes a life science).¥develop medicines and therapies that can cure currentlyuntreatable diseases. in spite of the great progress that hasbeen made in the invention of new medicines by chemists, andnew materials and delivery vehicles by engineers, the challenges in these directions are vast. new medicines to deal withcancer, viral diseases, and many other maladies will enormouslyimprove human welfare.¥develop selfassembly as a useful approach to the synthesis and manufacturing of complex systems and materials.mixtures of properly designed chemical components can organize themselves into complex assemblies with structures fromthe nanoscale to the macroscale, in a fashion similar to biologicalassembly. taking this methodology from the laboratory experimentation to the practical manufacturing arena could revolutionize chemical processing.¥understand the complex chemistry of the earth, includingland, sea, atmosphere, and biosphere, so we can maintainits livability. this is a fundamental challenge to the natural science of our field, and it is key to helping design policies that willprevent environmental degradation. in addition, chemical scientists will use this understanding to create new methods to dealwith pollution and other threats to our earth.¥develop unlimited and inexpensive energy (with new waysof energy generation, storage, and transportation) to pavethe way to a truly sustainable future. our current ways ofgenerating and using energy consume limited resources andproduce environmental problems. there are very exciting proscontinuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10beyond the molecular frontierpects for fuel cells to permit an economy based on hydrogen (generated in various ways) rather than fossil fuels,ways to harness the energy of sunlight for our use, andsuperconductors that will permit efficient energy distribution.¥design and develop selfoptimizing chemical systems.building on the approach that allows optimization of biological systems through evolution, this would let a systemproduce the optimal new substance, and produce it as asingle product rather than as a mixture from which thedesired component must be isolated and identified. selfoptimizing systems would allow visionary chemical scientists to use this approach to make new medicines, catalysts,and other important chemical productsñin part by combining new approaches to informatics with rapid experimentalscreening methods.¥revolutionize the design of chemical processes tomake them safe, compact, flexible, energy efficient,environmentally benign, and conducive to the rapidcommercialization of new products. this points to themajor goal of modern chemical engineering, in which manynew factors are important for an optimal manufacturing process. great progress has been made in developing greenchemistry, but more is needed as we continue to meethuman needs with the production of important chemicalproducts using processes that are completely harmless tothe earth and its inhabitants.¥communicate effectively to the general public the contributions that chemistry and chemical engineeringmake to society. chemists and chemical engineers needto learn how to communicate effectively to the generalpublic ñ both through the media and directly ñ to explainwhat chemists and chemical engineers do and to conveythe goals and achievements of the chemical sciences inpursuit of a better world.¥attract the best and the brightest young students intothe chemical sciences, to help meet these challenges.they can contribute to critical human needs while followingexciting careers, working on and beyond the molecularfrontier.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.111introductionchemistry and chemical engineering have changed very significantly sincethey were last reviewed by committees of the u.s. national research council.they have broadened their scopeñinto biology, nanotechnology, materials science, computation, and advanced methods of process systems engineering andcontrolñsuch that much of what is done and taught in chemistry and chemicalengineering departments is now quite different from the classical subjects. forthis reason, it was important to review chemistry and chemical engineering again,describing both their current state and the challenges that lie ahead.1 as will beseen, many of these challenges are already the subject of active research, whileothers should stimulate new research.this report breaks new ground: research, discovery, and invention across theentire spectrum of activities in the chemical sciencesñfrom fundamental, molecularlevel chemistry to largescale chemical processing technologyñare being summarized together for the first time. we use the term chemical sciences, oroccasionally chemical sciences and engineering, to represent the field in whichall chemists and chemical engineers work. chemistry was reviewed in 1965 by acommittee led by frank westheimer, in a report with the title chemistry: opportunities and needs.2 in 1985 a team led by george pimentel produced opportunities in chemistry.3 frontiers in chemical engineering: research needs and op1the committeeõs statement of task is provided in appendix b.2chemistry: opportunities and needs, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1965.3opportunities in chemistry, national research council, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1985.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12beyond the molecular frontierportunities4 was issued in 1988 under the leadership of neal r. amundson. ourambitious integration of the entire range of chemical sciences into one reportñpresaged by the publication in 1992 of critical technologies: the role of chemistry and chemical engineering5ñreflects the way the field has evolved, thesynergy and strong couplings in our universities between research and educationin chemistry and chemical engineering, and the way chemists and chemical engineers function in industry.the structure of the disciplines of chemistry and chemical engineering isdiscussed in more detail in the next chapter, with the aim of further probing thesecouplings. although the emphasis in this report is on an integrated, seamlessview of the chemical sciences, we recognize the welldeveloped disciplinarystructures of chemistry and chemical engineering, and the effects of such disciplinary structures on future developments.the current state of integration between the two traditional aspects of thechemical sciences, chemistry and chemical engineering, is extensive. ideas andprogress in fields such as polymers, catalysis, bioscience and technology andmany others respect no boundaries between traditional academic departments.those working in applied areas quickly utilize advances in basic science, whilediscoveries and problems in applied chemistry and engineering often stimulatebasic scientific investigations. since the connections between discovery and application are so strong, both activities are described together in the succeedingchapters. it is also important to recognize the existing and emerging strong integration between the chemical sciences and other fields from biology to solid statephysics to electrical engineering. as the discussion will show, basic and appliedchemical science and engineering place the field in a central role in the world ofscience and technology.the interaction between fundamental research and applications is not a linear, unidirectional one in which basic ideas are spawned in isolation and flowinexorably to important applications. a more realistic representation of the interaction, applicable to the chemical sciences, is the quadrant diagram of stokes(figure 11).6 neils bohr and thomas edison, respectively, personify pure science and pure empirical invention. stokes points to pasteurõs work in microbiology and langmuirõs work on surface chemistry as examples of practical problems that provoked a successful drive for deeper fundamental understanding. suchexamples are abundant in the chemical sciences, particularly because of the stronghistorical couplings between chemistry and chemical engineering and also because of the research and development efforts of major chemical companies and4frontiers in chemical engineering: research needs and opportunities, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1988.5critical technologies: the role of chemistry and chemical engineering, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1992.6pasteurõs quadrant, donald e. stokes, brookings institution press, washington, d.c., 1997.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction13research is inspired by:considerations of use?noyesquest foryespure basic researchuseinspired basicfundamental(bohr)research (pasteur)understanding?nopure appliedresearch (edison)the relationships they have had with universities. the main point of the quadrantmodel is that just as fundamental science is appropriately not always aimed atproducing technology, neither does science always precede technology. the interactions between basic research and applications are dynamic and cyclical, withmutual feedback spurring greater discovery and innovation. the spirit of thisstatement permeates our report.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemicalengineering presents an overview. here we describe, in broad strokes, the general goals, accomplishments to date, and future plans of the chemical sciences.after some discussion of the structure of the field in chapter 2, there is a sequence of five chapters (chapters 3 through 7) on the fundamentals of the chemical sciences and technology: synthesis and manufacturing, chemical and physicaltransformations, analysis and control, theory and computation, and the interfacewith biology and medicine.a series of workshops, organized in concert with this report, has focused inmore detail on the areas of societal benefit to which the chemical sciences contribute. each workshop, organized by a separately appointed committee, has produced its own reportñparticularly aimed at identifying opportunities in both basic and longerterm research. it is anticipated that these focused reports willmotivate work in directions that can have profound impacts on our society. theareas addressed by these workshops are materials, energy and transportation, national security and homeland defense, information and communication, healthand medicine, and environment. these topics are also chapters of the earlier bcstreport, critical technologies: the role of chemistry and chemical engineering,7 and are discussed in this report as well, in an overview fashion, in chapters6 through 11.figure 11the quadrant model of scientific research.7critical technologies: the role of chemistry and chemical engineering, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1992.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14beyond the molecular frontierdividing the enterprise of the chemical sciences strictly into fundamentalsand areas of societal benefit cannot, of course, be done with any degree of purity,so every chapter has significant elements of both. this is particularly true in thesections on theory and computation (chapter 6) and on the interface with biologyand medicine (chapter 7). we close in chapter 12 with our vision of grand challenges for the chemical sciences.our report was greatly helped by suggestions and contributions from manyindividual chemists and engineers, who were asked to suggest major challengesfor our fields. they are listed in appendix c.recent reports and books, besides the direct ancestors of this report (thewestheimer, pimentel, and amundson reports noted above), have addressed aspects of the chemical sciences and engineering. in 1999, the royal society ofchemistry of great britain produced a fascinating book, the age of the molecule,8 describing some of the outstanding achievements of chemistry in recentyears. a report on the aims and needs of the future for the u.s. chemical industrywas issued in 1996 with the title technology vision 2020.9 the 1992 nrc reportcritical technologies was noted above, and several relevant reports have emergedfrom the nrcõs chemical sciences roundtable, including assessing the value ofresearch in the chemical sciences,10 the impact of advances in computing andcommunications technologies on chemical science and technology,11 and research teams and partnerships: trends in the chemical sciences,12 the nrcõsboard on chemical sciences and technology has also produced several focusedreports that addressed research opportunities in such areas as catalysis,13 polymerscience and engineering,14 free electron lasers,15 and computational chemistry.168the age of the molecule, royal society of chemistry, london, u.k., 1999.9technology vision 2020: the u.s. chemical industry, the american chemical society, americaninstitute of chemical engineers, the chemical manufacturers association, the council for chemical research, and the synthetic organic chemical manufacturers association, washington, d.c.,1996.10assessing the value of research in the chemical sciences, national research council, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 1998.11the impact of advances in computing and communications technologies on chemical scienceand technology, report of a chemical sciences roundtable workshop, national research council,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1999.12research teams and partnerships: trends in the chemical sciences, report of a chemicalsciences roundtable workshop, washington, d.c., 1999.13catalysis looks to the future, national research council, national academy press, washington,d.c., 1992.14polymer science and engineering. the shifting research frontier, national academy press,washington, d.c., 1994.15free electron lasers and other advanced sources of light: scientific research opportunities,national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1994.16mathematical challenges from theoretical/computational chemistry, national research council,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1995.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction15in 1996, chemistry today and tomorrow: the central, useful, and creativescience17 was written by ronald breslow, at that time the president of the american chemical society. three books18 by philip ball also merit specific mention:made to measure: new materials for the 21st century, designing the molecularworld: chemistry at the frontier, and stories of the invisible: a guided tour ofmolecules. all these efforts have aided the goal of conveying the immense importance of the chemical sciences and engineering to a broad range of readers.this report is intended to continue the tradition.we hope that this overview will be of value and interest to many readers whowant to knowñand critically evaluateñthe status and future goals of the manyimportant sectors of the chemical sciences. we want readers to understand whatthe chemical sciences and engineering are aiming to do, and how close they are toachieving some of the goals. we want to provide insight into how the field shouldbe measured against some of these goals. the chemical sciences have an ambitious agenda for the united states to maintain leadership in this important fieldand attract an appropriate share of the very best minds. it will be necessary forchemists and chemical engineers to produce major new discoveries, revolutionary new technologies, and important new additions to the quality of life for oursociety. the chemical sciences and engineering must also stand ready to play amajor role in assisting our government and shaping its policies to benefit all ofour population.finally, it is critical to recognize that this report is missing one serious component: the future discoveries that we do not see clearly from our present position. the history of science repeatedly shows that major discoveries open upwhole new areas of understanding and of practical applications that were notanticipated. the aim of this overview is not to attempt to predict the future withgreat clarity but rather to be certain that the future is as rich and productive as itcan be. but as we examine the future of our fields, there is one prediction we needto make: chemists and chemical engineers will come up with inventions anddiscoveries that are not encompassed in any such survey, and we will all sayñwhy didnõt we think of that?17chemistry today and tomorrow: the central, useful, and creative science, ronald breslow,american chemical society, washington, d.c., 1997.18made to measure: new materials for the 21st century, philip ball, princeton university press,1997; designing the molecular world: chemistry at the frontier, philip ball, princeton universitypress, 1994; stories of the invisible: a guided tour of molecules, philip ball, oxford universitypress, 2001.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥create new understanding of our physical world and use that understanding to produce a better world.¥ensure that the traditional division of chemistry and chemical engineering into subdisciplines does not impede scientific and technological progress.¥collaborate with scientists and engineers in other scientific disciplinesto more easily advance science and technology.¥consider the properties and behavior of organized interacting systemsand processes, thereby responding to the trend of chemistry andchemical engineering to incorporate integrated, rather than reductionist, approaches.162the structures and cultures of thedisciplines: the common chemical bondthe first chapter of this report emphasizes the strong coupling and integration across the spectrum of chemical sciences and engineering. however, bothchemistry and chemical engineering have traditional subdisciplines that defineundergraduate education, graduate student training, and some aspects of the research agenda. the aims of these subdisciplines must be understood as part of theoverall picture of the present and the future of our field.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the structures and cultures of the disciplines17in chemistry, standard subdivisions are analytical, biochemical, inorganic,organic, physical, and theoretical. the subdivisions in chemical engineering are:applied chemistry, kinetics and reaction engineering, process systems engineering, thermodynamics and chemical property estimation, and transport processesand separations. these subfield categories are primarily used for pedagogicalclarity and organizational management in academia, but they are not typicallyused in industrial chemical research and development. however, the subfield limitations as artifacts and tools should be recognizedñthese categories are separated by boundaries that are neither essential nor rigid. this report has a centraltheme that creativity and progress often, perhaps even usually, occur across suchboundaries. thus as chemical science and technology move forward, it will beappropriate to examine whether the traditional disciplinary substructure continues to serve the chemical sciences well, or whether it is an impediment to progress.chemistry, as a recognized discipline, is much older than the recognized field ofchemical engineering with that name.1 however, this does not reflect the truehistory of the two fields. humankind has been doing useful things with chemistryfor a very long timeñgoing back to ancient egypt and even to prehistoric timesñand applied chemistry is the ancestor of the modern discipline of chemical engineering.chemists seek to relate the properties of all substances, both natural andmanmade, to their detailed chemical composition, including the atomic arrangements of all the chemical components. chemists want to do this not only forexisting substances but also for new substances that do not yet exist. for instancemedicinal chemists make new substances as potential cures for disease. understanding how the properties of substances are related to their molecular structureshelps chemists and chemical engineers design new molecules that have the desired properties, allows them to develop or invent new types of transformationsfor carrying out the syntheses, and assists them as they design ways to manufacture and process the new substances.chemistry is still one of the natural sciences, but in a special and unusualway. chemists want to understand not only the substances and transformationsthat occur in the natural world, but also those others that are permitted by naturallaws. consequently, the field involves both discovery and creation. chemistswant to discover the components of the chemical universeñfrom atoms and molecules to organized chemical systems such as materials, devices, living cells, andwhole organismsñand they also want to understand how these components interact and change as a function of time. however, chemical scientists consider notjust the components of the chemical universe that already exist; they also con1the formal origin of chemical engineering as a discipline is considered to date to 1888 when it wasintroduced as an option in the chemistry department at the massachusetts institute of technology(frontiers in chemical engineering: research needs and opportunities, national research council,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1988, p. 11).beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18beyond the molecular frontiersider the unknown molecules and substances and interactions that could exist.thus there is a field of synthetic chemistry, in which new molecules and substances and chemical transformations are created, rather than discovered in nature.new chemical compoundsñconsisting of new moleculesñare being created at the rate of more than one million each year. however, the number ofpossible molecules that are reasonably small and simpleñabout the size of atypical medicinal agent and composed of the same few common elementsñexceeds the number of known compounds by a factor of well over 1030. the chemical sciences produce tangible benefit to society when someone designs and engineers the production of a new and useful substance. clearly, there is much to doin the creation and understanding of molecules that do not yet exist, and in developing the novel transformations that will be needed to make them.chemical scientists are concerned with the physical properties of substances.are they solids, liquids, or gases? how much energy do they contain? they arealso concerned with chemical properties. can they be transformed to other substances on heating, or with light? can they interact with other substances; forinstance, can they dissolve in water, and why? can they react with other substances to undergo a transformation to something new? thus, the chemical sciences are concerned with substances, with their transformations, both chemicaland physical, and with the design and control of processes to achieve these transformations on scales of practical commercial and beneficial value to society.chemical scientists seek to fully understand the detailed mechanisms of thesetransformations, and to measure the rates of reactions, and to build predictivemodels of reaction sequences and networks for process design and control.as part of the overall goal, chemical scientists also want to understand thebiological properties of both natural and manmade substances. this includes notonly learning the detailed molecular structures of all the substances in livingthings, but also understanding the transformations that go on in the life process.they want to understand these properties of pure substances, and they want toextend that understanding to organized systems of substancesñincluding thoseas complex as a living cell, a whole living organism, and the complex multichemical system that is the earth itself. chemical science is integral to all of bioengineering and biotechnology. biosystems, from molecular assemblies to cells toorganisms, require insight from synthetic and physical chemistry as well as analysis of complex chemical networks if they are to be understood and exploited forthe benefit of society.investigating a single compound, a single reaction, or a single process maywell fall within the expertise of a single discipline or subdiscipline, but the situation is different when the investigations are extended to systemsñfull assemblages of related components that address the same functionñor to processes,where integrated systems of operations work in concert to produce a product.understanding, developing, and manipulating systems and processes often rebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the structures and cultures of the disciplines19quire the synergistic advantages of the entire range of the chemical sciencesñfrom fundamental chemistry, to chemical engineering, and even to other advancedareas of science and technologyñto create scientific understanding and benefitfor society. chemical engineers have concerned themselves with design, scaleup, and construction of large chemical systems and processes. this requires mastery of chemical and physical transformations of matter. chemical engineers bringquantitative, analytical, and computational tools to the design and developmentof chemical operations, systems, and processes. chemical engineers have alsomade enormous contributions to fundamental science.the evolution of chemical engineering as a distinct discipline within thechemical sciences occurred, largely over the course of the 20th century, through aseries of leading paradigms. chemical engineering emerged from applied chemistry by introducing an organized approach to the design of chemical processsystems for manufacturing chemical products. the paradigm of unit operationsñthe individual steps of an overall processñcharacterized chemical engineering inthe first half of the 20th century. during this time, the chemical industry, especially in the united states and germany, was being built into a leading, and thriving, productive economic force with power and stability. impressive success inthis period was exemplified by the creation of a robust industry to produce polymeric materials in large volumes by the 1940sñwhen 15 years earlier the mereexistence of such large molecules was being questioned on fundamental chemicalgrounds.in the 1950s, and over the next roughly 30 years until the 1980s, chemicalengineering research improved, advanced, and made more efficient both the design process and the ultimate designs of chemical plants. similar progress wasmade in the understanding of chemical and physical transformations through applications of applied mathematics and computation. academic research producedmajor advances in mathematical modeling and analysisñbased on rapidly emerging new information on chemical kinetics, reaction mechanisms, and transportphenomena. this progress changed the processdesign endeavorñfrom one basedpredominantly on empirical experience embodied in heuristics and correlations,to a more reliable, quantitatively predictive activity. the design of refineries andother facilities for production of largevolume commodity products was enormously influenced by predictive models based on science and applied mathematics. the abstraction necessary to produce general models for design purposes, aswell as the maturing of chemical engineering as an academic discipline, had theeffect of divorcing chemistry from chemical engineering to some extent, relativeto the earlier period during which chemical engineering had emerged as a branchof chemistry.the application of new methods for chemical research in industry during thisperiod was reinforced by several factors. these included steady hiring of university graduates, the engagement of many university faculty members in the chemical sciences as consultants, the substantial growth of research divisions in manybeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20beyond the molecular frontiercompanies doing longrange research, and the mutual understanding and alignment of goals between universities and industry.all of these factors began to change in the 1990s. fundamental chemicalresearch began to overlap with and penetrate chemical engineering to an unprecedented extent. this has been characteristic for interdisciplinary fields such aspolymers, catalysis, electronic materials synthesis and processing, biological science and engineering, pharmacology and drug delivery, nanoscale science andengineering, and computational science and engineering. these fields of researchhave become not just accepted but actually central to both chemistry and chemical engineering departments, and they cut across the traditional subdisciplinaryboundaries discussed in the first paragraph. the nature of the efforts of chemistsand chemical engineers in these areas are sometimes difficult to separate in ameaningful or useful way. some research emphasizes fundamental curiosity orsolving puzzles of nature, some aims to test intriguing or provocative hypotheses,and some seeks to improve our ability to address technological or societal problems.there is no doubt that chemistry and chemical engineering have reached ahigh level of integration across the entire spectrum of the chemical sciences.chemistsñwho have traditionally worked at the end of the spectrum nearest topure, basic researchñare also aware of the societal and technological benefit oftheir work. indeed, such benefits are commonly cited to justify the costs of theresearch. furthermore, chemists are increasingly involved in constructing, analyzing, and using complex systems and assemblies, from cells to clouds, fromenergy production to earth systems. this merges naturally with the systems approach of engineering. approaching the chemical sciences from the traditionallychemical engineering end of the spectrum, we find chemical engineers increasingly entering, and in some cases leading, in more basic fields of chemistry because more science input is needed to solve technological problems or becausethe tools of the chemical engineer are more suited to discovery in certain areas.the evolution toward integration in the chemical sciences is quite consistent withthe idea that they are gravitating toward pasteurõs quadrant of figure 11, in whichthe interplay between basic and applied research is more cyclical than linear.a new kind of relationship is emerging between universities and industry inthe chemical sciences, influenced in part by the bayhdole act of 1980, whichallowed universities to retain intellectual property rights from federally fundedresearch.2 as large industrial organizations have fewer and smaller departmentsdoing longrange or basic research, they look to universities both for fundamentalresearch and for students. in contrast to previous decades, in which many compa2for further discussion of this topic, see: research teams and partnerships: trends in the chemicalsciences, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1999; reducingthe time from basic research to innovation in the chemical sciences, national research council,national academy press, washington, d.c., in press, 2003.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the structures and cultures of the disciplines21nies simply supported university research and teaching without looking for a specific return, current universityindustry partnerships are often focused on specificshorterterm production of new data, knowledge, and insight. this has producedat least two identifiable trends in the nature of these relationships. in some cases,the interactions have become focused but strongñin terms of financial support ofthe academic partner from industryñenabling an unprecedented level of breadthand depth in concentration on subjects of mutual interest. in other cases, in orderfor university research to achieve technological or societal relevance, it has become necessary for university researchers to strike out on their own, to take promising leads from basic research and convert them into more fully developed technology. this means using research as a starting point and developing it into theseed of a startup company. when large companies invest less in developing theirown basic science, such startup ventures become important in providing pathways that lead from discovery and invention to sources of new business development.when taken together, the factors introduced in this chapter explain the motivation and rationale for this integrated report on challenges facing the chemicalsciences, chemistry and chemical engineering. the chemical sciences will unlockour ability to understand the mysteries of our worldñfrom new synthesis andcatalysis to life itself. the chemical sciences will produce answers to our futureenergy needs and environmental challenges. the chemical sciences will producethe materials of the future, and they will produce practical biotechnology frombiology. in this spirit, chemists and chemical engineers together are moving beyond the molecular frontier. the central challenge will be to create new understanding of our existing and potential physical world, and to use that understanding to produce a better world.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.223synthesis and manufacturing: creating andexploiting new substances and newtransformationssome challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥develop methods that will enable synthesis of all important moleculesin reasonable yields using compact synthetic schemes, so that no useful compound is inaccessible to practical synthesis.¥develop novel transformations that perform with the selectivities typical of enzymatic reactions, so that geometric factors are more important than the intrinsic reactivity of a molecule.¥use computer methods to design important target molecules and design efficient ways to make them.¥exploit combinatorial methods to discover important properties in synthetic materials.¥design synthetic procedures that can be varied systematically for thepurpose of optimizing specific properties of the reaction products.¥understand fully the basic chemical and physical properties of surfaces, especially those of solid catalysts.¥develop versatile and reliable synthetic methodologies for hard matter(microstructured materials such as nanoparticles and porous solids)that are as effective as those for synthesis of soft matter (complexorganic and biomolecules).beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing23¥synthesize new substances that can spontaneously selfassemble intocomplex organized systems with important properties.¥incorporate enzymes, native or modified, as catalysts in the synthesisand manufacture of important materials.¥devise good manufacturing processesñefficient and environmentallybenign, producing no unwanted byproducts, and using little energyñfor all important products.¥intensify manufacturing processes, so that compact chemical plantscan make required amounts of product efficiently, safely, and with minimal environmental impact.goalsthe longterm goal of the basic science in synthesis is to develop the abilityto create all the substances and organized chemical systems and transformationsthat are possible under the limits of natural laws, not just those that occur innature. the importance of such an extension of nature is clear in medicinal chemistry, for instance, but it is also part of the basic science of chemistry itself. inmost cases, only enough of the new molecules will be created to permit an evaluation of their properties.of course, in reality new chemical substances are not synthesized at randomwith no purpose in mindñthe numbers that have still not been created are toostaggering for a random approach. by one estimate,1 as many as 10200 moleculescould exist that have the general size and chemical character of typical medicines.instead, chemists create new substances with the aim that their properties will bescientifically important or useful for practical purposes. as part of basic science,chemists have created new substances to test theories. for example, the moleculebenzene has the special property of òaromaticity,ó which in this context refers tospecial stability related to the electronic structure of a molecule. significant efforthas gone into creating new nonbenzenoid aromatic compounds to test the generality of theories about aromaticity. these experiments helped stimulate the application of quantum mechanical theory to the prediction of molecular energies.synthesis is achieved by performing chemical transformations, some ofwhich are already known and some of which must be invented. thus another goalof the basic science of synthesis is to invent new types of transformations, bothbecause novel transformations are part of the universe of chemistry and also because they are the tools that make it possible to create interesting and useful newsubstances.1a. w. czarnik, accts. chem. res. 1996, 29, 112113.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24beyond the molecular frontieras another part of this field, it is also important to invent overall strategies toachieve multistep syntheses involving a sequence of transformations. knowinghow to perform simple transformations is like knowing the legal moves in chess;achieving the synthesis of a complicated molecule requires the strategic combination of many simple transformations, just as winning at chess requires a strategy to combine a sequence of legal moves. some of the achievements in synthesis have involved the invention of general strategies to attack particular classes ofdifficult problems. these efforts will be directed toward the synthesis of manykinds of substances with a variety of descriptions, such as organic and inorganiccompounds, polymers and ceramics, and hard materials and soft materials.a special aspect of synthesis is the synthesis of natural products, chemicalcompounds found in nature. for example, once the chemical structure of penicillin had been determined, synthetic chemists set out to make it from simple chemicals using nonbiological techniquesñeven though the mold makes it very well.a synthetic procedure for making penicillin would also provide the opportunityfor making analogous compounds. the structure of penicillin represented a challenge because it could not be made by the chemical transformations then known.thus both new transformations and new strategies had to be invented. in thiscase, the result then allowed chemists to use these new transformations to makeother related antibiotics, which are now used commonly as medicines. however,the original impetus for the synthesis was more basic. when chemists saw a structure in a natural compound that was too challenging for the current syntheticmethodology, they created new methods and strategies that helped fill the chemical universe with more effective tools.the goal of applied chemistry and chemical engineering is to learn how tomanufacture useful new substances. exploratory chemists often use methods thatproduce only small samples of the new material and are not suitable for largescale manufacturing, so entirely new schemes of synthesis must be invented. also,manufacturing equipment and processes have to be developed that meet all theother criteriañefficient highyield processes with inexpensive starting materials,easy isolation of pure products, and no environmental problems. a further morebasic goal is to develop the general principles that can be applied to solve newproblems.in both synthesis and chemical manufacturing there is a general need to develop separation methods as well as synthesis methods. until every syntheticreaction is perfectñwith respect to atom economy, so no sideproducts areformed, and by performing the reaction without added solvents or catalystsñit isnecessary to isolate the desired product and purify it. this is one of the mostexpensive aspects of some manufacturing processes, particularly in pharmaceutical manufacture. thus there are two goals related to separations. one is to learnhow to isolate and purify the desired compounds with high efficiency, and theother is to develop synthetic processes that do not need such separations. formanufacturing, a further goal is to eliminate solvents or at least replace them withbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing25harmless, inexpensive, and easily removed or recovered solvents. one interestingapproach is to substitute water for organic solvents; another is to use unusualsolvents such as supercritical carbon dioxide or even supercritical water. synthetic transformations often involve adding catalysts, substances that direct chemical reactions along less energetic but more efficient pathways. solid catalysts thatcan be simply filtered away, or retained in a reactor as the other components passthrough, are also desirable.atom economy is a goal only relatively recently understood. if all the atomsin the reactants are found in the desired product, we say that there is excellentatom economy. however, in many chemical reactions additional products areformed containing some of the atoms of the reactants. this is true in displacementand elimination reactions. it is also true if the reaction is not perfectly selective,and additional undesired products are formed. in most cases, the extra chemicalsproduced in displacement or elimination reactions or in nonselective reactionsmust be removed, and disposing of them adds cost and the potential for environmental problems (see chapter 9 for further discussion of related matters).progress to datefew known and thermodynamically feasible molecular structures are presently seen as impossible goals for synthesis. new transformations and effectivestrategies permit chemists to synthesize highly complex molecules, such as newnatural compounds discovered in the continued chemical exploration of the natural world. again, the point of such work is to develop new chemistry that permitsan approach to structures of the type found in nature. this expands the power ofchemistry and allows medicinal chemists to synthesize complex structures.synthetic efforts have also extended to compounds of theoretical and practical interest. a variety of novel cyclic, bridged, caged, interlocking, knotted, andotherwise topologically unusual structures have been prepared in both the organic and inorganic arenas. these studies have provided new insights into structure and reactivity: for example, new zeolitic materials have valuable propertiesas catalysts, and highly strained caged organic structures have shown intriguingenergetic properties.an interesting example is the work to synthesize the alkaloid strychnine.robert burns woodward (nobel prize, 1965) was the first chemist to synthesizethis very complicated structure, which has many places where the detailed spatialorientation of chemical bonds was important. the synthesis was accomplished bya team of students and postdoctoral associates that he directed. the world did notneed a new source of highly toxic strychnine, which is widely available in nature,but the synthetic challenge required woodward to develop new approaches tosome synthetic problems. the general approachesñinvolving new reactions andnew strategiesñdeveloped for strychnine and other biologically relevant molecules taught chemists how to tackle other challenging synthetic problems andbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26beyond the molecular frontierindicated the kind of complex molecule that was accessible through synthesis.continuing developments of new strategies and new chemical reactions in the1980s and 1990s led to several new syntheses of strychnine by other chemists,using less than half the number of steps of the original woodward synthesis. suchwork, expanding the tools of synthesis, has greatly increased our ability to synthesize useful medicines.there are natural targets whose syntheses have important practical applications. for example, paclitaxel (marketed as taxol by bristolmyers squibb) is ananticancer compound originally isolated from the bark of a species of yew tree,but for a long time it seemed that natural sources would not be sufficient to meetthe need. consequently, many chemists developed synthetic approaches topaclitaxel from readily available materials, although these are not yet fully practical for manufacturing. the quest continues, and a semisynthetic route has beendeveloped starting with a compound isolated from yew needles that can be harvested without destroying the tree. an alternative approach has employed plantcell cultures in bioreactors to produce paclitaxel from yew needles (see chapter 7for discussion of related matters).some established methods to achieve particular transformations are not applicable in all situations, and some are not practical in largescale manufacturing.consequently, new methods are still being sought even for the simplest transformations. for example, the oxidation of an alcohol to a ketone or an aldehyde haslong been performed in the laboratory by using certain compounds of chromiumas the oxidant, but the aldehydes are themselves often oxidized further by thechromium reagents. now, new oxidants have been developed that do not havethis problem. also, chromium oxidants are not practical in manufacturing. theircost is high, and more seriously, the chromiumcontaining waste products are notenvironmentally tolerable. a better process for manufacturing would be to usethe oxygen from air as the oxidant, resulting in water as a product. catalysts forair oxidation already exist. however, it may be necessary to develop improvedcatalysts to perform this inexpensive and environmentally benign process.this illustrates a general difference between the reactions used in manufacturing and those used in laboratory research. whenever possible, manufacturinginvolves catalytic processes, with inexpensive reagents. in laboratory research,the immediate goal may be just to make a small sample of a new compound todetermine its properties; consequently, there is less concern about the cost ofreagents or the environmental effect that a largescale version would create. thegoal is to make the new compound as quickly as possible, to see if its propertiesmake it worth manufacturing or simply to expand our basic knowledge.some manufacturing processes use the special properties of zeolites, inorganic substances that have interconnected cavities of welldefined size and shape.reactions can be catalyzed inside the cavities, and they are normally selective forthe shape of the substrate that can enter the cavities, and for the shape of thebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing27products being formed. selective absorption into the cavities also makes zeolitesuseful in separations.many laboratory syntheses of important structural types of compounds aretoo long or complex to work well in manufacturing. chemists working in theprocess area are thus often engaged in inventing new approaches that use themost modern reactions, in order to develop compact synthetic schemes with smallnumbers of acceptable steps. the modern reactions that make this possible arebeing invented by chemists involved in basic discovery and creation, usually inuniversities. the pressure on industrial process chemists to develop practicalschemes for manufacturing important products means that they do not normallyhave the time for the basic research that can lead to new chemical reactions.how do synthetic chemists invent and create new reactions? after recognizing the challengeña transformation that cannot be done easily with current methodsñthey look for inspiration in several places. one is biochemistry. if livingcells already perform a transformation related to the desired one, it may be possible to invent an analog of the natural processña biomimetic process. for example, in living cells there are enzymes that synthesize amino acids, and they doit with complete selectivity for the geometric orientation of the bonds. chemistshave now invented ways to do this without enzymes, but inspired by what isknown about the natural process. for many practical purposes, the results aremore useful and general for manufacturing.another inspiration comes from the chemists who study reaction mechanisms, learning how transformations occur (chapter 4). the insights from suchbasic work often suggest new reactions that should be possible. for example,much work has gone on recently to understand the catalysis of chemical reactionsby soluble complexes of certain metals such as palladium and platinum. theycatalyze transformations, often of great importance in manufacturing, that otherwise may be impossible. other work has helped us understand catalysis by metalparticles, in which the special chemical properties of the metal surfaces play thekey role. the insights from this work have stimulated the invention of other processes, while at the same time these applications have stimulated more workaimed at basic understanding. work in synthesis is at least as important in showing chemists new parts of their universe as it is in solving practical problems.another important area is the use of photochemistryñchemistry that resultsfrom light absorptionñto perform transformations that are not otherwise possible. the practical applications of photosynthesis were based on fundamentalwork to learn the new pathways that light absorption makes possible, but thework on these synthetic methods has also added to our basic understanding of thereaction mechanisms. the important natural process of photosynthesis also inspires some work in photochemistry, where the challenge is one of producingartificial photosynthetic systems that could use sunlight to drive the formation ofenergetic materials.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28beyond the molecular frontierfinally, it is not possible to discount the component of intellectual creativityfor such inventions. to quote george bernard shaw, òyou see things; and yousay, ôwhy?õ but i dream things that never were; and i say, ôwhy not?õó chemistslooking at their universe often see that some parts are missing, and they set out tocreate them. for example, a nobel prize was awarded to herbert brown andgeorg wittig in 1979 for the invention of new types of useful transformationsthat were unprecedented in nature. this effort to create goes beyond chemicalreactions and extends to molecules and organized molecular systems that originate in the imagination of an individual chemist.a nobel prize to geoffrey wilkinson and ernest o. fisher in 1973 recognized their creation, and understanding, of a new class of substancesñunrelatedto anything found in natureñcalled metallocenes. originally, these organometallic sandwich compounds (and their òopenfacedó versions) were of interest purelyas new occupants of the chemical universe, as if a new type of planet had beencreated in the astronomical universe. however, some versions of such sandwichcompounds have been shown more recently to act as catalysts for very significantreactions, and they are now applied in the manufacturing of polymers.synthetic inspiration can come from an attempt to make drastic improvements in the properties of existing substances. for example, some metals andmetal compounds become superconducting at extremely low temperatures. superconductors are attractive materials because they conduct electricity withoutany loss caused by resistance below a characteristic transition temperature, although above that temperature they are poor electrical conductors (and some areeven insulators). more practical, hightemperature superconductors, first developed by johannes g. bednorz and karl a. muller, a mineralogist and a physicist,have great current and potential uses throughout science, including chemistry andchemical engineering. for example, most modern nuclear magnetic resonance(nmr) instruments have electromagnets wound with superconducting wires.once an electric current is started in the wires, the source of electricity is disconnected, and the current keeps flowing as long as the temperature is kept very lowby cooling the magnet with liquid helium. there is a great effort to invent newmaterials that would be superconducting at higher and more easily attained temperatures. recently chemists and other scientists have been able to create newsuperconducting materials based on inorganic ceramics, which have considerablyhigher superconducting transition temperatures than the materials of bednorz andmuller.since synthesis is such a central part of chemistry and chemical engineering,many other nobel prizes have recognized synthetic achievements. for example, anobel prize in 1990 went to elias j. corey both for his contributions to the development of theory and methodology in organic synthesis and his application ofthem to the synthesis of important biologically active substances. it also recognized his formalization, and even computerization, of the strategies that successful multistep syntheses follow. karl ziegler and giulio natta received a nobelbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing29prize in 1963 for inventing a new general method to synthesize important polymers, a method that uncovered much new basic science. a nobel prize in 1984went to robert bruce merrifield for his invention of a general approach to thesynthesis of polypeptides and proteins, in a style directly reminiscent of the biological method used in such synthesis.although much of the preceding discussion involved the synthesis of newmolecules by organic and inorganic chemists, there is another area of chemistryin which such creation is importantñthe synthesis of new atoms. the periodictable lists elements that have been discovered and isolated from nature, but a fewhave been created by human activity. collision of atomic particles with the nucleiof existing atoms is the normal source of radioactive isotopes and of some of thevery heavy elements at the bottom of the periodic table. indeed nuclear chemistsand physicists have created some of the most important elements that are used fornuclear energy and nuclear weapons, plutonium in particular.an exciting goal has recently shown signs of progress. theory has suggestedthat beyond the bottom of the usual periodic table, where the elements becomequite unstable and have only a fleeting existence, there should be an òisland ofstability,ó a group of elements more stable to nuclear decay than those comingearlier in the periodic table. recently nuclear chemists have obtained evidencefor such special stability in the predicted elements. they are not stable enough forlongterm isolation, but their properties help confirm theories of nuclear structureand stability.challenges and opportunities for the futurethere is a healthy integration of the various branches of chemistry and chemical engineering. this integration brings together synthesis and measurement,theory and experiment, and design and manufacturing. the integration extends tothe related disciplines with which chemistry and chemical engineering share theintellectual frontiers of science and technologyñbiology, physics, and electronics to name just a few. this has opened great new opportunities.within chemistry, synthetic chemists will increasingly make use of the special properties of metalbased catalysts, both solid and as soluble complexes, todevise new transformations that are selective and efficient. chemical engineersare increasingly involved in product design, in addition to process design, requiring the integral participation of the chemical engineer in the molecular conception and design of the products. physical chemists and chemical engineers willincreasingly understand the surface chemistry and properties of solid catalysts;that understanding will help in the design of even better catalysts. inorganic chemists will create many new types of molecules that combine inorganic and organiccomponents, and that have applications and interest in both inorganic and organicchemistry. chemical reactor modeling has advanced the field of electronic materials production significantly.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30beyond the molecular frontiertheoretical chemists will increasingly be able to predict the properties ofunknown molecules, and thus stimulate synthetic chemists to make the interesting ones. as chemical engineers open new frontiers in biological engineering,they team effectively with chemists and biologists to influence biosystems andprocesses from metabolism to cell adhesion. the synergy with biology is particularly strong in medicinal chemistry, where computer methods are used to designdrugs. in every pharmaceutical company the computeraideddesign group worksfrom the molecular structure of an important protein, that had been determined bystructural chemists, and guides and rationalizes the work of the synthetic groups.some important new medicines have been designed this way, and many morewill come in the future.development of new synthetic methodologyin spite of the impressive progress achieved by synthetic chemists in the pastseveral decades, the state of the art of methods for chemical synthesis remains atan early stage of development. there is a great need for new reactions and synthetic methods to permit any substance, of any complexity, be it organic or inorganic in structure, to be synthesized with high chemical efficiency, in a smallnumber of steps, and with minimal cogeneration of any waste products. syntheticmethodology is the software of the chemical sciences. just as there is an explicitexpectation that there will be a constant evolution and improvement of the software and the operating systems that drive our computers, so should the chemicalcommunity expect that there will be constant improvement and evolution of thearmament of methodologies available for the practicing preparative chemist andthe chemical industries. an explicit goal of the chemical community should be tomake continual improvements in synthetic methodology, thereby expanding therange of challenging molecules that are accessible to practical synthesis.catalysissome aspects of synthetic chemistry have changed in response to environmental needs. for example, in the pharmaceutical industry the classical methodsproduce, on the average, about nine times as much disposable waste as desiredproduct. this has led to the demand for procedures that have atom efficiency, inwhich all the atoms of the reacting compounds appear in the product. thus (asdiscussed earlier) the demand for atom economy offers additional opportunitiesfor creative invention of transformations.there are still numerous major important targets for synthesis. as a simpleexample, we currently manufacture ammoniañfor use in fertilizers and otherimportant productsñby causing nitrogen to react with hydrogen at high temperature and pressure. yet microorganisms in the roots of some legumes are able toconvert nitrogen to ammonia at ordinary temperatures and pressures (althoughbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing31not using gaseous hydrogen). we need to understand their chemistry, even if it isnot as practical as is our current method of manufacturing ammonia. similarly,the enzyme methane monooxygenase is able to use atmospheric oxygen to convert methane to methanol, whereas chemical systems tend to oxidize the methanefurther. we need to develop catalysts for this important process that could convert the methane in natural gas into a useful chemical. the catalysts for both ofthese processes will surely include the inorganic chemistry of metallic elements.combinatorial chemistrysome new aspects have been introduced into the style of synthesis recently,and these aspects hold great promise. one has to do with what are called combinatorial methods, where syntheses are carried out to make many different (butrelated) products at one time. sometimes these are in a mixture, but with thedifferent products attached to separate polymer beads, while at other times thesimultaneous reactions are performed in many different small vessels. for example, a library of amide products might be produced by allowing a single reagent to react with a large group of different amines. for such libraries of products, different schemes have been devised to identify the individual components.then the various products can be tested for a desirable property. in pharmaceutical chemistry, the library of products is put through biological screens, usuallyautomated, to determine whether any of the products binds particularly well to anenzyme of interest or to another biological receptor. when one product has beenidentified as a good binder, normal synthetic procedures are used to make enoughfor thorough testing.at one time, some people predicted that the ability of combinatorial methodsto produce literally thousands of new products at one time would diminish theneed for synthetic chemists in the pharmaceutical industry. however, the opposite has turned out to be true. the large number of leads produced by combinatorial methods requires many more synthetic chemists to continue research on thesecompounds in a more traditional way. companies are increasing, not decreasing,their cadre of synthetic chemists. in addition, combinatorial methods have provoked radically new approaches to screening the libraries rapidly for good leadcompounds, generating a new field called high throughput analysis and new opportunities for chemists.biomimetic synthesisas we increasingly understand the chemistry performed by living systems, inparticular that catalyzed by enzymes, we will continue to develop biomimeticmethods to achieve some of the special selectivities that enzymes show. enzymescan selectively bind a particular molecule out of the mixture of substances in thecell, then hold it in such a way that the geometry of the enzymesubstrate combeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32beyond the molecular frontierplex determines what happens next in a sequence of chemical reactions. for example, in an enzymesubstrate complex the reaction may take place at a particularpart of a molecule even if that is not the most chemically reactive siteñin contrast to normal synthetic chemistry, where changes take place at the reactive functional groups. alternatively, enzymatic reaction might produce just one of several possible stereochemical consequences. for example, an enzyme might bind anatural lamino acid but not the mirror image and thus distinguish the l aminoacids that human cells contain from the damino acids sometimes found inbacteria.the selective introduction of chirality is a problem of much current interestin synthesis, and it is generally solved by using the same concept that governsenzymatic reactions. the nonchiral substrate interacts with a chiral reagent orcatalyst, and the selective conversion of the substrate to a chiral product follows.pioneering work to develop such methods was recognized in 2001 by nobel prizesto william s. knowles, ryoji noyori, and k. barry sharpless. in synthesis thebinding often involves quite different forces than are used in enzymes, and thereagents and catalysts are much smaller than are protein enzymes. new procedures increasingly involve the formation of welldefined molecular complexesbetween substrate and catalyst, or substrate and reagent, that may allow chemiststo overcome the classical domination of selectivity by the reactivity of functionalgroups. donald j. cram, jeanmarie lehn, and charles j. pedersen receivednobel prizes in 1987 for their work on molecular complexes.there is another approach that is increasingly part of synthesis: the use ofenzymes as catalysts. this approach is strengthened by the new ability of chemists and molecular biologists to modify enzymes and change their properties.there is also interest in the use of artificial enzymes for this purpose, either thosethat are enzymelike but are not proteins, or those that are proteins but based onantibodies. catalytic antibodies and nonprotein enzyme mimics have shown someof the attractive features of enzymes in processes for which natural enzymes arenot suitable.selfassemblyhistorically, chemistry has been largely reductionist, breaking natural materials such as wood down to their pure components so they could be analyzed. ithas since become more integrationist, putting together pure chemicals into complex organized structures. this is true in the new areas of nanoscience andnanotechnology, where synthesis is needed to make organized arrangements ofmany chemical componentsñnanostructuresñwith the distant goal of makingtiny molecular machines and even molecular scale computers. integration is alsoexploited as chemists begin to synthesize organized structures that imitate someof the properties of living cells. the processes carried out by living cells dependon the spatial organization of many different chemical components. chemists, inbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing33particular synthetic chemists, also need to start building such organization intostructures with many different cooperating chemical componentsñboth to understand them and to create useful microscopic devices. such organization ismost favorably based on spontaneous selfassembly of the chemical components,driven by their own selective molecular recognition and interactions. this is as ifthe components of an automobile would automatically fall into the correct places,rather than being placed there by machines. in chemistry such spontaneous selfassembly is possible on the molecular scale, but needs to be developed.a vital aspect of chemical selfassembly is selection. in a mixture of compounds the correct pairings of chemicals must occur, so the system must have away to choose those correct pairings. an exciting new challenge is to developways to impose a process of selection on the mixture of components, so thatunwanted interactions are suppressed. in biology mutants are selected becausethey convey an advantage to a cell. chemists need a similar tool, for example alibrary of possible catalysts from which the system would use their relative catalytic activities to selfselect the one that is the most potent. this would removethe current need to screen the entire library for such activity. an even more desirable goal, difficult to reach currently, would be to develop chemical systems thatcould vary their own structures in a drive to produce the optimum of some desiredproperty such as catalytic potency or strength of binding to a receptor. such achemical system could optimize itself according to the needs of humankind.manufacturingchemical manufacturing systems involve the implementation of chemicalsynthesis schemes to transform one composition of matter to another on scalesfrom the very small (micrograms) to very large (hundreds of billions of kilogramsper year). these materials and processes enable modern life. they may be inorganic, organic, or even biological, and they span the range from metals and concrete to glass, paper, and plastic; from advanced composites and electronic materials to fertilizers, agrochemicals, and dyes; from drinking water and fuels to saferefrigerants; and from pharmaceuticals to packaging for secure nuclear wastes.no matter what composition is produced, no matter what the purpose, and nomatter what the scale, process systems engineers face relentless demands. thesedemands are for increased capital efficiency and reduced costs for materials, labor, and energyñall while producing material of high and consistent quality anddoing so reliably, safely, sustainably, and with minimal environmental impact.specific new challenges to process systems engineering are both economicand social. globalization of the chemical enterprise has opened new markets thatare linked to the general increase in the standard of living throughout the world.at the same time, globalization has resulted in growing worldwide competition.this, along with the introduction of electronic commerce, is producing greatermarket efficiencies. it is also producing reduced manufacturing margins at a timebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34beyond the molecular frontierof increased investor demands for predictable earnings growth, despite the inherent cyclical character of verylargescale capitalintensive industry.sustainability, hazard reduction, and protection of health and the environment remain great concerns for the process industries. many of the raw materialsusedñespecially those derived from oil, gas, and some plants and animalsñhavebeen and in some cases continue to be depleted at rates either large compared toknown reserves or faster than replenishment. in addition, there is the desire forproducts, intermediates, solvents, catalysts, and other materials produced or selected for use in chemical manufacture to be as safe and nontoxic as possibleduring their use and to be recoverable or benignly degradable after their use.also, by the very nature of chemical transformations, there are almost always unused chemicals remaining. these chemical leftovers include contaminants in the raw materials, incompletely converted raw materials, unavoidablecoproducts, unselective reaction byproducts, spent catalysts, and solvents. therehave long been efforts to minimize the production of such waste products, and torecover and reuse those that cannot be eliminated. for those that cannot be reused, some different use has been sought, and as a last resort, efforts have beenmade to safely dispose of whatever remains. the same efforts apply to any leftovers from the production of the energy from the fuels produced or consumed bythe processing industries. of particular immediate and increasing concern are thepotential detrimental effects of carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere fromfossil fuel combustion, as discussed further in chapters 9 and 10.the chemical enterprise must meet the societal and environmental challengesit faces. this will necessitate starting from different raw materials, producingnew products, using new sources of energy, and paying much greater attention tothe creation and disposal of waste. taking these steps will require innovations inthe chemistry used, in catalysts to facilitate this chemistry, in reactors to manufacture the products via this new chemistry, and in separations techniques to purify the resulting products and recover everything else.the future will likely see greater use of more abundant or renewable rawmaterials, and greater reuse of materials such as carbon dioxide, salts, tars, andsludges that are currently discarded as waste. exploiting some of these alternativeraw materials and chemistries may involve greater energy input than required forraw materials presently in use, and the source and impact of any such increasedenergy requirements will need to be carefully considered. many of these goals areincorporated in the principles of green chemistry.2chemistries such as gasification, carboxylation, carbonylation, partial oxidation, and salt splitting may see much greater emphasis in manufacturing. thesechemistries will need concurrent development of more selective catalytic andbiocatalytic systems and promoters, as well as processes requiring much less ex2http://www.acs.org/.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing35otic materials of construction than we now have available. demands for greatercapital, energy, and material efficiency will require the development of processsystems that are more tightly integrated. such systems will need greater mass andenergy recycling, more byproduct reuse, and advances in computeraided,plantwide process control. only with such advances will it be possible to maintain safety, reliability, flexibility, operability, and economic performance in highlyintegrated systems.some of the new process engineering technologies for manufacturing willinvolve new devices and the exploitation of new phenomena that will change thetraditional way we look at unit operations in chemical engineering. in the area ofreaction engineering, new units might include centrifugal or high shear reactors,very short contact time reactors, or rotating packedbed reactors. in these units,process intensification (see box) is often a major driving force for reducing thesize of the device or equipment. other novel reactor technologies include microwave reactors that have the objective of reducing the energy use and bulk temperature of reaction mixtures by performing selective heating on the particles ofthe catalyst. novel separations technologies include membrane absorption andmembrane distillation, centrifugal distillation columns, and simulated moving bedadsorbers.an interesting trend in process intensification is not only the reduction in thesize of equipment, but the integration of different functions and phenomena. forinstance, microreactors are devices of very small dimensions that have a structureconsisting of different layers with micromachined channels (10 to 100 microns indiameter). the layers perform different functions such as mixing, catalytic reaction, heat exchange, and separation. the very high heattransfer rates (e.g., 20,000w/m2k) allow exothermic processes to be operated isothermally. also, very lowreactionvolume/surfacearea ratios make microreactors attractive for processesinvolving highly toxic components.process intensification also can be achieved by reconfiguring standard equipment. a good example is the use of divided wall columns for distillation, in whichvarious separations that are commonly performed in separate columns are integrated into one single column. this is accomplished through clever rearrangement of trays and divisions between them, yielding significant savings in bothcapital cost and energy. another way of achieving process intensification is byexpanding the functions in the device. an example is reactive distillation in whichholdup catalyst is added over a subset of trays in a column to perform simultaneous reaction and separation. the methyl acetate column developed by eastmanchemical (see box) provides an excellent illustration of the dramatic cost reductions that can be achieved with this technology. specifically, a single reactivedistillation column replaced a large complex plant that consisted of one reactorand nine conventional columns. this not only reduced the required capital investment to onefifth of the original cost, but it also greatly reduced the energy consumption.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36beyond the molecular frontieremerging platforms for process intensificationand miniaturizationchemical engineers have responded successfully for years to pressures to improve the efficiency and reduce the cost of chemical processoperations and to design and construct chemical plants as safely andexpeditiously as possible. in this regard, the unit operations concept haslong been a useful organizing principle for the synthesis of chemical process flow sheets, while economies of scale and energy efficiency havedictated construction of the very large petrochemical plants that havedominated the scene for decades.however, this situation is hardly static. for instance, hybrid processmethods and apparatus for performing chemical operations in a highlyintegrated fashion are continually being introduced that defy simple classification according to the traditional unit operations schemeñand rendersomewhat naive the view of the process flow sheet as an orderly networkof discrete and welldefined steps. at the same time, the mix of technical,economic, and social factors that drive chemical plant siting, design, andcapacity decisions is continually evolving to reflect emerging social issuesrelated to environmental acceptability and public safety, especially wherethe transportation, storage, and use of hazardous chemicals are concerned. bigger is not necessarily better, and the future may conceivablywitness the construction of smaller, modular, less centralized, and moreflexible chemical plants capable of òondemandó chemical production.several technological responses to these emerging trends can begathered under the umbrella of process intensification. this term encompasses a wide range of methods and equipment for performing chemicalprocessing steps more quickly and compactly, thereby increasing thedemands for greater capital, energy, and material efficiency will require thedevelopment of more integrated process systems involving greater mass and energy recycle, as well as advances in computeraided process control to maintainsafety, reliability, flexibility, and operability in such highly integrated systems.capital efficiency will also drive the need for greater process intensification asdiscussed above, making more material more quickly and in less space. newmethods will need to be developed exploiting new phenomena to increase theintrinsic rates of mass transfer (for reactors and separations devices), heat transfer(again associated with separations and reactions devices), and reaction kinetics.in addition, the synergistic combination of multiple tasks into single devices suchas reactive distillation will become more widespread. such advances could resultin new reactor configurations and new separations and other processing equipment exploiting different phenomena than at present, resulting in smaller, simpler, less energydemanding processes, and less environmental impact.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing37volumetric productivity and reducing the footprint of the chemical plant.efforts at process intensification, underway for several decades, havefocused primarily on downsizing process equipment and boosting itsthroughput; staticmixerbased devices, compact heat exchangers, structured packings, catalyst monoliths, and centrifugal contactors have allbeen used for this purpose. in recent years, considerable energy hasalso been devoted to the design of multifunctional apparatus capable ofconducting several process steps in a synergistic fashion. such taskintegration is exemplified by the reactive distillation process for methylacetate production.continuesthe taskintegrated methyl acetate column is much simpler than a conventionalplant. courtesy of eastman chemical company.a family of approaches to achieving high volumetric productivity that isreceiving considerable attention in this age of miniaturization involves theuse of apparatus with very small flow channels with dimensions of several microns and up. the steep concentration and temperature gradientsrealized in such equipment encourage rapid heat and mass transfer andpromote greater uniformity of reaction conditions. not only the rate butalso the selectivity and yield of chemical conversions can, in principle, besignificantly improved. devices based on both silicon chip and microchannel architectures are currently being considered for performing rapidmixing, heatexchange, and catalytic reaction in a highly compact andintrinsically safe manner.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38beyond the molecular frontierthe silicon chip as a miniaturized chemical reactor. courtesy of felice frankel.micro heat exchangers based on microchannel architecture. top left and bottom:reprinted with permission from w. ehrfeld et al., microreactors: new technologyfor modern chemistry. wileyvch: weinheim, germany, 2000. top right: courtesy of the institut fuer mikrotechnik mainz, gmbh.chemically functional membranes afford yet another intriguing platform upon which processintensified chemistry can be performed. forexample, an enzyme membrane reactor process is used to produce abeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.synthesis and manufacturing39chiral intermediate for the cardiac drug diltiazem. this membrane systemperforms a number of tasks in a highly integrated and effective fashionincluding:¥reversible biocatalyst immobilization;¥ minimization of mass transfer resistance through efficient substrate/enzyme contact;¥separation of immiscible organic and aqueous process streams,along with separation of the reactants and products contained withinthem; and¥coupling of the enzymatic reaction with a subsequent complexationreaction designed to remove an inhibitory byproduct in the form of awatersoluble adduct.still other types of chemically functional membranesñparticularly adsorptive microfiltration membranes containing affinity ligands or othercomplexants bound to interior pore wall surfacesñare capable ofaqueous solutioncontainingbisulfite anion(2r, 3s) ð mmpgin solventenzyme in microporoushollowfibermembrane(2r, 3s) ð mmpg(2s, 3r) ð mmpgin solventaqueous solutioncontaining adduct formedbetween aldehyde and bisulfite anionohco2ch3ch3ohohco2hch3ohstereoselectiveenzymatichydrolysis(2s,3r)methyl methoxyphenylglycidate(2s,3r)methoxyphenylglycidic acidenzyme membrane reactor for production of diltiazem intermediate. a solution ofthe racemic ester in organic solvent enters the port at the bottom of the reactorand flows past the strands of microporous, hollowfiber membrane that contain anenzyme. the enzyme catalyzes hydrolysis of one enantiomer of the ester thatundergoes decarboxylation to 4methoxyphenylacetaldehyde (which in turn formsa watersoluble bisulfite complex that remains in the aqueous phase). the otherenantiomer of the ester remains in the aqueous stream that leaves the reactor viathe port at the top. courtesy of sepracor, inc.continuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40beyond the molecular frontierwhy all this is importantthe most distinctive aspect of the chemical sciences and engineering is theability to create new molecules and chemical systemsñfrom minute to commodity quantitiesñwithout being limited to the study of those that already exist innature. the expansion of our chemical universe through synthesis leads to greatnew scientific insights. moreover, chemical synthesis is the activity that has madechemistry and chemical engineering so vital to human health and welfare. theopportunities and challenges for the future are unlimited. the promise of bettermedicines and better materials depends on the ability of synthetic chemists tocreate new transformations and to use them in the creation and manufacture ofnew substances. it is no surprise that synthesis is still the active concern of a largefraction of practicing chemists, and will remain so.the development and implementation of techniques will be critical for allaspects of chemical manufacturingñfrom synthesis and analysis to optimization,evaluation, design, control, supplychain management scheduling, and operationof chemical process systems. this will need to be done in a way that is consistentwith societal and economic objectives and constraints. and it will be critical nomatter what the chemistry or biochemistry, whether isolated or in supplychainnetworks, dedicated or general purpose, batch or continuous, microscale ormacroscale. these constraints will require the further creation and exploitation ofa science base that includes novel representations of the underlying chemical andphysical phenomena. similarly, it will demand computationally efficient formulation and solution methods, as well as the expansion and incorporation of advanced process systems engineering expertise and judgment.dramatically downsizing adsorptive separation equipment. operation ofthese socalled òaffinity membranesó in a flowthrough mode sidestepsthe ratecontrolling diffusive mass transfer resistances characteristic ofparticulate adsorbents used in packed bedsñand so improves volumetricproductivity. interestingly, nature abounds with examples of processintensification realized with the aid of adsorptive membranes and enzymemembrane reactors.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.414chemical and physicaltransformations of mattergoalsa principal goal of the chemical sciences is to understand and manipulatechemical and physical transformations of matter. we are using the term transforsome challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥perfect the tools to study reaction mechanisms of chemical and biochemical reactions, so the processes can be observed directly andmore efficient syntheses can be designed rationally.¥develop reliable computer methods to predict the detailed pathwaysand rates of unknown chemical reactions, avoiding the need for creating and measuring them to determine their practicality.¥understand the chemistry and properties of large molecules, includingbiopolymers, to the level that smallmolecule chemistry is understood.¥understand the behavior of molecules and substances in unusual environments: at extreme temperatures or pressures, absorbed on solidsurfaces, or under shear flow.¥understand the chemistry of molecules and substances in their excited states, or at or near their critical points, and at the nanoscalelevel in which surface characteristics can dominate bulk properties.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42beyond the molecular frontiermation very generally here to mean a change in composition, state, or organization of matter, or movement or rearrangement of material by flow, heat or diffusion, which describes the very essence of chemical science and technology. weneed to understand the mechanisms of chemical reactions that we invent, as wellas the transformations that occur in living systems and in the environment. suchan understanding will aid in the design of new transformations.in this domain of transformations of matter, the full scope of the chemicalsciencesñfrom basic to applied to technological innovationñis easily seen. forexample, it is a fundamental challenge to understand how efficient catalysts, suchas natureõs enzymes, are able to perform transformations with very high speedsand selectivities. such insight would be useful in applied chemistry to designcatalysts or conditions for the transformations. catalysis has been key to a largenumber of new chemical products and processes in the last half century. catalyticchemical reactors are the central elements in chemical process systems in whichthermodynamic phase behavior, flow, heat transfer, and diffusion all play keyroles in performance. many processes arising in chemical science and technologyinvolve physical transformations in addition to, or even without, chemical reactions, such as phase change, polymer and particulate processing flows, or diffusion in liquids, solids, and membranes. this chapter provides an overview ofchemical and physical transformations of matter that are the heart of the chemicalscience enterprise.progress to datea chemical transformation can occur when molecules collide with sufficientenergy. typically, reaction happens when the molecules are heated or irradiatedto provide the energy necessary to overcome the activation barrier that separatesreactants from products. a catalyst reduces the magnitude of the activation barrier by changing the pathway of the reaction. as described in chapters 3, 7, and10, catalysis is fundamental to biology, to synthesis, to manufacturing, and toenergy saving and generation.many intermediates along the path of a reaction cannot be directly observedwith current instrumental technology, making this objective one of the longstanding goals of the chemical sciences. in 1999, ahmed zewail received the mostrecent of the several nobel prizes recognizing developments of methods to follow fast reactions. he was able to witness the bondbreaking and bondmakingprocess on the time scale of 10ð15 seconds, which some say is the limiting timescale for chemical reactions. in 1994, george a olah received a nobel prize forwork establishing the properties of reactive carbon cations, which are intermediates in many important transformations.whereas the detailed molecular structures involved throughout the entire procession from starting materials through the transition states to products in a chemical reaction are so far not directly observable, there are certain classical ways inbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical and physical transformations of matter43which reaction mechanisms are effectively deduced. one route is through the useof kinetics, the observation of how the rate of a reaction depends on concentrations of its various components, and on temperature and sometimes pressure. ifthe rate doubles when either of two reactants is doubled in concentration, weknow that both are together in the transition state, while if the reaction speeds upas the pressure is increased we know that the system has a decreased volume atthe transition state. chemical kinetics studies can also facilitate the design ofchemical reactors and processes.a related technique for revealing mechanisms measures the rates of relatedreactions, using reacting molecules that differ in a small way from each other. aclassical approach involves measurement of isotope effects. for example, when ahydrogen atom in a reactant is replaced by a deuterium atom, the isotope withtwice the mass, the rate of the reaction will be affected depending on what thathydrogen atom is doing at the transition state. this technique has contributed toour knowledge of mechanisms for a large number of reactions and has been particularly useful in exploring the mechanisms of enzyme reactions. enzymes willoften have such strict geometric requirements that significant changes in the sizeof the substrate can change the rate for geometric reasons. however, the changefrom hydrogen to deuterium does not involve such a geometric problem.one interesting feature of the hydrogen versus deuterium rate effect is that itcan be used to detect a very special phenomenonñquantum mechanical tunneling by the hydrogen. in this process, the hydrogen essentially disappears fromone position and then reappears a short distance away without traversing the intermediate space. this is possible because all atoms have the character of both aparticle and a wave, and waves can diminish in one spot and build up in anotherwithout necessarily rolling across the intervening region. such tunneling has beendemonstrated in some enzymatic reactions and invoked to help explain their veryhigh rates. more detailed understanding of quantum mechanical phenomena isessential to a clearer picture of chemical reaction mechanisms and rates.evidence on the mechanism of reactions can also come from examining theexact molecular geometry of the overall process, its stereochemistry. for example,if a reactant with defined handedness (chirality) is converted to a product that isan equal mixture of the left and righthanded forms, the loss of handedness indicates that a particular geometry must have been involved along the path. if arighthanded molecule is converted only to a lefthanded product, we say that aninversion of configuration has occurred, and this also tells us a lot about how thereaction occurred.chemists are also interested in developing reactions that produce new asymmetric centers within molecules. there is significant interest in the developmentof new catalysts that produce centers of asymmetry, or handedness, within molecules that have no preferred handedness to start. simple chiral molecules generated by these asymmetric catalysts are important building blocks for new medicines and research tools.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44beyond the molecular frontierseeing chemistry in motionchemical processes happen over a range of time scales that challenges our comprehension. some chemical reactions, such as thechange of diamond to graphite under normal conditions of temperatureand pressure or the spontaneous conversion of lefthanded to righthanded amino acids, are so slow that their rate of change is measured inmillions of human lifetimes or longer. contrast these processes with thedirect breaking of a chemical bond when a molecule absorbs light. sucha photodissociation process is so fast that it typically takes 10 to 100femtoseconds (i.e., between 10 x 10ð15 and 100 x 10ð15 seconds); this isthe time required for light to travel about 3 to 30 microns). as the 20thcentury came to a close, chemical scientists were delighted that theypossessed the tools to make kinetic measurements over the full range ofreaction rates.different changes take place on widely different time scales; consequently, the complex nature of chemical transformations often can beseparated into a set of discrete steps. each step that takes place on adifferent time scale requires the use of different experimental tools tostudy it. for example, consider the conformational change and folding ofrna, a key molecule transferring genetic instructions from dna to buildproteins, and a molecule that itself carries out biological transformations.for these molecules conformational changes occur on the time scale ofa few seconds. this information has been readily obtained by studyingfluorescence resonance energy transfer (fret) of a single rna moleculetagged with fluorescent dyes. the energy transfer is a sensitive functionof distance between energy donor and acceptor in the molecule. therefore, by labeling two sites of the rna by donor and acceptor molecules,it is possible to follow the rna conformation as a function of time.(a) conformational change of rna illustrating motion of the p1 duplex in the tetrahymena group i ribozyme. cy3 dye attached onto p1, and cy5 attached on theother end of rna acts as donor and acceptor, respectively. fret between cy3and cy5 signals conformational change occurring in rna molecule. (b) frettime traces from single ribozyme molecules showing p1 docking and undocking.fret is defined as ia/(id + ia), where ia and id are the fluorescence signals fromacceptor and donor, respectively. (c) histograms of the dwell times in the undocked(top) and docked states (bottom) obtained from the fret time trajectories. thesolid lines are single exponential fits of the data giving rate constants for docking(kdock = 1.62  0.08 s1 ) and undocking (kundock = 0.224  0.015 s1), respectively.reprinted with permission from x. zhuang, l. e. bartley, h. p. babcock, r. russell,t. ha, d. herschlag, s. chu, science, 288, 2048 (2000). copyright 2000, american association for the advancement of science.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical and physical transformations of matter45continuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46beyond the molecular frontier(a) structures of calmodulin with and without ca2+ ion binding. courtesy of mikaelakke, lund university, sweden. (b) linewidths of 43canmr spectrum of ca2+/calmodulin mixture as a function of temperature (circles), together with best fit tothe kinetics (solid line). by analyzing the temperature dependence, the activationbarrier is determined. adapted from t. drakenberg, s. fors”n, h. lilja, j. mag.res. 53, 412 (1983). reprinted from journal of magnetic resonance, 53, t.drakenberg et al., 43ca nmr studies of calcium binding to proteins: interpretation of experimental data by bandshape analysis, 412422, (1983), with permission from elsevier science.the binding of calcium ion to calmodulin, a major biochemical regulatorof ion pumps and receptors, occurs on a time scale about a thousandtimes shorter than that observed for rna conformational change. thisca2+calmodulin binding, which can be followed successfully by nuclearmagnetic resonance (nmr), occurs in about ten milliseconds.other chemical changes can be much faster than the rna conformational changes illustrated here. photodissociation of sodium iodide (nai)in the gas phase occurs on the time scale of a few picoseconds (10ð12seconds). to measure this phenomenon, nai molecules are irradiated bya subpicosecond ultraviolet pulse of radiation, and the subsequentevents are clocked by another short light pulse that detects the newbornfree calmodlinca2+  calmodulin complex(a)(b)beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical and physical transformations of matter47these examples illustrate only a small part of the range of time scalesthat chemists and chemical engineers examine in their studies of chemicalphenomena. by visualizing chemical transformations, chemical scientistsobtain a deeper fundamental understanding of how chemical reactionsoccur and even develop the ability to create favorable conditions to control some of these reactions.sodium atoms. the illustrations show the time evolution of the naatomwave function.(a) potential energy curves for the excited states of sodium iodide showing thecrossing of the ground state with the excited state (b) time evolution of free (emptysquares), and bound (filled circles) na fragments observed by laserinduced fluorescence. motion of the nai wave packet as a fraction of the molecules cross fromthe ionic ground state to the covalent repulsive excited state causes oscillations inthe observed signals. reprinted with permission from a. h. zewail, science, 242,1645 (1988). copyright 1988 american association for the advancement of science.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48beyond the molecular frontierusually we talk about reactions in solution, but recently techniques havebeen developed to follow reactions that occur in a vacuum when a stream ofreactant a and a stream of reactant b cross each other in a defined direction, aswith molecular beams. from the direction in which the products are ejected andtheir energies, much fundamental information can be deduced about the details ofthe molecular processes. lasers, which emit lightenergy in a highly focusedbeam, are sometimes used to put energy into one of the reactants in a definedway. such a technique reveals less about the nature of the transition state thanabout what is called the dynamics of the processñhow molecules collide so as toreact, and how the products carry away the energy of the overall reaction. thedevelopment and application of such techniques were recognized by a nobel prizein 1986 to dudley herschbach, yuan lee, and john polanyi.the interaction between experiment and theory is very important in the fieldof chemical transformations. in 1981 kenichi fukui and roald hoffmann received a nobel prize for their theoretical work on the electronic basis of reactionmechanisms for a number of important reaction types. theory has also been influential in guiding experimental work toward demonstrating the mechanisms ofone of the simplest classes of reactions, electron transfer (movement of an electron from one place to another). henry taube received a nobel prize in 1983 forhis studies of electron transfer in inorganic chemistry, and rudolf marcus received a nobel prize in 1992 for his theoretical work in this area. the state ofdevelopment of chemical reaction theory is now sufficiently advanced that it canbegin to guide the invention of new transformations by synthetic chemists.particular interest in recent times has centered on trying to understand thechemical mechanisms by which various biological processes occur. such complex events as the cleavage of rna by the enzyme ribonuclease, the multistepsynthesis of atp in vivo (paul boyer and john e. walker received nobel prizesin 1997 for working this out), and the activity of molecular motors that powerbacterial flagellae are now understood in molecular detail. george wald receiveda nobel prize in 1967 for discovering the chemical mechanism in the eye bywhich light is transformed into a signal to the brain that produces vision. therecent sequencing of the human genome has provided a molecular foundationfrom which other complex biological processes might be tackled at a molecularlevel.the basic science of chemical reactions has been put to good use for morethan half a century in the fuels, plastics, environmental, and biotechnology fields.one story illustrates well the societal benefit of learning to guide the pathways ofchemical reactions, in this case via catalysis and process design. the 1997 draperprize of the national academy of engineering, the engineering professionõs highest honor, went to vladimir haensel for his 1947 invention of platinumcatalyzedreforming of petroleum. the prize citation explains how, while working for universal oil products co. (now called uop), haensel sought to improve the process by which gasoline was produced from crude oil; thermal cracking of petrobeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical and physical transformations of matter49leum over a clay catalyst yielded only modest amounts of very lowoctane gasoline. haensel proposed using platinum as a catalyst for the refining process, despite the challenges posed by the expense and availability of platinum. he developed a simple method that was efficient in producing more gasoline from thesame amount of petroleum and that also produced a remarkably highergradefuel. platinum reforming produces vast amounts of aromatic hydrocarbons, theraw materials used in the manufacturing of plastics and synthetic fibers such aspolyester. platinumcatalyzed reforming has reduced u.s. reliance on foreign oil,broadened the worldõs longterm energy outlook, helped reduce pollution due tocombustion, and saved billions of dollars in transportation costs. these are revolutionary effects on energy, transportation, materials production, and our environment.for examples such as platinum reforming, designing the reactors is as essential for technological success as is detailing the chemistry. the chemical knowledge and new catalysis are embedded in the process, but other factors are necessary as well. these include transporting materials through the process equipment,mass transfer between the fluid and catalyst, controlling pressure and its effectson physical properties and phase behavior, and mixing and separation processes.advances in these physical aspects of transformation processes have been essential to modern chemical manufacturing. effective technological implementationrequires integrated knowledge and use of chemical and physical transformationfundamentals.important physical transformations between states of matter, not necessarilyinvolving chemical reaction, can occur on changes in temperature or pressure orapplication of external forces or fields. such phase transitions have been centralto quantitative research in chemical sciences, at least since the time of robertboyle in the mid17th century and, in a more modern context, sadi carnot, r.j.clausius, and j. willard gibbs in the 19th century. suitable choices or changes intemperature, pressure, and other controllable properties can produce abruptchanges (firstorder transitions) in the state of a substanceñfor example, boilingor freezing, or formation of systems having two phases coexisting with distinctphase boundaries between them.equations of state relate the phase properties to one another and are an essential part of the full, quantitative description of phase transition phenomena. theyare expressions that find their ultimate justification in experimental validationrather than in mathematical rigor. multiparameter equations of state continue tobe developed with parameters tuned for particular applications. this type of applied research has been essential to effective design of many reaction and separation processes.the last several decades have seen the growing scientific importance of phenomena near critical points, those conditions of system properties where two coexisting phases, such as liquid and vapor, become identical. this is exemplifiedby the 1982 nobel prize awarded to kenneth wilson for his theoretical studies ofbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50beyond the molecular frontiercritical phenomena and continuous or secondorder phase transitions. supercritical fluid processing is exploiting knowledge about this domain of phase behavior for new applications in separations, chemical reactions, and materials production. supercritical carbon dioxide is now used as a solvent in improved,environmentally benign methods for decaffeination of coffee and for dry cleaning (chapter 9).phase behavior in complex fluids such as polymer blends and block copolymers has been a rich area of the chemical sciences. nearcritical and other transitional phenomena are frequently prominent. since molecular movement in viscous systems such as these is comparatively slow, phase transitions can be studiedmore easily in time, and manipulated by quenching and other external influences.processes for controlled growth of ordered materials are often readily influencedby diffusion, a variety of external fields, and the influence of interacting boundaries, or flow.flow processes in materials that contain structural elements, such as polymers and suspensions, can influence important physical and chemical transformations. thinning or thickening of fluids under shear flow, structural rearrangements that affect physical properties, and flow of granular media are just a fewexamples where flow produces major changes in a chemical product, often permanent and sometimes helpful. alignment of polymer molecules in fibers andfilms is essential to produce high strength. for example, ultrahigh molecularweight polyethylene fibers, which appear gellike when produced, are used inbulletproof vests. arranging the fibers to cross at 0 degree and 90 degree anglescauses the material to have excellent protective properties. paints, coatings, inks,toners, and adhesives often contain particulate additives precisely for the purposeof producing interactions that respond to the imposition of flow. the science ofthese interactions is advancing rapidly, through theory and experiment. extending molecular theories to the length scales of particles has produced detailed descriptions of the behavior of hard spheres, polymercoated particles, and associating colloids. experimental insight has come from rheology (the study of thechanging form and flow of matter), light scattering, and microscopy, often usingnational facilities for synchrotron xrays and neutrons. frequently systems can beobserved under flow to illuminate the òtransition statesó of these physical transformations.the importance of physical transformations in making chemical productsimplies a vast opportunity for understanding structures of many kinds of important chemical products at higher levels and longer lengthscales than those ofindividual molecules. structured chemical products will be a rapidly growingarea, particularly with the investments of financial and intellectual resources thatare currently being made in nanoscale science and engineering. in the past 15years we have seen an accelerating explosion in the ability to formulate, characterize, and predict phase behavior and the resulting transport processes for colloids, surfactant solutions, and block copolymers in particular. control over synbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical and physical transformations of matter51thesis and interparticle forces has allowed selective addition of nonadsorbing,associative, and diblock copolymers, and external electric and magnetic fieldshave been used to control equilibrium phase behavior and rheology.chemists have synthesized a spectacular array of submicron and nanoparticles with welldefined size and atomic structure and very special properties.examples include cdse quantum dots and novel spheres and rods. transport enters the picture via fundamental studies of the physical processes that affect thesynthesis, which must be understood for even modest scaleup from the milligram level. likewise, processes for assembling fascinating facecenteredcubiccrystals or ordered multilayers must concentrate on organizing the particles viaflow, diffusion, or action of external fields. nearperfection is possible but requires careful understanding and control of the forces and the rates.block copolymers consist of two or more sections of polymer, of which eachsection is made of a single type of monomer. block copolymers are representative of a class of structured chemical products where physical chemistry and synthetic chemistry must go hand in hand to create the desired product. the vasteffort invested in copolymer microphase separation has recently spawned a number of novel efforts. studies of the relationship between molecular architecture,orderedphase morphology, and mechanical properties have shown that multiblock copolymers offer special advantages in product properties that result fromthe molecular connectivity over the multiple domains that they create. equallyimportant to mechanical properties are the new transport properties and membrane separation capabilities that structured, composite chemical products candeliver. another example is the development of block copolymer nanolithography. ordered monolayers with spherical or cylindrical morphologies are cast,and the minority phase is then removed to permit etching or deposition throughthe gaps in the remaining continuous phase. the results are holes or posts withlattice spacings on the order of 10 nm over remarkably large areas. in both theseexamples, transport processes limit the rate of annealing due to thermal motion,but when driven by flow or external fields, may conspire to provide even longerrange order. application of external fields in physical transformations produceseffects analogous to those of catalysis in chemical reactionsñenhancing the ratesand selecting the products. transport phenomena play crucial roles in both thecreation and performance of structured chemical products. this idea has littleparallel in mechanistic studies of reactions to synthesize simpler molecular chemical products.transport phenomena present an important challenge in the progression toward smaller lengthscales of microscale, nanoscale, and molecular scale. chemical processing will need to exploit smallscale reactors in new applications. understanding chemical and physical transformations at these lengthscales will benecessary for advances in microfluidics, for progress in developing new chemicaland biological sensor applications, and for realizing the promise of selfassemblyas a chemical processing method. molecular models of structured fluids (polybeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52beyond the molecular frontiermers, suspensions, composites), validated in part by singlemolecule mechanicalmeasurements, will be crucial to the growth in this area.challenges and opportunities for the futurehow can we obtain direct information on the molecular details of a reactionpath and harness this for the design of new processes? while femtosecond spectroscopy has made it possible to observe reactions on a short time scale, a majorchallenge is to devise ultrafast techniques, such as superfast electron diffraction,that will permit observation of the actual molecular structure of a transition state,not just its rate of passage. as a general goal, we want to be able to make movingpictures of the reactions themselves, observing all the intermediate states and therates at which they interconvert. such moving pictures can be generated evennow, by computer simulation of the reaction; the problem is to determine whetherthose pictures are correct. thus a second challenge is to interface with theoreticalchemistry in getting the best possible calculations, and then devise experimentaltests of the major theoretical predictions to see whether experiments confirm thecorrectness of the calculations.most mechanistic work has focused on chemical reactions in solution or extremely simple processes in the gas phase. there is increasing interest in reactions in solids or on solid surfaces, such as the surfaces of solid catalysts in contact with reacting gases. some such catalysts act inside pores of defined size,such as those in zeolites. in these cases only certain molecules can penetrate thepores to get to the reactive surface, and they are held in defined positions whenthey react. in fact, the mobil process for converting methanol to gasoline dependson zeolitecatalyzed reactions.there is also increasing interest in reactions involving organometallic compounds, at the interface between organic and inorganic chemistry. many suchreactions are useful in synthesis, where the organometallic reagents can haveimportant properties as catalysts. many details of reaction mechanisms in organometallic chemistry are yet unclear; understanding these mechanisms will allowthe development of improved catalysts.much work has been done to help understand how metal ions react or catalyze reactions in solution. many enzymes also use bound metal ions to catalyzetheir reactions, and there is still need to understand how they work. when we dounderstand them in detail, we should be able to produce biomimetic catalysts foruseful processes in manufacturing.when molecules react thermally, at room temperature or on heating, they arein their lowest electronic states. however, when reactions occur on irradiation ofthe molecules with visible or ultraviolet light, the processes involve species inelectronic excited states. some of the details of such processes are known, butthere is still much to do. since photoexcitation is important in many areasñphotosynthesis, photography, electronic displays, solar cells, cancercausing ulbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical and physical transformations of matter53traviolet interactions with the skin, identification of interstellar molecules, degradation of materials and dyes by sunlightñit is important to investigate these processes. as part of understanding the chemical universe with all the substancesand transformations that are possible, or at least learning their major features,basic chemical science needs to understand transformations of excited states, notjust of ground states.the design of multicomponent processes remains an important challenge.conventional process development has focused on single reactions and their optimization. new processes that involve reaction cascades, where the product ofone reaction feeds the next, will permit more efficient production of industrial orbiomedical products. a detailed understanding of biological metabolic networkswill facilitate the design of similarly complex artificial systems. computationalanalysis of such interconnected reaction networks will be important for reactionmodeling and design.it is a continuing challenge to understand the properties of enzymes. theyare usually very effective catalysts, able to speed up reactions of many biologicalsubstances in both the forward and reverse directions. also, their activities can bemodified by inhibitors that bind to them, and many medicines such as cholesterolreducing drugs function as enzyme inhibitors. to some extent the details ofthe catalytic mechanisms of enzymes have been elucidated, or at least guessed at.however, there is not yet a real understanding of the factors that contribute toenzymesõ high effectiveness, and we do not yet have good examples of syntheticanalogs of enzymes that catalyze the same reactions with the same or better speedsand selectivities. a full understanding of enzymes will enable the introduction ofsynthetic catalysts, which will be of great value in manufacturing. the introduction of synthetic catalysts may also contribute to the development of a new classof medicines. medicines today operate mainly by binding to various biologicalmolecules, but they donõt carry out catalyzed reactions in the body. if we fullyunderstand enzymes well enough to be able to make new catalysts of similareffectiveness, such artificial enzymes could be an exciting class of molecularmachines and medicines. they could destroy undesirable species or toxins, orpromote the formation of materials that are present in insufficient quantities dueto some diseases. we are also learning how to recreate the process of evolutionthrough natural selection in a test tube.1 new enzymes can be evolved by applying selective pressure for improved properties or even for totally different functions.by manipulating genes, chemists have learned to create new enzymes withnew functions. to do this rationally and predictably, it is critical to understandthe structures and mechanisms of the genes that are being modified. enzymes andother biological components often function in clusters, in multicomponent sys1a. d. keefe and j. w. szostak. nature 410 (6829) 715718, 5 apr 2001.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54beyond the molecular frontiertems. thus even when we understand fully the chemical properties of a pureenzyme, a challenge remainsñto understand the properties of interacting molecules, including enzymes, assembled into welldefined structures.why all this is importantany list of applications such as the examples presented in this chapter isalways too limited. it is more realistic to say that there are still big gaps in ourunderstanding of the molecular details of chemical and biochemical reactions.the chemical universe is filled with transformations, both natural and invented.we apply them in manufacturing, we admire them in biological chemistry, butwe do not yet know enough about their details. with understanding, when wehave it, will come greatly improved methods for synthesis and manufacturing.increased understanding of the details and special character of transformationswill also lead to applications not yet even thought of, as has happened with everybig advance in scientific understanding.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥improve the tools for imaging and determining structure so that detailed chemical structures can be determined with tiny amounts of noncrystalline material.¥improve the ability of instruments to detect and quantify very low concentrations of important substances, even in very small volumes.¥develop effective methods for detecting dangerous materials, evenwhen they are hidden.¥understand the chemistry that occurs in interplanetary and interstellarspace, for which spectroscopy is the primary tool available.¥develop instruments for online process control that bring the power ofmodern analytical and structuredetermination methods to chemicalmanufacturing technology555isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structuresgoalschemical scientists want to explore the natural world and identify all itschemical components. they also want and need to identify all of the new chemical substances produced directly and indirectly as a result of their synthetic andbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56beyond the molecular frontiermanufacturing endeavors. as described in chapter 7, much of this has involvedlearning the nature of the substances that are part of, and produced by, livingorganisms. generally it is necessary to learn how to separate complex mixturesinto their pure components, and then determine the molecular structure of eachcomponent. this sequence is also necessary for the substances that are created inthe laboratory or in manufacturing. if a mixture is produced, it must be separatedinto its components, and each new species must have its chemical structure determined.detecting known substances, and determining their quantity, is also important. in synthetic research, it is essential to know the relative proportions of various reaction products. in manufacturing, it is important to detect any impurities inthe product and to determine whether they are present in a significant amount.analytical characterization is critical in pharmaceutical products, for instance.products for practical usesñpaint or adhesives, for exampleñwill typically consist of several components. for proper and reliable performance it is important tomeasure the amounts of each of the components as part of a manufacturing quality control system. manufacturers also commonly need to analyze the raw materials they receive, measuring the amounts of various substances in them to be surethat the material meets their requirements. before it can be correctly processedinto steel, iron ore must be analyzed to determine how much of other componentsneed to be added to produce a metal alloy of the desired composition and properties.the determination of quantity in complex mixtures is also vital in health careand medicine. we are all familiar with the medical examinations in which asample of blood or urine is sent to a laboratory for analysis. the procedures usedhave been developed by chemists, and are performed by trained chemical technicians. the high level of automation achieved by the chemists who designed theseanalytical procedures has greatly reduced the costs of such analyses. clinicalanalysis continues to be driven by a need for better methods to detect and measure important proteins, for example, that while present in tiny amounts are relevant to our health and wellbeing.there is a constant need for better methods of chemical analysis, driven byour need to know òwhatõs in that, how much is present, and how long will itlast?ó the frontiers in this field lie in improving sensitivity to detect vanishinglysmall quantities, to separate extremely complex mixtures of chemical substances,and to assess the structures or compositions of components. measurements usingvery small or very dilute samples can present a major challenge in clinical medicine or environmental analyses. moreover, often we must deal with all of theabove determinations in extremely small spaces, such as that of a living cell.fundamentally new approaches may be needed to achieve these objectives. as animportant example, there is currently a need for sensitive methods to detectñin ahighthroughput environmentñexplosives in airplane baggage and in land minesin wartorn areas (see also chapter 11). these problems are being approached bybeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolating, identifying, imaging, and measuring57developing very sensitive arrays of chemical detectors, sometimes called artificial noses, that can detect and identify volatile components of explosives in verysmall amounts. other problems are learning to detect chemical and biologicalwarfare agents, both on the battlefield and in civilian areas, and to detect tracecomponents in our environment, either anthropogenic or of natural origin, thatoffer health risks to living organisms: human, beast, insect, fungus, and plant.progress to datestructure determinationa vital activity of the chemical sciences is the determination of structure.detailed molecular structure determinations require identifying the spatial locations of all of the atoms in molecules, that is, the atomic distances and bondangles of a species. it is important to realize that the threedimensional architecture of molecules very much defines their reactivity and function. however, molecules are dynamic, a feature that is not reflected by static pictures. this last pointrequires further explanation. because the atoms in all molecules move, even inthe limit of the lowest temperatures obtainable, molecular structures really describe the average position about some equilibrium arrangement. in addition, rotations about certain bonds occur freely at common temperatures. consequently,some molecules exist in more than one structure (conformation). some moleculesare so floppy that structural characterizations really refer to averages among several structures. yet other molecules are sufficiently rigid that molecular structures can be quite precisely determined.the techniques available to achieve molecular structure determinations arelimited. they include structural analysis with diffraction techniquesñsuch aselectron, neutron, and xray diffractionñand various absorption and emissiontechniques of electromagnetic radiationñsuch as microwave spectroscopy andnuclear magnetic resonance (nmr). for molecules with unpaired spins a companion technique of electron spin resonance spectroscopy (esr) is highly informative.a number of other spectroscopies provide information that is related to molecular structure, such as coordination symmetry, electronic splitting, and/or thenature and number of chemical functional groups in the species. this informationcan be used to develop models for the molecular structure of the system understudy, and ultimately to determine the forces acting on the atoms in a moleculefor any arbitrary displacement of the nuclei. according to the energy of the particles used for excitation (photons, electrons, neutrons, etc.), different parts of amolecule will interact, and different structural information will be obtained. depending on the relaxation process, each method has a characteristic time scaleover which the structural information is averaged. especially for nmr, the relaxation rate may often be slower than the rate constant of a reaction under study.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58beyond the molecular frontierthe application of theoretical tools for predicting molecular structure, suchas ab initio calculations and density functional methods, are discussed in chapter6. these tools provide only a first approximation to the molecular structure. thereis much room for further development of theoretical molecular structure calculations, but even so such methods have already become a standard part of molecular structure determinations.the following section presents a variety of instrumental spectroscopic techniques for the determination either of molecular structure or of parameters relatedto molecular structure. the applicability of each method, its particular advantages as well as its limitations, are presented. it is not an exhaustive list. thespectroscopic methods are discussed in order of increasing excitation energy.nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopiesnmr has proven to be invaluable as a tool for structure determination,particularly of new compounds isolated from nature. all synthetic chemists usenmr to see whether they have made the product they want, even if it is a previously unknown molecule. in fact, nmr has really revolutionized the practice oforganic synthesis. nmr is typically applied to molecules in solution, so it can beused with noncrystalline materials, for which xray crystallography is not possible. it also can be used to learn whether the structure determined in the solidstate by xray methods is maintained in solution. this is particularly importantfor proteins, which are flexible enough that they can change shape to some extentwhen they dissolve. a nobel prize in 1991 went to richard ernst for inventingnew techniques in nmr that are important tools in the study of proteins. kurtwthrich shared a nobel prize in 2002 for developing nmr methodology thatenables determination of the threedimensional structures of biological macromolecules in solution.nmr finds its main application in the analysis of solutions, using 1h as themost sensitive nucleus; 13c, 19f, and 31p nuclei are also used frequently. nmryields information on chemical functional groups of organic ligands and has revolutionized work in synthesis. multidimensional techniques can be used for finding spatial connections between nuclei and gaining information on moleculardynamics. an important recent advance is nmr on solids, not solutions, withwhich it is possible to study the structures of polymers, of proteins in membranes,and of chemicals immobilized on solid supports. the application of nmr to imaging the human body, or magnetic resonance imaging (mri), has revolutionizedthe practice of medicine.the major current limitation of nmr is its sensitivity (ca. 10ð4 m in 1h, 13c,19f, 31p). it is expected that higher sensitivities will be reached in the future asmore powerful magnets with improved instrumentation and software becomeavailable. the ultimate goal would be to perform nmr analyses of single molecules.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolating, identifying, imaging, and measuring59rotational spectroscopiesrotational spectra provide measurement of the moments of inertia of a chemical species. bond angles and bond lengths can be derived by making isotopicsubstitutions and measuring the resulting changes in the moments of inertia. amajor drawback of rotational spectroscopies is the limited information containedin a measurement of the moment of inertia. consequently, while quite precise, itis generally limited to smaller molecules. it is the chief technique used to identifymolecules in outer space, such as the components of interstellar gas clouds.vibrational spectroscopiesinfrared and raman spectroscopies provide complementary information concerning the type of functional groups present, as well as bond strengths in a molecule. recent experiments using infrared pulse sequences offer the tantalizingpossibility of bringing to infrared and raman spectroscopies the same advantagesthat have been realized in pulsed nmr spectroscopiesñgreater sensitivity andhigher information content. a major limitation of vibrational spectroscopies hasbeen the congestion of overlapping features at lower frequencies. however thiscongestion makes an infrared spectrum a literal fingerprint of the structure ofsmall molecules, so the identity of known molecules can be assessed from a library of their spectra. some of the molecules in interstellar space have been identified by their infrared spectra. new resonant enhancement techniques can provide useful information about molecules on surfaces and at interfaces.electronic spectroscopiesthe interaction of species with shorter wavelengths of radiation causes electronic excitation (boundbound electronic spectroscopy) or even ejection (boundcontinuum photoionization). these events also show the fine structure of themotions of the nuclei. in addition, nuclear motions moderate the energies of theejected electrons, and an analysis of the electron energy provides additionalchemical information. thus, xray photoelectron spectroscopy (xps) is an excellent technique for determining an atomõs electron binding energies, at least forspecies on the surface of the material under study. valuable information aboutsurfaces can also be obtained from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (ups),a technique that reveals ionization potentials and molecular orbital orderings forsubstances in general.by comparing the chemical shifts and peak heights of an unknown with standards or known reference materials, some predictions of the unknown structurecan be made. in some exceptional but important cases, such as the photodetachment of negative ions, the wavelength of light causing photoionization is in thevisible or even the near infrared, allowing extremely precise structure determinations.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60beyond the molecular frontieranother noteworthy example is xray absorption fine structure (exafs).exafs data contain information on such parameters as coordination number,bond distances, and meansquare displacements for atoms that comprise the firstfew coordination spheres surrounding an absorbing element of interest. this information is extracted from the exafs oscillations, previously isolated from thebackground and atomic portion of the absorption, using nonlinear leastsquare fitprocedures. it is important in such analyses to compare metrical parameters obtained from experiments on model or reference compounds to those for samplesof unknown structure, in order to avoid ambiguity in the interpretation of resultsand to establish error limits.the absorption spectra in the xray absorption near edge structure (xanes)region contain information concerning coordination geometry and metal ion valence. exafs and xanes data can be obtained on samples in different physicalstates or in solution and can be made element selective by tuning the wavelengthused for the study. a drawback of these absorption spectroscopies is the need tobring the sample to a large dedicated facility.nuclear structure spectroscopiesnuclei also have bound energy levels that can be accessed with gammaraysources. of great chemical interest is mıssbauer spectroscopy, which takes advantage of the recoilfree emission of gamma radiation from a solid radioactivematerial. because the gamma emission is recoilfree, it can be resonantly absorbed by stationary nuclei in a solid. typically, the gamma ray source is mechanically vibrated back and forth to doppler shift the energy of the emittedgamma radiation. a detector records the frequencies of gamma radiation that areabsorbed by the sample as the energy of the gamma radiation is scanned by doppler shifting.the nuclear transitions are very sensitive to the local environment of theatom, and mıssbauer spectroscopy is a sensitive probe of the different environments an atom occupies in a solid material. by analyzing the chemical shifts andquadrupole splitting in mıssbauer spectra of samples containing mıssbaueractive nuclei, information on the state of oxidation and the local structure can beobtained. only a few nuclei can be used for this purpose, so this method haslimited but powerful applications.diffraction techniquesxray, neutron, and electron diffraction techniques are used to determinecrystal structures and can thus be used for molecular structure determinations.because of its high resolution and applicability to small and often weakly diffracting samples, xray crystallography and powder diffraction are by far themethods of choice for most structure determinations on crystalline compounds,beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolating, identifying, imaging, and measuring61either single crystals or crystalline powders. diffraction techniques are not applicable to amorphous phases at present, but the exciting possibility looms on thehorizon to use ultrafast techniques to obtain diffraction patterns of possibly aslittle as one biological molecule (see below).the intensity and tunability of synchrotron radiation have revolutionized theapplication of xrays for studying the structure of macromolecules, enabling muchhigher resolution information to be obtained on increasingly large and complexmolecular systems. the average bulk crystalline structure determined from diffraction studies is expressed as simple, small, symmetric arrangements of atomsin a unit cell. however, local deviations from this average structure are often thedriving force behind the collective behavior of a crystalline compound. neutroncrystallography has the unique advantage of high contrast for the location of hydrogen atoms, so it affords information complementary to that normally obtainedfrom xray crystallography.as conventionally applied today, xray methods give rise to òtimeaveragedóstructural information. since many chemical processes, including the making andbreaking of chemical bonds, occur in the subpicosecond time domain, timeresolved structural information has been limited and only indirectly available. recent developments in electron diffraction and soontobeavailable xray lasersources could dramatically improve the investigation of structural dynamics.compressed electron pulses can be produced with reasonable intensities andwidths of a few picoseconds; these are being used to study relatively simple molecular reactions. xray freeelectron lasers, based on using high energy linearaccelerators providing beams to long undulators, have the promise of easily reaching pulse lengths of only a few hundred femtoseconds and, with additional magnetic and optical compression schemes, likely the regime of only a few femtoseconds. such xray freeelectron lasers might have sufficient photons in a singlepulse to record an entire diffraction pattern, hence bringing the most powerfultools used today for structural determination to bear on understanding chemicaland biological reactions.a major limitation of diffraction techniques has been the need to obtain crystalline samples. if scientists could learn how to crystallize large molecules in aroutine manner, a breakthrough would result. in the biological area, this limitation is keenly experienced for membranebound proteins, which are important inmany biological functions. scientists are now devising techniques and strategiesto crystallize these proteinsñif not in threedimensional, then in twodimensionallattices.future development of spectroscopic structuredetermination methods willdepend on the availability of more powerful photon and particle sources as wellas advances in photon and particle detectors. impressive progress has been madein molecular structure determinations based on advances in computation powerand in computational algorithms, such as fast fouriertransform techniques, fornearly every form of spectroscopy and diffraction analysis. hajdu and coworkbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62beyond the molecular frontierers1 have presented calculations estimating radiation damage of samples. theysuggest that useful structural information might be obtained before radiation damage destroys the sample by using femtosecond xray pulses. moreover, their calculations indicate that sufficiently bright light sources might be capable of imaging ultrasmall samples at sizes approaching that of a single biological molecule.structure determination has greatly advanced with the invention of new waysto use xray crystallography, mainly new mathematical methods that permit theinterpretation of the observed patterns of diffraction of xrays by a crystal, translating it into the molecular structures in the crystal. a nobel prize in 1985 toherbert hauptmann and jerome karle recognized such an advance.mass spectrometrythe òweighingó of a molecule of a chemical substance and of its fragmentshas great utility in both assessing molecular identity and determining molecularstructure. the determination of molecular weight is after all one of the most elemental aspects of puzzling out the structure and identity of an unknown sampleor a new substance. furthermore, if the molecular mass can be determined withsufficient accuracy, the elemental formula of the substance can be estimated or atleast the possible choices narrowed considerably. for materials such as thoseencountered in biologically derived samples, where the quantities available arevery small, determining a molecular weight and elemental formula are extremelyimportant steps. ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (icrms) has beenespecially effective at exact mass determinations.mass spectrometry requires that the material being studied be converted intoa vapor. great strides have been taken in recent years to address this problem,especially in enticing large, thermally fragile (bio)molecules into the vapor state.matrix assisted laser ionizationdesorption (maldi) and electrospray ionization(esi) are two current forefront methods that accomplish this task. even components of bacteria and intact viruses are being examined with these approaches.john b. fenn and koichi tanaka shared in the award of a nobel prize in 2002 fortheir respective contributions to development of electrospray ionization and softlaser desorption.a decade or so ago, mass spectrometry was regarded as a òmatureó area ofmethodology. the invention of new ways to volatilize molecules, from solids andfrom surfaces, has revolutionized and reinvigorated this field. it is an excellentexample of how new ideas can make even supposedly òdeadó areas find new life.1neutze, r.; wouts, r.; van der spoel, d.; weckert, e.; hajdu, j. nature, 406 (6797) p. 752, 2000.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolating, identifying, imaging, and measuring63measurement science, or analytical chemistrythe scope of this branch of chemistry encompasses both the fundamentalunderstanding of how to measure properties and amounts of chemicals, and thepractical understanding of how to implement such measurements, including thedesign of the necessary instruments. the need for analytical measurements arisesin all research disciplines, industrial sectors, and human activities that entail theneed to know not only the identities and amounts of chemical components in amixture, but also how they are distributed in space and time. these sectors ofneed include research in specific disciplines (such as chemistry, physics, materials science, geology, archeology, medicine, pharmacy, and dentistry) and in interdisciplinary areas (such as forensic, atmospheric, and environmental sciences),as well as the needs of government policy, space exploration, and commerce.practical needs for analysis come from the activities of industrial enterprisesand government functions that span manufacturing, shipping, communications,domestic power, water supplies, waste disposal, forensic analysis, environmentalpolicies, international verification of quality and quantity (metrology), and farfrom least of all, national security. the need for measurements of chemicals isubiquitousñmeasurements of the mass and dimensions of chemical substancesand of their capacity to adsorb heat, to absorb or reflect light, and to respond topressure and temperature. many measurements also must be made under varyingconstraints of speed, cost, and location of the measurement.this enormous diversity of customers seeking analytical information placespressing and urgent demands on chemical scientists. in response, many great successes have been achieved but, at the same time, fastmoving advances in science, technology, and human activity continue to awaken sleeping giants thatdemand new, better, faster, cheaper, more sensitive, and more selective measurements.the following is an outline of some success stories in analytical measurements. they are categorized in terms of progress in improving sensitivity formeasuring very small quantities, of dealing with sample complexity, of measuring large molecules, of making measurements in small dimensions, and of increasing the throughput of new analytical information.sensitivitynearly every area of measurement science can boast of progress in measuring eversmaller quantities of chemicals, but several stand out in their stunningtraceanalysis capabilities. tracemetal analysis has come to be dominated bymethods that volatilize the sample and then either measure its spectroscopic emission or absorption, or measure the masses of the gaseous metal ions using massspectrometry. volatilization is accomplished by various thermal means that include flames, furnaces, and inductively coupled or microwave plasmas. the combeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64beyond the molecular frontierbination of the inductively coupled plasma with mass spectrometry allows highsensitivity analysis of virtually every metallic element in the periodic table. thesemethods are used worldwide for tracemetal analysis.lasers have innumerable uses in measurement science; in the excitation ofmolecular emission (fluorescence) they have become workhorses of analyticalinstruments and have produced remarkable levels of analytical sensitivity. lasersare widespread as components of detectors in commercialized chromatographicinstruments and clinical analyses. laserinduced fluorescence has been carried tothe ultimate sensitivity of detecting single moleculesñthere is no more sensitivemeasurement than this! the very idea of measuring ultralow concentrations losesits meaning when one detects a single molecule, but the fruit of this remarkableaccomplishment is that one can contemplate measuring variations in properties ofindividual molecules, including enzymes and other proteins. in addition, by following the time behavior of a single molecule it would be possible to unmaskmany important aspects of structure, kinetics, and function of molecules that arehidden by measurements over averages of many molecules. this sensitivity advance revolutionizes how chemical scientists think about measuring molecularbehavior, which in the past has always reflected averages of many molecules.singlemolecule spectroscopy thus offers valuable information that cannot beobtained by studying a bulk sample.in clinical analysis, one of the recent advances has been the use of antibodiesto detect biologically important substances, including medicines. chemists andchemical engineers devised ways to translate the binding of a molecule to anantibody into a detectable signal, sometimes amplifying the signal by an enzymecatalyzed reaction that could be modulated by antibody binding. such methodshave largely replaced related methods using radioactive tracers.sample complexitysample complexity refers to measurements of mixtures of chemicals and totheir context. complexity can mean large numbers of similar chemicals beingsimultaneously present (petroleum for example), mixtures of very large similarmolecules (biomolecular systems), reactivity and thermal fragility of mixturecomponents, and the context of the analysis (such as detection of explosives inairport luggage). the invention of various methods for separating the chemicalcomponents of complex mixtures has benefited enormously from the techniquesgenerally known as chromatography and electrophoresis. these techniques andthe instruments used in them are constantly being improved.the principal analytical methods for complex samples are those that separatethe mixture by differential migration and then detect the separated components.the separation methods are chromatography, electrophoresis, and field flow fractionation; the detection methodsñwhich need not be selective but must be sensitiveñinclude absorption, laserinduced fluorescence, electrochemistry, and massbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolating, identifying, imaging, and measuring65spectrometry. gas chromatography (gc), highperformance liquid chromatography (hplc), and capillary electrophoresis (ce) have been extremely successful.hplc has become the backbone of the pharmaceutical industry, providing essential information on purity (chemical and isomeric) of candidate and manufactureddrug agents. gc is routinely the method of choice for gaseous or easily volatilized mixtures, and is commonly used with a mass spectrometer to identify themixture components as well as to detect and measure their quantities. ce is themost powerful existing separations method (by orders of magnitude), and it isused for very difficult separations. as analytical chemistry has advanced into theworld of molecules that biology creates, ce is the method of choice for the hugelycomplex mixtures of chemicals present in living organisms and their cellular subcomponents. ce has been employed for separation of the contents of individualcells and subcellular compartments (organelles), and it is the enabling analyticalmethod for the human genome project. an important frontier continues to bepractical ways to combine the merits of different separation methods, such ashplcce, to create hybrid separation techniques.other analytical approaches to complex systems include methods that respond selectively to individual chemicals (or a selected class), the detection ofwhich is of paramount importance. examples are chemical and biological warfare agents, industrial pollutants and toxins, and carbon monoxide in the air in ourhomes. attaining analytical selectivity outside a pristine laboratory setting is oneof the most difficult and widely unsolved analytical needs. ion mobility spectrometry (ims) and gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (gc/ms) are on trialin airport security checkpoints. while one can point to many successes, includingthe co detector in your home, analytical chemistry continues to struggle for sensitivity and selectivity in competition with nosebased odor detection by dogs!macromolecules and biomacromoleculesthe birth of polymer science provoked numerous new analytical challengesseveral decades ago; the existing thrust of chemical sciences into molecular biology is now provoking many more challenges at a rapid pace. polymers, alongwith pharmaceuticals, are arguably the most important and beneficial substancesthat synthetic chemistry has brought to the human race. synthetic polymers generally consist of individual molecules having different chain lengths and molecular weights. this complexity is an important factor in determining properties ofthe polymer. understanding of relations between polymer structure and properties has been aided enormously by the development of gel permeation chromatography (which measures the dispersity of polymer chain length), of infraredspectroscopy (which measures functional groups), and of thermal methods likedifferential scanning calorimetry (which detects polymer crystallinity).there have likewise been early successes in addressing measurements ofbiopolymers, particularly their molecular weights, and to a more limited extentbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66beyond the molecular frontiertheir structure and folding. the most important techniques for structure determination, in addition to xray crystallography, include highfield nuclear magneticresonance (nmr) spectroscopy and mass spectrometry (ms). a host of computerreliant nuclear relaxation protocols and highfield magnet technology havecombined to cement an nmr foundation that has brought about a 30fold advance in terms of chemical shift resolution from the first commercial introductionof nmr in the 1960s. in mass spectrometry, there is an ongoing evolution ofways to entice large, thermally fragile biomolecules into the gas phase; the methods of electrospray ionization (esi) and matrixinduced laser desorptionionization (maldi) are presently the most widely adopted.small dimensionsthe measurement of a chemical on a surface or in a small volume has historically been quite challenging. the amounts of sample are small, so the measurement must be sensitive; the sample is spatially localized, so the measurementmust be spatially selective; and the sample may exhibit ordering that the measurement must be able to detect. the advances in measurement capabilities in thisarena have been truly remarkable and are ongoing. most of the measurements arebased on principles that were unknown 50 years ago. surface analysis can nowcall on xray and auger photoelectron spectroscopy (aes) to measure emittedphotoelectrons, revealing the identity of atoms within several nanometers of asolid surface. secondary ion mass spectrometry (sims) measures the emittedionconsequences of crashing energetic or heavy ions onto the surface. molecularordering and quantities on surfaces can be delineated using vibrational spectroscopy, surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy, and raman and surface enhancedraman spectroscopy (sers), all of which have been enabled by the laser. theseadvances in surface composition and structure analysis have been crucial in thedevelopment of the microelectronics industry, which lives or dies by the properties and composition of surfaces.imaging of the lateral composition and topography of surfaces has long beenan important area and includes topics like electron microscopyñwhich has madephenomenal advances in recent yearsñand scanning auger electron spectroscopy. the measurement of ordering and arrangements of atoms and molecules ina small volume or on a surface was given a quantum leap by the invention ofscanning tunneling microscopy (stm) and its progeny of various atomic forceand surface force microscopies. the enabling tools in the new instruments were(again) the laser, piezoelectric materials, and computer instrumentcontrol. it ispresently possible to visualize the ordering of atoms on a surface, and even toarrange individual atoms, such as òquantum corrals,ó2 with the contacting tip2s. l. silva and f. m. leibsle, surface science, 441, l904, 1999.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolating, identifying, imaging, and measuring67probe. much further understanding of the structures of semiconductor surfaceshas been derived from stm measurements, with important technological dividends. dna chains lying on a surface can be imaged, and even individual molecules can be stretched in order to understand the energy of their folding. imagingof molecularly soft surfaces such as the surfaces of cells offers an enormouspotential for understanding organization of molecules in natural life systems. theprobe tips of surface probe microscopies can also be made chemically sensitive.this is an exciting development by giving us a new dimension of moleculescaleimaging of chemical properties, for instance by detecting interactions between amolecule on a probe tip with a receptor site on a surface. emerging research onnanostructures will rely heavily on microscopy, including its stm and surfaceforces forms.there have also been major advances in measuring transfers of electronswithin small sample dimensions. the science of attaching chemicals to electrodes(chemically modified electrodes) has enabled measurements of electron transferkinetics associated with electrocatalysis and electroanalysis. significant applications include attaching enzymes to the electrode coatings for use in, for example,the monitoring of blood glucose for diabetics. another smalldimension analysisis enabled by using microscopically small electrodes, which are capable of detecting, in real time, the singlevesicle release of neurotransmitters from neuronalcells. these microelectrodes are having a substantial impact on the general science of neurochemistry. overall analysis in small dimensions seems to be in anenormously promising infancy, and is far from having achieved its limits evenwith existing ideas.throughput of analytical informationthe worlds of science and technology continually demand more informationper unit time (and per unit cost); there is an ongoing revolution in response to thisdemand. the human genome project, for example, provoked advances in capillary electrophoresis instrumentation that can now produce sequencing results onthe order of one base pair per second. combinatorial synthesis has precipitatedordersofmagnitude increases in the demand for the analysis of structural andreactivity information. in both dna sequencing and combinatorial chemistry,the concept of òparalleló analysis has emerged, in which instrument design focuses on simultaneous analysis of many different samples. the scope of parallelanalysis can be expected to grow for years to come. a significant concept in thisemerging field is miniaturization of the entire measurement into a òstar trekólike microchip device that would allow instant analysis of a microsample with amicroinstrument. the true capabilities of miniaturized instruments remain to bedefined, but they are already impressive. chip technologies hold the promise ofallowing many parallel measurements to be done simultaneously at little cost.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68beyond the molecular frontierprocess analysismonitoring the course of chemical transformations during chemical processing and manufacturing is a crucial component of commercial activity. desirablythe analysis is in real time and with the required selectivity and sensitivity toadequately inform the process engineer.a possible future process analysis challenge is monitoring a chemical selfassembly process, where chemists and chemical engineers want to know aboutthe òextent of reaction.ó the chemical process may involve covalent chemicaltransformations, or be simply the adoption of the desired physical structure. thetools could be optical (uvvisible or ir absorption, for example) or measurements of density or heat evolution. when the evolution of structure effectivelycaptures the òextent of reaction,ó structural characterization tools should be sufficient. more difficult problems would be posed for process control in multicomponent materials with complex structural features where the measurements shouldbe realtime (instantaneous) and provide information for feedback control of theprocess. the analytical time constants required for realtime measurements wouldbe less than that inherent in the selfassembly, which may have widely varyinginherent characteristic times, and are influenced by extensive molecular transportand organization. the close coupling of developments in new online measurements with process control theory and practice will be crucial to the fullest possible development of chemical manufacturing. this is only one example of manyfuture challenges in process analysis.challenges and opportunities for the futurechemical measurements will continue to be challenged by the broad advancesof the chemical sciences. it is not possible to overstate the future need for massively parallel, highthroughput, miniaturized, and widely distributed instrumental analyses, preferably with òsmart instrumentsó that are selfcalibrating andhighly automated. furthermore, a related need exists for massive automation indata reduction, storage, retrieval, and graphic presentation. the necessary devices will revolutionize the practice of medicine and the understanding of the lifesciences, and they will provide chemists and chemical engineers with the toolsfor discovery and for process control.at the start of the 21st century, we are witnessing a discernible shift fromhypothesisdriven science and technology to informationdriven science and technology. in the 21st century, the interaction of measurement science with theory,modeling, and simulation will play a central role in the acquisition of informationand its conversion into useful knowledge. new fundamental knowledge is essential for advancement in the measurement sciences, particularly in nanoscale science and technology, which are at the heart of future advances in automated storage and retrieval of information. the measurement sciences correspond to abeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.isolating, identifying, imaging, and measuring69convergent need in both the human genome project and the quest for new materials. increasingly, precise and quantitative measurements are equally essential toadvancing the acquisition of fundamental knowledge.the chemical world is often divided into òmeasurersó and òmakersó of molecules. this division has deep historic roots, but it artificially impedes takingadvantage of both aspects of the chemical sciences. of key importance to allforms of chemistry are instruments and techniques that allow examination, inspace and in time, of the composition and characterization of a chemical systemunder study. to achieve this end in a practical manner, these instruments willneed to multiplex several analytical methods. they will need to meet one or moreof the requirements for characterization of the products of combinatorial chemical synthesis, correlation of molecular structure with dynamic processes, highresolution definition of threedimensional structures and the dynamics of theirformation, and remote detection and telemetry.the development of measurement tools of unprecedented specificity and sensitivity will be central to achieving a molecularlevel understanding of complexsystems that will allow molecular interactions and their time evolution to be fullyunderstood. moreover, the challenge of solving increasingly complex problems,with the accompanying paradigm shift from hypothesisdriven to informationdriven science, places a premium on rapid, parallel, and inexpensive measurements. these trends are especially evident in the human genome project, incombinatorial chemistry, and in the study of the chemical networks that controlcell function.additional instrumentation demands spring from the reduction in size of systems that must be studied to the microscale and nanoscale levels. this size reduction will require greatly increased instrumental sensitivity as well as new mathematical approaches to pattern recognition and graphics display. the need fornew fundamental knowledge of interfacial and transport phenomena will be accentuated by the dramatic increase in the surfacetovolume ratio that will resultfrom the corresponding reduction in sample size. new technologies that permitmultiplexed measurement at higher spatial resolution and greater molecular specificity are emerging, and established technologies are being further developed toenhance speed, resolution, and sensitivity.urgent expansion is needed for activities in the measurement sciences toachieve a variety of goals:¥develop new concepts and associated instrumentation in five broad categories:1.highperformance instruments and measurements of unprecedentedprecision, sensitivity, spatial resolution, or specificity;2.lowcost, robust instruments and measurements for monitoring andanalyzing exceptionally small volumes, for realtime control of probeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70beyond the molecular frontiercesses, or for detection of chemicals and biotoxins without physicalcontact;3.highthroughput measurements, including informatics and mathematics for interpretation of largevolume data streams;4.separation and analysis of chemical and biological mixtures of extreme complexity and heterogeneity;5.determining the structural arrangements of atoms within noncrystalline chemical substances, and resolving how they change as a function of time, on any time scale.¥integrate measurement science into the fundamental intellectual core ofgraduate education and training for scientists and engineers.why this is importantthe most fundamental question that anyone can ask when looking at a newmaterial is, òwhat are the molecules (or ions, etc.) in it, and how much of each isthere?ó for a chemical scientist, this means discovering the molecular composition of all the components in some substance, their quantitative amounts, andtheir arrangement with respect to each other. the context of this discovery can beour own bodies, the swamp next door, the air on the highway, the white powder inan envelope, and, in the broadest context, the planet next door or a galaxy away.when we want to know more about other planets in our solar system, we deviseinstruments that can go to those planets and examine their chemical components.the instruments need to be able to detect and measure the chemicals that arepresent, and determine if they might indicate present or past life on those planets.such tools let chemists and chemical engineers isolate, detect, and measureñsothey can explore the chemical universe. the instruments that allow them to determine chemical structures permit them to identify the novel components of thatuniverse, including those parts of it that humans themselves create.in practical terms, detecting and measuring are critical to all aspects of human activityñto manufacturing, to our environment, to health and medicine, toagriculture, and to national security. thus it is essential that chemical scientistscontinue to improve the tools and methods needed for this central scientific activity.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.716chemical theory and computer modeling:from computational chemistry to processsystems engineering1some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥develop computer methods that will accurately predict the propertiesof unknown compounds.¥develop reliable computer methods to calculate the detailed pathwaysby which reactions occur in both ground states and excited states,taking full account of molecular dynamics as well as quantum and statistical mechanics.¥develop reliable force fields for molecular mechanics calculations oncomplex systems, including those with metallic elements.¥invent computer methods to predict the threedimensional folded structure of a proteinñand the pathway by which folding occursñfrom itsamino acid sequence, so information from the human genome can betranslated into the encoded protein structures.¥devise experimental tests to establish the reliability of new theoreticaltreatments.1as part of the overall project on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century, aworkshop on computing and communications will lead to a separate report. the reader is urged toconsult that report for further information. also see mathematical challenges from theoretical/computational chemistry, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1995.continuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72beyond the molecular frontierthe phenomenal increase in speed and computational power of computersñas well as their dramatic reduction in costñhas continued at an astonishing paceover the last decade. in terms of cpu speed, mooreõs law implies that computingpower should double every year or two,2 a pattern that is expected to continue forat least 10 years into the future. at the same time, key advances in areas such asultraviolet lithography techniques, nonleaking complementary metal oxide semiconductor (cmos) transistors, and multiple instruction, multiple data (mimd)computer architecture are already in place to support clockspeeds at the 10ghzplateau with power requirements at 1 v or lower. in addition, the technology andsoftware infrastructure now exist for researchers to routinely build large parallelsupercomputing clusters using offtheshelf commodity computers and networking components, thus increasing the impact of mooreõs law by orders of magnitude. finally, 10 years ago, few could envision how the dimension of communicationsñvia the internetñwould enhance computing in what may have been themost revolutionary development in the late 20th century.chemistry and chemical engineering, like many other disciplines, are beingprofoundly influenced by increased computing power. this has happened in partby enhancing many existing computational procedures, providing a new impetusto quantum mechanical and molecular simulations at the atomic level, and optimizing processes and supply chain management at the macrosystem level. furthermore, these computational tools have helped test new conceptual approachesto understanding matter and molecules. while we expect all these developments¥invent new computer tools and logistics methods to reduce significantlythe time needed for commercializing new drugs.¥invent new algorithms to globally optimize at the worldwide level theuse of raw materials, energy, and environmental impact of chemicalprocesses.¥develop new and powerful computational methods, applicable fromthe atomic and molecular level to the chemical process and enterpriselevel, that will enable multiscale optimization.2moore originally stated that òthe complexity for minimum component costs has increased at a rateof roughly a factor of two per year,ó moore, g.e., electronics, 38 (8), 1965. this has been restated asòmooreõs law, the doubling of transistors every couple of years,ó (http://www.intel.com/research/silicon/mooreslaw.htm). there are two related laws: (1) the cost of a fabrication plant to make eachgeneration of processors doubles in price from the previous one. (2) since the discovery of the giantmagnetoresistance (gmr) effect, the density of disk storage increases by a factor of 2 every 12months. see also: gelsinger, p., gargini, p., parker, g., yu, a., ieee spectrum, october 1989.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling73to continue, the important challenge is likely to arise in dramatic growth of newcomputing needs. these needs are driven by the increasing shift in the chemicalindustry toward biotechnology products and pharmaceuticals, the emergence ofindustrially relevant nanotechnologies, the requirement to optimize existing largescale commodity chemicals plants, and the increased size and complexity of manynew problems and systems. instruments used by chemists and chemical engineersare already substantially controlled by onboard computer systems, the complexity of which will increase with that of the purpose and use of the instruments.computational chemistry and process systems engineering play a major rolein providing new understanding and development of computational proceduresfor the simulation, design, and operation of systems ranging from atoms and molecules to industrialscale processes. the enormous span of scales of space andtime that range from computational chemistry to process systems engineering canbe visualized with the òchemical supply chainó shown in figure 61. the supplychain starts with the set of chemicals that industry must synthesize and characterize at the molecular level. subsequent steps aggregate these molecules into clusters, particles, and filmsñas single and multiphase systems that finally take theform of macroscopic mixtures. at the process engineering scale, the figure illustrates the design and analysis of production units that are integrated into a chemical process, which in turn is part of a site with multiple processes. finally, thissite is part of the commercial enterprise that is driven by business considerations.the multiple scales of this chain are a fact of life in chemical sciences and technology. to date, the field has neither sufficient tools nor enough trained people topursue computational chemistry and chemical engineering across all these scales.the field will qualitatively changeñin new insights, in what experiments aredone and how chemical products and processes are designedñwhen this isachievable.advances in computing have facilitated major progress in computationalchemistry and biochemistry, computational materials design, computational fluiddynamics, process synthesis, planning and scheduling, modelbased process control, fault diagnosis, and realtime process optimization. this progress has beenenabled by parallel advances in fundamental chemical physics theory, mathematics, operations research, and computer scienceñincluding computational techniques for simulation and optimization of chemical systems. this chapter showshow areas that span computational chemistry, from the atomic level to processsystems engineering at the macrosystem level, are full of exciting computationalchallenges that await solutions from bright minds.3,43impact of advances in computing and communications technologies on chemical science andtechnology, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1999.4mathematical challenges from theoretical/computational chemistry, national research council,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1995.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74figure 61the chemical supply chain. courtesy of professor wolfgang marquardt.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling75goalsscience proceeds by both experiment and theory. simple experimental factswithout a theory to interpret them do not satisfy our need for understanding. indeed, many experimental measurements cannot be interpreted without theory,and as experiments probe phenomena and structures at ever smaller spatial andtemporal scales, the role of theory in interpreting experiment increases. however,theory without experiment can lead to unrealistic dreams.the birth of modernscience came when it was realized that truth is obtained from facts, not just fromspeculation. theory validated by experiment runs through all of chemistry, andalmost all its branches now use computers. structures are determined by computer treatments of xray data, potential new drugs are analyzed by computermodeling, and even synthetic strategies to make a desired target molecule aredeveloped using computer programs created for the purpose.quantum mechanicsthe chemical sciences are built on a set of fundamental mathematical theories that have increasing utility as computational hardware and software becomemore powerful. as the basis for calculating the electronic structure of molecules,quantum mechanics permits calculations, often based on rational approximations,of structure and properties of molecules, and of reactivity and reaction mechanisms. the schrıdinger wave equation can in principle predict the electronicstates of any chemical species, but in practice it can be applied only approximately to molecules of any significant size. a continuing, important goal is todevise better and more accurate ways to obtain predictions of molecular structures, bond energies, molecular properties, transition state structures, and energies for systems of increasing size.good approximate quantum calculations usually can be done reliably onlyfor isolated molecules. another important objective in this field is to developmethodologies for solvated molecules and molecules that are parts of membranesor other organized biological systems. engineers are attempting to use quantummechanical calculations to predict practical phenomenañfor example, makingand breaking of bonds in adhesion and fractureñthat are based on electronicinteractions. additional goals are to learn how to accurately include heavier elements and to calculate the properties of molecules as a function of time, whenthey are interacting with other species.quantum calculations are the starting point for another objective of theoretical and computational chemical science, multiscale calculations. the overall objective is to understand and predict largescale phenomena, such as deformationin solids or transport in porous media, beginning with fundamental calculation ofelectronic structure and interactions, then using the results of that calculation asinput to the next level of a more coarsegrained approximation.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76beyond the molecular frontieran important goal is to improve or supplement quantum mechanical methods in order to calculate reliably the energy and geometry of a transition state.this is one piece of information that can lead to the larger objective of predictingthe rates of unmeasured reactions, but a second goal must also be met to achievethis. the accurate prediction of reaction rates also depends on our knowledge ofdynamical properties of molecules and the dynamics of their sampling of accessible electronic, rotational, and vibrational states. another goal is to predict thecourse of excitedstate reactions, often initiated by adsorption of light. such molecules do not traverse the lowest energy paths, and they usually form productsthat are different from those produced in groundstate reactions. molecules thatabsorb light are transformed into various different excited states, depending onthe energy of the light that is absorbed. each excited state can in principle undergo a unique photochemical transformation. the development of successfultheoretical treatments for such complex phenomena presents a substantial challenge. this goal also extends to the calculation of magnetic, optical, electrical,and mechanical properties of molecular and extended solids in both the groundand excited states.yet another related goal is to be able to predict the catalytic activity of agiven surface for a particular reaction. using computational quantum chemistry,it is becoming possible to predict with reasonable accuracy the energy barriersand transition states of molecules reacting on catalytic surfaces, thus leading toinsights into reaction rates. this is enabling a new field of rational catalyst design, which offers the promise of designing and optimizing new catalysts computationally so that synthetic efforts can be focused on highpriority candidates.molecular mechanicsone tool for working toward this objective is molecular mechanics. in thisapproach, the bonds in a molecule are treated as classical objects, with continuous interaction potentials (sometimes called force fields) that can be developedempirically or calculated by quantum theory. this is a powerful method that allows the application of predictive theory to much larger systems if sufficientlyaccurate and robust force fields can be developed. predicting the structures ofproteins and polymers is an important objective, but at present this often requiresprohibitively large calculations. molecular mechanics with classical interactionpotentials has been the principal tool in the development of molecular models ofpolymer dynamics. the ability to model isolated polymer molecules (in dilutesolution) is well developed, but fundamental molecular mechanics models ofdense systems of entangled polymers remains an important goal.a particular goal of chemical theory is to predict protein structure from theamino acid sequenceñto calculate how polypeptides fold into the compact geometries of proteins. one strategy is to develop methods (often based on bioinformatics) for predicting structures approximately and then refining the structuresbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling77using atomiclevel molecular modeling methods. molecular mechanics is also thetheoretical approach employed in calculating how a proposed drug might bindinto a protein.modeling and simulationmodeling and simulation are extremely important tools in the chemical sciences. the understanding and engineering of complex chemical processes, suchas combustion or atmospheric chemistry and transport, generally rely heavily andincreasingly on modeling and computation. recent advances in computing notonly have enabled more accurate and reliable calculations, but they have alsoprovided new tools for interpreting the output of the calculations. modern computer graphicsñincluding molecular graphics, simulations, and animationsñhave greatly enhanced the ability of scientists and engineers to understand andutilize the results of their computations.yet modeling can be no better than its assumptions. it often suffers from theproblem that we cannot follow any computed process for a long duration (manytime steps)ñprimarily because the computer time needed per time step is significant, but also because of the cumulative propagation of roundoff errors. thetypical time step is on the order of 1 femtosecond (i.e., 10ð15 s) of real time for anatomically detailed molecular simulation. consequently, modeling phenomenaon the femtosecond time scale would require about 103 time steps, which is notdifficult, and modeling on the picosecond time scale (106 time steps) is fairlyroutine. however, many phenomena of interest (e.g., the time to fold a protein)are on the millisecond or larger time scale and would require 1015 time steps ormore. another goal is to learn how to improve the calculations by overcomingthese problems. one approach is to use stochastic approaches based on cleverlychosen monte carlo methods; another is to reduce the level of detail in the models for the molecules (socalled coarse grained models).statistical mechanics and fluid mechanicssometimes the theoretical or computational approach to description of molecular structure, properties, and reactivity cannot be based on deterministic equations that can be solved by analytical or computational methods. the propertiesof a molecule or assembly of molecules may be known or describable only in astatistical sense. molecules and assemblies of molecules exist in distributions ofconfiguration, composition, momentum, and energy. sometimes, this statisticalcharacter is best captured and studied by computer experiments: molecular dynamics, brownian dynamics, stokesian dynamics, and monte carlo methods. interaction potentials based on quantum mechanics, classical particle mechanics,continuum mechanics, or empiricism are specified and the evolution of the system is then followed in time by simulation of motions resulting from these directbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78beyond the molecular frontierinterparticle, stochastic, or fluid mechanical forces. the larger the size of thecomputation, the better the statistical representation of the system.statistical mechanics is the science that deals with average properties of themolecules, atoms, or elementary particles in random motion in a system of manysuch particles and relates these properties to the thermodynamic and other macroscopic properties of the system.5 use of statistical mechanics reflects the viewthat broad features of a system may be captured best as a description of the statistical distribution of the elements within a population rather than as a precise description of the elements themselves. one advantage of statistical mechanics isthat a good model often reveals some underlying generality governing the system, thereby permitting analogies to be made between properties or behaviorsthat superficially are quite different. simulations and statistical mechanics arekey tools for physical chemists and engineers working on understanding rheological behavior, mass transport, modeling of microfluidic devices, flow of granular media, and behavior of dense particle suspensions.at the next higher level of coarsegraining, fluid mechanics and other continuum mechanics methods are active arenas of theory and computation. for example, electrorheology and magnetorheology have provided tremendous impetusin the last decade. efforts to determine the dependence of basic scaling on fieldstrength and particle volume fraction quickly require answers to questions aboutmaterial properties. the links between the thinking of chemical engineers studying transport and chemists designing and producing materials are crucial forprogress. granular media is another area where the clear interplay between science and technology is facilitating progress in solving sophisticated scientificquestions that have immediate impact on technology and practice. from the viewpoint of computation and simulation, engineers working in granular media areaddressing problems of flow and mixing (such as those arising in the processingof powdered pharmaceuticals); discrete computational approaches encompassparticle dynamics, monte carlo, and cellular automata calculations.spanning length and time scalesmany of the problems cited above highlight the need for being able to bridgecalculations across several length and time scales. it is thus worthwhile to consider this in some additional detail. for example, reactions involve changes in themolecules, and hence are inherently quantum mechanical in nature. but a reaction taking place in a solution at finite temperature implies that the reaction isinfluenced by a dynamic environment more pragmatically described by classicalmolecular simulation methods. hence, a scalebridging method is needed to allow the dynamics of the solvent around the reactants to influence the electronic5random house websterõs unabridged dictionary, v2.2 for 16bit windows systems, copyright1999, random house, inc.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling79structure of the reactants in various conformations, as well as the reactants influencing the motion of the solvent molecules around them. one solution is to perform molecular simulations with force fields calculated òon the flyó by quantummechanical methods at each time step. such òfirst principlesó or ab initio molecular simulation methods are presently limited to fairly small numbers of atoms(around 100 to 1000) for rather short simulations (10 ps is a typical value). otherhybrid methods, which treat just the environment around reactants quantum mechanically, are less accurate in principle but allow much longer time scales andmuch larger spatial scales to be accessed, since the vast majority of the moleculesare treated by classical molecular simulation.the problem of spanning scales goes well beyond spanning from the electronic structure scale to the molecular (which might be thought of as the †ngstrımor nanoscale). chemical processes at the commercial scale ultimately involvespatial scales on the order of meters, and time scales (corresponding to processingtimes in reactors and separations equipment) ranging from seconds to hours and,in the case of many bioengineering processes involving fermentations, days orweeks. how do we connect phenomena at the electronic and molecular scale tothe commercial chemical process scale?in some cases, the connection is trivial: for lowmolecularweight molecularsystems, properties calculated at the electronic structure level (e.g., reaction rates,and free energies of formation and reaction) or at the molecular simulation level(e.g., the socalled critical constants, and transport properties such as viscosity)can be used directly at the process scale as input data for process models. however, for complex molecules (such as polymers and proteins) the properties at themolecular level are not decoupled from the process level. for example, flow atprocess level can result in changes in the conformation of the molecules, which inturn changes the properties of the molecules. in such cases, the problem of developing accurate molecular modeling methods that will span the scales from electronic to molecular to mesoscopic to macroscopic (the process scale) cannot beavoided. since such complex molecules and their processing are the focus of themodern chemical, pharmaceutical, and materials industries, it is imperative thatthe problem of developing effective multiscale modeling methods be solved. it iscurrently one of the most active research focuses of the molecular modeling community. it is also a major focus of nanotechnology modeling efforts, since in suchsystems the need to connect nanoscale structure to macroscale functionality iseven more apparent.making the òscaleupó connection between the electronic and molecularstructure of molecules and their macroscopic properties, and the design of processes to manufacture them, is one half of the story. the other half is making theconnection òscaledownóñfrom specification of a processlevel manufacturingneed (e.g., a solvent with better properties) to the design of a molecule that meetsthe need. harnessing these yettobedeveloped methods and combining themwith stateoftheart process modeling and optimization tools will result in intebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80beyond the molecular frontiergrated process and product design: the ability to computationally design and optimize products (e.g., chemicals, drugs, materials) as well as the manufacturingprocesses to make them. the molecular modeling and process design communities recognize that, with the continued rapid pace of computer hardware, software, and algorithmic advances, this goal is now accessible in the next decade ortwo. hence, conferences are beginning to spring up whose main goal is to bringtogether members of these communities to learn from each other. crossfertilization between the fields has led to computational chemistry methods (e.g., simulated annealing) crossing over to the process design community, just as techniques from the process design community (e.g., mathematical programmingmethods) have crossed over to the protein folding community.6h.s. chan, and k.a. dill, physics today, 46 (2): 2432 feb. 1993.the problem of time scales in molecular simulationbruteforce classical molecular dynamics simulation will not span thetime scales present in complex molecular systems, even with fully efficient implementation on the worldõs fastest parallel supercomputers. thistime scale problem was captured well by ken dill in 1993.6 although thisscheme did not fully take into account the impact of massively parallelcomputers (by which the current generation of ~10 teraflops computerstheoretically increase the level of computing 1,000 to 10,000fold overworkstations), the essential problem of simulating over long periods oftime relative to the shortest time scale motion is not fundamentallychanged even by recent advances in parallel supercomputing. whileparallel supercomputing makes it possible to span larger spatial scalesrather easily, spanning larger time scales remains a fundamental difficulty. to be more concrete, there are about 30 million seconds in a year,and the maximum speed at which messages can be passed betweenany two processors on a parallel supercomputer is roughly 10,000 persecond. hence, even if the time to compute forces could be reduced bysufficient parallelization to essentially zero, a molecular dynamics simulation could not execute more than 3 x 1011 time steps per year; in practice, it will be considerably less. when a calculation is limited by the timerequired to pass messages, it is referred to as communicationslimited.thus, with a time step of 10ð15 s, in a year of computing the most onecould hope to achieve is around 10ð4 s of real time. this conclusion highlights the need to develop theoretically sound methods for spanning themany time scales present in the molecular simulation of complex systems(such as proteins and polymers).beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling81how well has dillõs prediction held up? in 2000, the first evermicrosecondlong molecular dynamics simulation of protein folding wasreported. it required 750,000 node hours (equal to the product of thenumber of hours times the number of processors) of computer time on acray t3 supercomputer. according to dillõs prediction, this length ofsimulation was not to be expected until around 2010. however, as notedabove, dillõs analysis does not take into account largescaleparallelizationñwhich, unless the computation is communicationslimited, will effectively increase the speed of a computation in proportionto the number of processors available.time scales for various motions within biopolymers (upper) and nonbiological polymers (lower). the year scale at the bottom shows estimates of when each suchprocess might be accessible to brute force molecular simulation on supercomputers, assuming that parallel processing capability on supercomputers increases by about a factor of 1,000 every 10 years (i.e., one order of magnitudemore than mooreõs law) and neglecting new approaches or breakthroughs. reprinted with permission from h.s. chan and k. a. dill. physics today, 46, 2, 24,(1993).progress to dateimportant insights have been developed using approximate methods that werenot highly precise quantitatively, and excellent highlevel methods for solvingthe schrıdinger equation have been developed, but the methods still have usedapproximations. a nobel prize in 1998 went to john pople and walter kohn fortheir different successful approaches to this problem. earlier methods used manybiopolymersnonbiological polymersbiopolymersnonbiologicalpolymersbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82beyond the molecular frontierdifferent parameters derived from experiment, but current socalled ab initiomethods as pioneered by pople are essentially free of such experimentally derived parameters. with the current methods, systems of 5 to 20 common atomsare handled well. densityfunctional theory (dft) as developed by kohn is alsomoderately successful with larger systems, and with more unusual atoms.in molecular mechanics, force fields and sampling methods used in the calculations are being improved continually, but they are not yet good enough thatatomiclevel refinement of protein structures is feasible on a robust and routinebasis. it is unclear what the relative contribution of force field and sampling errors are to the problem. similar comments apply to the prediction of proteinligand binding. the proteinfolding problem is thus currently being approachedmainly by analogy, using data from existing protein structures to derive variousfolding rules. the field of ab initio theoretical protein foldingñprediction of fullthreedimensional protein structure using a combination of an optimization algorithm to minimize energy with an explicit forcefield representation of the functional groups in the proteinñis a computationally intensive approach that hasrecorded some successes in protein structure prediction.7 ab initio proteinfolding approaches are the only methods capable of predicting fundamentally newstructures in proteins (i.e., substructures not previously found in any experimentally measured protein structures). one forefront area of research at the interfaceof polymers and biology is the synthesis (by genetic engineering) of syntheticproteins/biopolymers containing building blocks other than the usual 20 aminoacids, including inorganic species such as silicon. ab initio proteinfolding approaches offer routes to predicting the properties of such biopolymers.initially, most theoretical methods calculated the properties of molecules inthe gas phase as isolated species, but chemical reactions are most often carriedout in solution. biochemical reactions normally take place in water. consequently,there is increasing interest in methods for including solvents in the calculations.in the simplest approach, solvents are treated as a continuum, whose averageproperties are included in the calculation. explicit inclusion of solvent moleculesin the calculation greatly expands the size of the problem, but newer approachesdo this for at least those solvent molecules next to the dissolved species of interest. the detailed structures and properties of these solvent molecules affect theirdirect interaction with the dissolved species. reactions at catalytic surfacespresent an additional challenge, as the theoretical techniques must be able tohandle the reactants and the atoms in the surface, as well as possible solventspecies. the first concrete examples of computationally based rational catalystdesign have begun to appear in publications and to have impact in industry.7the use of the term ab initio in the context of protein folding should not be confused with its useto describe ab initio quantum chemistry calculations. in both cases, ab initio is meant to convey theidea of òfrom first principles,ó but the starting point and theoretical framework are different for each.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling83in the area of collective properties, simulation methods have been developedover the past decade and a half that make it possible to predict the phase equilibria of systems directly from force fields, dramatically widening the applicabilityof molecular simulation for processengineering calculations. phase equilibria ofvarious kinds (vaporliquid, liquidliquid, fluidsolid) lie at the center of most ofthe separation techniques (e.g., distillation and crystallization) commonly used inthe chemical industry. the last decade has also seen dramatic improvements inmolecular simulation methodologiesñlargely based on stochastic methodsñforovercoming the long relaxation times inherent in the equilibration of polymersand similar complex materials. a recent international comparative study of theindustrial application of molecular modeling in the chemical, pharmaceutical,and materials industries in the united states, europe, and japan gathered information from over 75 sites; the report documents some of the remarkably diverseways in which molecular modeling methods are successfully impacting industrytoday.8 given the limitations of todayõs tools, the future for integrated molecularbased product design and processlevel design and optimization is very brightindeed.goals in process systems engineering, and progress to dateprocess systems engineering is the study of the processes used in manufacturing. it encompasses all aspects of the design, construction, control, and operation of the chemical processes used in chemical manufacturing. the goal of process systems engineering remains the understanding and development of tools forthe advantaged synthesis, analysis, optimization, evaluation, design, control,scheduling, and operation of chemical process systems consistent with new societal and economic objectives and constraints. this is true for all processesñnomatter what the chemistry or biochemistry, whether isolated or in supply chainnetworks, dedicated or general purpose, batch or continuous, and whether microscale or macroscale. this goal requires the further creation and exploitation of ascience base that includes novel representations of the underlying chemical andphysical phenomena, computationally efficient formulation and solution methods, and the expansion of and incorporation of advanced engineering expertiseand judgment. as discussed below, two major objectives in process systems engineering are the creation or invention of new processes (process synthesis), andthe systematization of decisionmaking with prediction of systems performance(modeling and optimization).8the report is available on the internet at http://itri.loyola.edu/molmodel.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84beyond the molecular frontierprocess synthesiscreation of new processes for building new plants or retrofitting existingfacilities is a key area for addressing the goals of process systems engineeringcited above. the major reason is that process synthesis deals with the systematicgeneration and search of alternatives that can potentially lead to major structuraldiscoveries and modifications. significant progress has been made in the development of systematic techniques for the synthesis of energy recovery networks,distillation systems (including azeotropic separations), and reactor networks. forsynthesizing process flow sheets that integrate these subsystems, hierarchical decomposition and superstructure optimization have emerged as two major approaches. in the design of multiproduct batch plants, progress has been madewith mathematical programming models that integrate scheduling as part of thedesign decisions.in the future we will see the application of synthesis techniques to new processes that involve greater use of more abundant or renewable raw materials, andgreater reuse of materials such as carbon dioxide, salts, tars, and sludges, whichare currently generally disposed of. exploiting some of these alternative raw materials and chemistries may involve greater energy input than required for rawmaterials presently in use, and the source and impact of any such increased energy requirement must also be carefully considered. at the same time, pressuresto increase reaction selectivity will continue unabated.process synthesis is the invention of chemistryimplementing processing concepts. it is a creative openended activity characterized by a combinatorially largenumber of feasible alternatives. process synthesis defines the overall structure ofthe manufacturing process and identifies and designs the processing equipment tobe employed and specifies how they are to be interconnected. the number ofpotential feasible process designs is in general very large, and selecting the rightprocess structure generally determines most of the economic potential of a new orretrofitted chemical process. in recent industrial experience, energy reductions of50% and overall cost reductions of 35% using systematic process synthesis techniques have been achieved. nevertheless, a significant need remains for evenbetter approaches.some success has been achieved in developing systematic process synthesismethods based on recursive hierarchical meansends analysis architecturesadapted from artificial intelligence research. these have been greatly aided bythe recent development of new representations of the underlying physical scienceand thermodynamic knowledge that define the forces generally engaged in chemical reaction and separation processes. exploiting these representationsñproblemsolving strategies that focus primarily on the processing tasks to be accomplished rather than the equipment to be employedñhas proven to be particularlyeffective in creating novel superior designs.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling85the chemical process synthesis problem might also be formulated as an optimization over all feasible process structures. in principle, if we employed alldifferent possible approaches to implement some desired chemistryñincludingall possible different reactor configurations, all possible different separation andpurification schemes, techniques, and equipment, and all interconnections amongthese potential units in one gigantic tentative process flow sheetñand if we thensubjected such a superstructure to economic optimization constrained by environmental, safety, and other criteria (during which process inferior equipmentand interconnections were eliminated), the best manufacturing process in termsof both structure and the design of each surviving piece of equipment wouldemerge. this, of course, is a massive and extremely difficult optimization problem involving a mixture of continuous, integer, and logical variables and relationships. however, new mathematical techniques such as generalized disjunctiveprogramming and global optimization, combined with the tremendous increasesin available computing power made possible through large clusters of fast independent processors, give hope that this superstructure optimization approach tochemical process synthesis may be practical in the near future.modeling and optimizationthe chemical industry can largely be viewed as being composed of two major segments. one is the òvalue preservationó industry that is largely based on thelargescale production of commodity chemicals. the other is the òvalue growthóindustry that is based on the smallscale production of specialty chemicals, biotechnology products, and pharmaceuticals. for the chemical industry to remainstrong, it is essential that these two segments be competitive and economicallystrong. the òvalue preservationó industry must be able to reduce costs, operateefficiently, and continuously improve product quality, thereby making processsimulation and process optimization its key technologies. the òvalue growthóindustry must be agile and quick to market new products, making supply chainmanagement one of its key technologies. in both cases, major challenges over thenext two decades will be to gain a better understanding of the structure and information flows underlying the chemical supply chain of figure 61, and to developnovel mathematical models and methods for its simulation and optimization.in the past, most of the modeling and optimization activity has taken place inisolated parts of the chemical supply chain. in chemical engineering it has beenmostly at the level of process units and plants, but more recently it has beenmoving in two opposing directionsñthe molecular and the enterprise levels. incomputational chemistry, the modeling research has been directed at the molecular level and is increasingly moving toward the atomic and quantum scale, asdiscussed in the previous sections. developments in planning and scheduling arebeing increasingly directed to address the optimization of the supply chain at thebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86beyond the molecular frontierenterprise level. major difficulties in developing mathematical models that integrate the various parts of the chemical supply chain result from the huge differences in length and time scales in the supply chain and the number of chemicalspecies considered at each level. furthermore, at the longer scales, new situationscan arise that may not be reliably predicted from the basic models.process simulation: a revolutionprocess simulation, which emerged in the 1960s, has become one ofthe great success stories in the use of computing in the chemicalindustry. for instance, steadystate simulation has largely replacedexperimentation and pilot plant testing in process development for commodity chemicals, except in the case of reactions having new mechanisms or requiring new separation technologies. tools for steadystateprocess simulation are nowadays universally available to aid in thedecisions for design, operation, and debottlenecking; they are part ofevery process engineerõs toolkit. their accuracy and predictive abilityfor decisionmaking is widely accepted to make routine plant trials andmost experimental scaleup obsolete in the commodity chemicalsindustry.dynamic simulation plays a dominant role in the design of trainingsimulators for operators. as with aircraft simulation, these programsallow operators to deal with disturbances, startups, and upsets that gobeyond conventional regulatory control. for hazardous processes, theyare a requirement for operator certification on distributed control systems. environmental, safety and hazard, and operability studies areoften handled through steadystate and dynamic simulation tools. inshort, process simulation is the engine that drives decisionmaking inprocess engineering. it is the accepted òvirtual realityó of the processindustries.some recent applications have benefited from advances in computing and computational techniques. steadystate simulation is beingused offline for process analysis, design, and retrofit; process simulators can model flow sheets with up to about a million equations byemploying nested procedures. other applications have resulted in greateconomic benefits; these include online realtime optimization modelsfor data reconciliation and parameter estimation followed by optimaladjustment of operating conditions. models of up to 500,000 variableshave been used on a refinerywide basis.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling87offline analysis, controller design, and optimization are now performedin the area of dynamics. the largest dynamic simulation has been about100,000 differential algebraic equations (daes) for analysis of controlsystems. simulations formulated with process models having over 10,000daes are considered frequently. also, detailed training simulators havemodels with over 10,000 daes. online model predictive control (mpc)and nonlinear mpc using firstprinciple models are seeing a number ofindustrial applications, particularly in polymeric reactions and processes.at this point, systems with over 100 daes have been implemented foronline dynamic optimization and control.while the developments described above are currently implementedand available, significant remaining issues are being investigated tofurther improve the capability of process simulators. one example is theuse of objectoriented approaches to integrating models from differentsources and vendors in a single simulation. another challenge is combining partial differential equation models with dae and algebraic processmodels, which will require parallel computations to solve models withmillions of variables. finally, nonlinear optimization algorithms areneeded that can handle very large models as well as discrete variablesfor performing topology optimization in process flow sheets.to tackle these problems successfully, new concepts will be required fordeveloping systematic modeling techniques that can describe parts of the chemical supply chain at different levels of abstraction. a specific example is the integration of molecular thermodynamics in process simulation computations. thiswould fulfill the objective of predicting the properties of new chemical productswhen designing a new manufacturing plant. however, such computations remainunachievable at the present time and probably will remain so for the next decade.the challenge is how to abstract the details and description of a complex systeminto a reduced dimensional space.another important aspect in the modeling and optimization of the chemicalsupply chain is the description of the dynamics of the information and materialflow through the chain. this will require a better understanding of the integrationof r&d, process design, process operation, and business logistics. the challengewill be to develop quantitative models that can be used to better coordinate andoptimize the chemical enterprise. progress will be facilitated by new advances ininformation technology, particularly through advances in the internet and by newmethods and mathematical concepts. advances in computer technology will playa central role. fulfilling the goal of effectively integrating the various functionsbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88beyond the molecular frontier(r&d, design, production, logistics) in the chemical supply chain will help tobetter meet customer demands, and effectively adapt in the new world of ecommerce. concepts related to planning, scheduling, and control that have not beenwidely adopted by chemical engineers should play a prominent role in the modeling part of this problem. concepts and tools of computer science and operationsresearch will play an even greater role in terms of impacting the implementationof solutions for this problem.supplychain management increases profitability of thechemical industry through computer toolsnew optimization tools, information management systems, and theinternet are revolutionizing supplychain management in chemical companies. the objective of these tools is not only to help manage moreeffectively the flow of materials from their production facilities to theirdistribution centers, but also to incorporate the suppliers and the customers.instead of running businesses from the inside out, forward thinking companies are integrating their business processes to run the business theway their customers demand: from the outside in. the ultimate winners inthis new world will be the ones who manage their supply chains moreefficiently than their competitors, harness the customer loyalty factor, andfind ways to facilitate business transactions. making the customer andthe other business partners more profitable is the new way to compete inthe chemical industry, where many products rapidly become commodities. from simple ways to reduce the cost of each transaction, to workingtogether to reduce overall inventories, to true collaboration of businessprocesses such as product design, logistics management, manufacturing execution, product marketing, and overall management, the use ofadvanced computer and optimization tools and process models deployedthrough the internet will give those companies a significant competitiveadvantage.supplychain management can be applied at three major levels:strategic planning, tactical planning, and production scheduling. furthermore, its integration can lead to new business practices such as improvedòcapability to promiseó in the sales of products. an example of strategicplanning is the integration of a single product through the entire supplychain, from raw materials delivery, through manufacturing, to delivery tocustomers. major decisions at this level include rationalizing the distribution network, building new plants, or evaluating new markets. this is incontrast to tactical planning, which involves developing an operationalplan, meeting capacity constraints, and developing inventory and overtime strategies to increase the efficiency in the supply chain. basf perbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling89formed a corporate network optimization of packaged finished goods innorth america. there were 17 operating divisions with multiple, heterogeneous systems: 25,000 stockkeeping units (skus), 134 shippingpoints, 15,000 shipto locations, 956 million pounds shipped direct tocustomers, and 696 million pounds shipped to customers through distribution centers. by using optimization tools basf reduced transportationand facility costs by 10%, nextday volume delivery increased from 77%to 96%, the number of distribution centers was reduced from 86 to 15,generating $10 million per year savings in operating costs (personal communication, dr. vladimir mahlaec, aspen technology).an example of production scheduling involves scheduling a plant incontinuous time to optimize sequencing, while providing an executableproduction schedule. this problem is complicated by the fact that it musttake into account forecast and customer orders, inventories of raw material, intermediates and finished goods, facility status, manufacturing information, rates, facility preferences, and recipes. pharmaciaupjohn wasfaced with such a problem in the scheduling of a fermentation process.using modern software, schedules were generated for 6 days of production. the major benefit was an effective and flexible computer tool forrescheduling that can readily accommodate changes in customer orders.finally, an interesting trend in supplychain management is improvingbusiness practices by providing capabilities to improve service for customers. one such concept is òcapability to promise.ó the idea is not justto ensure that the product is available, but that the supply chain is capableof delivering the product. this involves, for instance, capability to rapidlychange the schedule to accommodate the customer order and interactwith the active plant schedule. such a system was developed at celanesefibers, which is integrated with a customer order system and enabledvia a web browser.challenges and opportunities for the futurechemical theory and computationfaster and cheaper computers will extend the range of highlevel methods.improvements in dft functionals will improve the accuracy of dft calculations. one specific challenge will be to derive density functional theory fromfundamental theory in a way that reveals how to incorporate successive approximations for the exchange and correlation terms. some work on highlevel methods with better scaling may allow more immediate extension of highaccuracycalculations to larger systems. combining quantum mechanical and molecularbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90beyond the molecular frontiermechanics methods will allow very large systems to be treated using quantummethods in the reactive core and force fields for the remainder of the systems, forexample in enzymatic chemistry. many specific needs can be identified:¥methods to simulate quantum molecular dynamics in condensed systemswithout approximating the system as a quantum system coupled to a classicalbath. this is not now possible although there has been some progress toward thisend in the treatment of simple physical models. this is a development that willbenefit greatly from the development of practical quantum computers.¥development of methods to bypass the problem of multiple time scales inmolecular dynamics. this difficulty is particularly egregious in the proteinfolding problem.¥methods for the efficient sampling of rough energy landscapes such asthose found in proteins. because of high energy barriers in such systems, most ofthe time is spent sampling energy basins near the starting configuration. the development of efficient methods is required for the determination of structural andthermodynamic properties as well as for efficient refinement of protein structure.¥accurate polarizable force fields for peptides, water, etc. improved forcefields explicitly incorporating polarization are being developed. until rapid abinitio molecular dynamics methods exist, such force fields are required for thesimulation of chemical systems with chemical accuracy.¥to understand the kinetics of protein folding from a mechanistic point ofview. abstract schemes have been proposed, but there is much yet to do beforethis goal is realized.¥to develop methods for understanding and predicting energy transfer, electron transport, and the entirely new quantum effects involving coherence thatarise in nanoscale devices.¥to develop the statistical mechanics of fluids and fluid mixturesñfor example, to obtain improved understanding of associating fluids, hydrophobicity,and ionic systems.¥to develop computational tools for solidstate problems, including calculation of magnetic, optical, electrical, and mechanical properties of molecular andextended solids in both ground and excited states.¥to correlate theoretical predictions with experimental results, designingexperiments specifically to test various theoretical predictions. as this is done,and is successful, the role of mathematical theory in chemistry will increase invalue.process systems engineeringa number of major challenges exist in process systems engineering in whichcomputing will play a major role. these can be grouped by major areas of application:beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling91¥process and product design. the traditional process design will be expanded to include product design as an integral part of this area. within the commodity chemicals industry major challenges that will be addressed include process intensification for novel unit operations, and design of environmentallybenign processes. areas that are likely to receive increased attention due to thegrowth in new industries include molecular design, synthesis of microchips, smartmaterials, bioprocess systems, bioinformatics, and design and analysis of metabolic networks.¥process control. the traditional process control will be expanded towardnew applications such as nonlinear process control of biosystems. however, inthe commodity chemicals industry there will be increased need for synthesizingplantwide control systems, as well as integrating dynamics, discrete events, andsafety functions, which will be achieved through new mathematical and computer science developments in hybrid systems.¥r&d and process operations. the traditional area of process operationswill expand upstream and downstream in terms of integrating r&d as well aslogistics and distribution functions. areas that are likely to receive increased attention include logistics for new product development, planning and supply chainmanagement, realtime scheduling, and synthesis of operating procedures (safety).¥integration. as is also described below, the integration of several parts ofthe chemical supply chain will give rise to a number of challenges, such asmultiscale modeling for molecular dynamics, integration of planning, schedulingand control (including internet based), and integration of measurements, control,and information systems.progress in these areas will require a number of new supporting tools thatcan effectively handle and solve a variety of mathematical models involving thousands and millions of variables. these supporting tools in turn will require thatchemical engineers become acquainted with new advances in numerical analysis,mathematical programming, and local search techniques.¥there is a need for largescale differentialalgebraic methods for simulating systems at multiple scales (e.g., fluid mechanics and molecular dynamics), acapability that is still at a very early stage.¥there is a need for methods for simulating and optimizing models whoseparameters are described by probability distribution functions, a capability that isin its infancy.¥there is a need for advanced discretecontinuous optimization tools thatcan handle mixedinteger, discretelogic, and quantitativequalitative equationsto model synthesis and planning and scheduling problems.¥there is a need for methods that can determine global optima for arbitrarynonlinear functions, and that can handle extremely large nonlinear models forrealtime optimization (on the order of millions of variables).beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92beyond the molecular frontier¥there is a need for improved modeling tools to accommodate heuristicand qualitative reasoning.¥there is a need for hierarchical computations for conceptual design, whichwill require knowledge of new developments in computer science.¥there is a need for informationmodeling tools, which will become increasingly important for supporting integration problems as well as teamwork.finally, there are new potential applications from software and internetbasedcomputing. while the former is likely to be most relevant for a few specialists,the demand for software development may increase as chemistry and chemicalengineering move to new areas in which there are no standard software packages.for internetbased computing an exciting possibility will be to share more readilynew software developments directly from the developers, bypassing the commercial software vendors. another area of sharing leading to powerful new computational opportunities in the chemical sciences is the use of peertopeer computingin the form of sharing unused cycles on small computers. we can do very largescale computations on networks of personal computers, as is being done in studies of protein folding9 and molecular docking.10 the potential here is to tacklecomputational problems of unprecedented size and complexity, with a relativelylow investment in the actual computational resources.scientific computingadvances in scientific computing will help to address some of the challengesin computational chemistry and process systems engineering, particularly computational tasks that scale exponentially with size. while singlethreaded execution speed is important and needed, coordination of multiple instruction multipledata (mimd) computer systems is rapidly becoming the major challenge in scientific computing. the optimal parallel organization is application dependent:synchronous systems execute multiple elementary tasks per clock cycle whileasynchronous models use clusters, vector units, or hypercubes. although work inautomatic task parallelization has made significant progress, the major issues inscientific highperformance computing are likely to be identification of suitablehardware architectures, algorithms to reformulate problems into a sequence ofparallelizable subtasks with the òweakest possibleó couplings, and nondeterministic procedures with statistical properties. on the positive side, parallel computing is becoming almost routine as individual researchers, groups, universities,9http://www.stanford.edu/group/pandegroup/cosm; v.s. pande and d.s. rokhsar, proceedings ofthe national academy of sciences, u.s.a. 96, 90629067, 1999; v. s. pande, a. y. grosberg, t.tanaka, and d. s. rokhsar, current opinions in structural biology, 8:6879, 1997.10http://www.chem.ox.ac.uk/curecancer.html; robinson, daniel d.; lyne, paul d.; richards, w.graham, j. chem. inf. comput. sci., 40(2), 503512, 2000.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chemical theory and computer modeling93and companies embrace lowcost cluster parallel computers made from commodity offtheshelf processors and network interconnects. from a computational science point of view, however, this multiplies the complexity of delivering higherperformance computational tools to practicing researchers. even when the number of parallel supercomputer vendors peaked in the mid1990s, the number ofmanufacturers, processors, and network architectures was limited to a handful ofsuch systems; by contrast, the number of possible cluster configurations is enormous.beyond parallelization, the major thrust of highperformance computing today is computational grids, modeled after the electrical power grid, in which thecomputational resources of a large number of sites are combined through widearea networks into a computational metaresource. significant scientific and technical obstacles associated with the grid computational environment must be overcome, since grids embody all the complexity of parallel computers with additional difficulties such as distributed ownership of resources, multiple andwideranging network latencies, and heterogeneous architectures, to name justthree. resolution of these obstacles is one of the major thrusts of computationalscience research today. nevertheless, assuming these obstacles can be overcome,grid computing offers the possibility of solving the largest scale problems confronting the computational chemistry and process engineering communities inthe most costeffective way. they can also facilitate collaboration between groupswith complementary expertise that can share their capabilities while maintainingcontrol over them. one can foresee the day when integrated process/product design/optimization (ippdo) is performed on a wide area grid in which dedicatedservers perform needed parts of the overall calculation, with the most computeintensive computations being executed on the highest performance nodes of thegrid.as the sophistication of computation approaches increases, and the desire tointegrate product and process design and optimization becomes reality, we anticipate that largescale computations will be required that may last for days or weeks(even on the fastest computational resources) and that these computations willrequire intervention and redirection (known as computational steering) by theexperts managing the computation. computational steering is a relatively newfield that is being applied in such areas as global climate modeling. enablingcomputational steering requires the development of appropriate visualization toolsthat communicate the relevant information to the users, and interfaces to the computation that enable quantities and methods to be changed. tools specific to theintegrated ippdo application will need to be developed.another new capability whose impact is still somewhat difficult to predict iswireless computing. one area that is likely to benefit is in the integration of measurements, control, and information systems. wireless computing may also playan important role in computational steering of long computations described above,since examining the state of a computation, consulting with colleagues, and steerbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94beyond the molecular frontiering the computation can all be envisaged as taking place on an appropriatelyenabled handheld device. many of these tools exist in a disconnected and primitive form today: much of the challenge lies in integrating the tools and adaptingthem for the ippdo application.why all this is importantin the final analysis, basic understanding of chemistry will require successfultheoretical approaches. for example, in our picture of the exact pathways involved in a chemical reaction there is no current hope that we can directly observe it in full molecular detail on the fast and microscopic scale on which itoccurs. as discussed in chapter 4, our ability to make a detailed picture of everyaspect of a chemical reaction will come most readily from theories in which thoseaspects can be calculated, but theories whose predictions have been validated byparticular incisive experiments.when we have the information from the sequencing of the human genome,and want to understand the properties of those proteins that are coded by some ofthe genes but not yet known experimentally, we need to solve the proteinfoldingproblem. then we can translate the gene sequenceñwhich specifies the sequenceof amino acidsñinto the threedimensional structure of the unknown protein.for practical applications, good effective theories and computational toolsare invaluable. we want to calculate the properties of molecules that have not yetbeen made, to select a likely medicine for synthesis. we want to be able to calculate what catalyst would best speed a particular reaction with selectivity, so thatcatalyst can be created and used in manufacturing. we want to calculate the properties of organized chemical systems, nanometersized particles, and aggregateswhose properties can be valuable in computers and in other electronic devices.we need to develop new and powerful computational methods that span from theatomic and molecular level to the chemicalprocess and chemicalenterprise levelin order to allow their effective integration for multiscale simulation and optimization. we want to synthesize energyefficient and environmentally benign processes that are cost effective. we want to manage networks of plants that eliminate inventories and can be operated in a safe and responsive manner. withincreasingly powerful computers and better software, these goals seem withinreach in the future, and they will greatly enhance our capabilitiesñboth in basicand applied chemistry and in chemical engineering.as discussed above, simulation and modeling are central components of process engineering. improvements in these techniques will permit the design ofmuch more efficient processes and facilities. integrating the current and futurecapabilities of computational chemistry and process engineering will result inimproved materials, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals; yield more efficient environmentally benign processes to manufacture them; and accomplish this whileproviding greater financial return.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.957the interface with biology and medicine1some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥understand fully the chemistry of life, including the chemistry of thebrain and memory.¥invent and learn to manufacture effective antiviral agents and antibiotics to fight all serious diseases, including those caused by drugresistant pathogens.¥invent medicines that go beyond treatment to provide cure or prevention of lifelimiting conditions and diseases such as cancer, alzheimerõsdisease, mental illness, and diabetes.¥invent better ways to deliver drugs to their targets, including devicesthat can function as artificial organs.¥learn how genetic variation among individuals will affect their responses to particular medicines.¥invent biocompatible materials for organ replacements and for artificialbones and teeth.1as part of the overall project on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century, aworkshop on health and medicine will lead to a separate report. the reader is urged to consult thatreport for further information.continuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96beyond the molecular frontiergoalsthe goal of fundamental science at the interface of chemical sciences andbiology is to understand life in chemical terms. our ability to accomplish thetranslation of biology into chemical terms is closely related to our fundamentalunderstanding of lifeõs machinery. decoding these mysteries and producing adetailed molecular picture of how things work is a critical step. however, formost people, the real impact comes when we can use that understanding to improve our lives. nowhere has the role of chemical sciences been better illustratedthan in the discovery, development, and production of new medicines and waysin which we can more selectively deliver these medicines to the organ or tissuewhere they are needed. this fundamental understanding of what chemical transformations occur in living creatures, how these chemical transformations are regulated, and how they respond to extracellular stimuli is also critical to developingsemisynthetic tissues and organs as replacements for damaged organs, to genetherapy, and to solving a host of clinical problems. in addition, these chemicaltools will provide the basis for improvements in the productivity of agriculture inboth animal and plant production systems. most directly, advances in the chemicalsciences will be essential for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of disease.underlying sciencethe mechanisms of life are revealed when we understand their moleculardetails. moreover, molecular understanding of biology plays the major role in¥invent improved diagnostic methods so that diseases can be detected,identified, and treated at an early stage.¥create food additives that protect and enhance our diets with unquestioned safety.¥learn how gene expression is controlled in living cells and how we canaffect that process with smallmolecule medicines.¥learn why enzymes are so effective, so we can design artificial biomimetic catalysts that work as well as the best enzymes.¥extend our chemical understanding of how life might arise spontaneously, on earth or elsewhere.¥make organized chemical systems that imitate the functioning of biological cells.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine97guiding drug discovery, and molecularlevel understanding of biology is fundamental in developing diagnostic methods.nature is a highly innovative chemist, and we know only a small fraction ofthe universe of natural products. currently, about half of the most widely prescribed drugs in the united states are either smallmolecule natural products,such as penicillin, or synthetic molecules that are based on natural products buthave better properties. the other half are products of the creative imagination ofmedicinal chemists. natureõs genetic and chemical diversity is a treasure thatshould not be squandered. one reason to maintain ecosystems such as rain forestsintact is that less than 10% of plant species have been systematically investigatedfor their chemical products. also, many microbes, insects, and other species havenot been explored for useful products.discovering which natural product is useful has historically been a slow,laborious effort. our improved understanding of the molecular basis of life and ofdisease has allowed us to develop methods for rapid screening of libraries ofnatural products for compounds that interact with specific molecular targets. synthetic chemists have used the techniques of combinatorial chemistry to generatelarge numbers of chemical compounds that also can be screened in a similarmanner to identify promising drug candidates. tremendous advances have beenmade in our capabilities to rapidly make a wide variety of complex new chemicals for such testing.although we do not know the identity of all chemical species in a living cell,we do know many of the most essential components and have determined theirmolecular structures. molecular analysis of living cells has led to a flow plan ofinformation in molecular biology, known as the central dogma: the informationnecessary for a cell is encoded in the double helix of dna. dna acts as a template for its own replication, and segments of dna that encode information forthe primary structure (i.e., amino acid sequence) in a protein are called genes. theinformation for production of a protein is first transcribed from dna throughsynthesis of a messengerrna molecule by the process of transcription, and regulatory elements on the dna help determine when and how often a particular geneis transcribed. the information on the messenger rna is converted to a proteinthrough the process known as translation; if the physiological conditions in thecell are correct, the nascent protein folds into its proper threedimensional shape.proteins act as catalysts (called enzymes), transporters, receptors of information,regulators, and structural elements in the cell. their threedimensional shape iscritical to biological activity.the language of biology uses four letters (a, t, c, and g corresponding tofour different nucleotides) in dna, and threeletter words. each threeletter wordspecifies a particular amino acid (or signals to start or stop translation). othercombinations of dna letters (of various lengths) combine with proteins in thecell to block or encourage transcription of genes; these combinations of lettersconstitute regulatory elements. the language of biology is universal; the samebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98beyond the molecular frontierlanguage applies to humans, plants, and microbes. this universality makes genetic engineering and gene therapy feasible.recent advances in technology, using modern chemical techniques for structure determination, have allowed us to sequence or read the letters in the dna, orgenome, of a cell. we have genomic sequence data for humans, an insect, a plant,simple multicellular organisms, and many microbes; more are constantly beingproduced. these sequences represent the total genetic and biochemical blueprintfor each of these organisms. this information is useless unless we learn to read itintelligently; that is, to relate linear sequence information to cell and organismalfunction. functional genomics is a term used to describe that relationship, and itwill be a primary challenge for the next 50 years.the simple sequence of letters in the genome tells us only a little. the detailsof threedimensional structure are important to understanding the chemical processes of life. for example, the discovery that dna forms a double helix made itclear how genetic information is passed on and utilized. the biological activity ofthe proteins encoded on the dna is dependent on their specific threedimensional structure. many chemists are concerned with how best to determine thestructure of such proteins. ideally, that structure could be predicted from the sequence of amino acids that correspond to the code in the gene on the dna. thisremains a challenging problem in computational chemistry (chapter 6), but acombination of experimental and theoretical techniques have advanced our understanding of structure and function in proteins. for example, xray methods canbe used when a protein can be crystallized (although this is often difficult).nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) techniques can be used to probe the structureof proteins in solution. many of the computational techniques are related to recent advances in sequencing of dna. bioinformatics includes computationalchemistry with the goals of predicting function and threedimensional shape directly from the amino acid sequenceñby comparison with sequence, function,and structural information for other proteins (often from other organisms).knowing protein structure can provide direct benefits to human health. theprecise molecular structure of a protein gives it great selectivity in distinguishingamong substrates. sometimes that activity can be blocked by molecules that aresimilar to the substrate but do not cause a reaction or response when bound to theprotein.for example, with the crystal structure of the aspartyl protease from humanimmundeficiency virus (hiv1) in 1989 came the opportunity to design molecules to block this important enzyme that acts as a molecular scissors. hiv is thevirus responsible for aids. essential to viral replication, the hiv protease cutslong strands composed of many proteins into the functional proteins found inmature virus particles. this proteolysis occurs at the very end of the hiv replication cycle (figure 71). the threedimensional structural information derived fromthe xray crystal structure, combined with computer modeling techniques, allowedchemists to design potent, selective inhibitors of the protease enzyme (figurebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine99figure 71the hiv replication cycle. a virus particle (small sphere) attaches to a cellin the immune system such as a lymphocyte (large sphere, shown here in cross section) asthe first step. two complementary approaches to aids therapy utilize (a) reverse transcriptase inhibitors (enlargement, lower left) to block incorporation of the viral genomeinto the host cell, and (b) hiv protease inhibitors (enlargement, lower right) to blockcleavage of proteins into key functional enzymes that are required for mature viral particles. copyright merck & co., inc., whitehouse station, new jersey, usa, all rightsreserved, used with permission.72). design of complex molecules that òdockó into a target is only a first stepñthe molecules had to be synthesized from simple building blocks. the excellentstereocontrol of reactions like the jacobsen and sharpless epoxidations and theevans aldol reaction was essential to the construction of molecules with as manyas five chiral centers (for which 25 or 32 possible stereoisomeric forms are possible). target molecules had to be made in pure form and tested, and eventuallythe single òactiveó isomer had to be produced with >99.8% purity at a level exceeding 100,000 kg/year. a decade ago, production of synthetic drugs with thislevel of molecular complexity was inconceivable. protease inhibitors have become an important part of the treatment for aids patients.a major lesson learned from the first draft of the human genome sequence2 isthat there are fewer genes (perhaps only 30,000) than originally predicted (over2j.m. claverie, science, 291, 1255, 2001; j. d. mcpherson, et al., nature, 409, 934, 2001; j. c.venter, et al., science, 291, 1304, 2001.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100beyond the molecular frontier100,000). this was a surprise to biologists, who had speculated that the numberof genes in an organismõs genome might scale according to that organismõs levelof complexity. instead, some simple worms such as nematodes have nearly asmany genes as human beings! where are the complex functions encoded that arecharacteristics of higher mammals? one answer seems to be in the posttranslational modification of proteins. during or after their biosynthesis, proteins can bemodified with myriad added decorations, such as phosphate, sulfate, and acetylgroups; the modified proteins can have vastly different properties compared withthose of their unmodified progenitors. thus a single protein, derived from a singlegene, can be transformed into numerous distinct molecular species and therebyamplify the information content of a very concise genome. comparisons haveshown that posttranslational modifications are more extensive in higher organisms.the chemistry of polysaccharides is a major frontier. their branched andcomplex nature makes them far more difficult to synthesize than the linearbiopolymers, proteins, and nucleic acids. for this reason, automated syntheticmethods for polysaccharides were just created in 2001, several decades after comsnohohnoonh2oonnhostbunhoohhhhonnnhnoohohnhoamprenavirnelfinavirindinavirfigure 72examples of hiv protease inhibitors.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine101parable methods were perfected for the linear biopolymers. there is still a needfor improved syntheses of the linkage that connects sugar residues within apolysaccharide chain, the glycosidic bond. at the moment, each specific linkagemust be made with different optimal reagents, making a generalized automatedsynthesis very difficult.our increased understanding of the biology of polysaccharides has led tomajor breakthroughs in medicinal chemistry. the attachment of white blood cellsto cells that line the walls of blood vessels is a hallmark of inflammatory conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and transplant rejection. disruptionof this cellcell binding event would stop the inflammation and improve thepatientõs health. it was discovered that the pathological binding of these two celltypes is mediated by noncovalent association of a receptor on the white bloodcell, termed lselectin, with polysaccharide ligands on the blood vessel walls.soluble versions of that polysaccharide that can bind to the receptors and thusinhibit cell binding are now in clinical trials as antiinflammatory drugs.in most cases, the precise functions of polysaccharides are not known; eventheir primary sequences are very hard to determine using current analytical techniques. thus, a major challenge is to crack the òcarbohydrate codeó and determine the structures and functions of all the polysaccharides found on human cells.terms such as òglycomicsó have already been coined to describe such globalefforts.biochemical engineeringbiochemical engineering is both an established and an emerging field that isinherently multidisciplinary. it integrates chemical engineering with biology andbiochemistryñto participate in biological discovery or to create processes, devices, or therapies.for example, bioprocess engineering is concerned with the development ofmanufacturing processes based on living cells or enzymes to make pharmaceuticals, food ingredients, or chemicals. much of biochemical engineering activity isdirected toward human health and forms an important branch of biomedical engineering, particularly in activities such as drug delivery devices, artificial organs,and tissue engineering (e.g., artificial skin for burn victims).modern biochemical engineering has become so focused at the molecularand cellular level that the difference between molecular and cellular biology andmolecular and cellular engineering can be difficult to discern. biologists and biochemists want details of mechanisms and have successfully used a reductionistapproach in which they strip away all elements except those directly under study.biochemical engineers typically require a less detailed description of componentmechanisms, but they need to understand how the cellõs components interact witheach other. thus, biochemical engineers must view the cell or collection of cellsas a whole system. it is often this integrative approach that distinguishes biobeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102beyond the molecular frontierchemical engineers from biologists and biochemists. the integrative or systemsperspective of the biochemical engineer complements the traditional reductionistapproach of the biologist.another distinction between the biochemical engineer and the biologist isthat the creation of a process, therapeutic strategy, or device is the ultimate goalof the engineer, while discovery is the primary goal of the biologist. however, theengineerõs approach often leads to new discovery, and many biologists participate in creation. since some properties of systems emerge only when componentparts are integrated together, the complete discovery and understanding of livingcells will require the integrative approach common in engineering, in addition toreductionist approaches.modern biochemical engineering began with the challenge of largescale production of penicillin by fermentation during world war ii. this challenge required the active cooperation of microbiologists, biochemists, and chemical engineers. today many smallmolecule natural products are made from microbes inlarge (>100,000 l) fermenters followed by a series of separation and purificationoperations.other major early contributions of biochemical engineering have been in thedevelopment of the artificial kidney and physiologically based pharmacokineticmodels. the artificial kidney has been literally a lifesaver. pharmacokinetic models divide the body of an animal or human into various compartments that act asbioreactors. these mathematical models have been used very successfully in developing therapeutic strategies for the optimal delivery of chemotherapeutic drugsand in assessing risk from exposure to toxins.more recent accomplishments include development of bioprocesses for production of highpurity proteins, using genetically engineered cells. this challengewas particularly difficult with respect to the development of largescale systemsfor production of therapeutic proteins using mammalian cells suspended (or dispersed) in a liquid medium. examples of some of these products are tissue plasminogen activator used to treat stroke and heart attack patients, erythropoietin totreat anemia resulting from kidney damage or chemotherapy, and granulocytecolony stimulating factor as an adjuvant to chemotherapy and cancer treatment.another accomplishment has been the development of effective devices for thecontrolled release of pharmaceuticals and therapeutic proteins. localized delivery of drugs (for example, in the brain) has been a key to effective treatment ofcancers and other ailments.commercial production of paclitaxel (better known by the commercial nametaxol), an important anticancer agent, has been accomplished using plant celltissue cultures, where cells or small aggregates of cells are suspended in a liquidmedium. this technological advance could lead to general methodology for theproduction of plantbased medicinals from rare and difficulttogrow plant species. tissueengineered products such as artificial skin and cartilage have beenrecently introduced into the market. the need to combine living cells and polybeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine103mers under the strictest conditions of sterility challenged the ability of the engineers to mass produce and package these products..the preceding accomplishments are applied in nature, but required tremendous amounts of basic research on mass transfer, interactions of materials withbiological components, fluid dynamics, separation processes (especially chromatography and membrane separations), and biochemical kinetics.biochemical engineers also have made major contributions to a better understanding of cells, tissues, and organisms. these contributions fall mainly undersuch categories as metabolic engineering, cellular engineering, and hemodynamics.metabolic engineering refers to purposeful genetic manipulation of the biochemical pathways in a cell to produce a new product, to eliminate unwantedreactions, or to increase the amount of a desired product already produced by acell. the optimal approach to effective metabolic engineering of a cell is essentially quantitative in nature; biochemical engineers have played the major role inthe development and application of the appropriate mathematical models (e.g.,metabolic control theory). in addition, chemists have developed a better understanding of the modular cellular machinery used to synthesize natural productsand have used the techniques of metabolic engineering to harness these modularprocesses to create novel molecules. an excellent example is recent work to makenovel polyketide antibiotics. biochemical engineers do much of the current experimental work on metabolic engineering in collaboration with other chemicalscientists.cellular engineering, while closely linked to metabolic engineering, is concerned not so much with metabolic pathways but instead with processes such ascell adhesion, cellular mechanics, signal transduction due to growth factors andhormones, and viral infections. by combining mathematical models of these processes with clever experiments we have far greater insight into these biologicalmechanisms. such insight can assist in the design of drug candidates. as an example, both models and experiments show that the intuitive assumption that themost effective inhibitor of a receptorbased process would have the highest binding affinity is wrong. due to receptor recycling a nonmaximal binding affinity isoptimal.largescale production of proteins from recombinant dnausing suspensions of animal cellswhen recombinant dna technology was developed in the late 1970sand early 1980s, many thought that all proteins could be produced ineasytogrow bacterial cultures. this optimism proved incorrect; bacteriawere incapable of making some proteins in a therapeutically useful form.continuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104beyond the molecular frontierfor these proteins, mammalian cells proved better hosts, as they couldprocess the protein with intracellular machinery similar to that in humans.however, largescale production of proteins in cell culture was problematic. mammalian cells had to grow attached to a solid surface, such asglass in òroller bottleó culture. while the federal drug administration(fda) had approved some processes for vaccine production that usedcell cultures, it required that these cells be ònormal.ó normal mammaliancells can divide only a few times before they stop growing, making scaleup to large volumes difficult.the first largescale process to circumvent these limitations was onedeveloped by genentech, inc. (south san francisco, ca) for productionof recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (tpa). this protein dissolvesblood clots and can be used to treat heart attacks and strokes. this process was developed in the mid1980s, resulting in final product licensurein 1987. the process required both regulatory and technical breakthroughs.genetic scientists chose to use a chinese hamster ovary (cho) cellline as a recombinant for production of human therapeutics. this cell lineis òtransformed,ó which means it can replicate indefinitely. all cancersarise from transformed cells, so genentech had to convince the fda thattheir process, including recovery and purification, would eliminate thepossibility of injecting patients with a òtransforming factoró that couldcause cancer in a patient. in addition, they had to adapt the cho cells togrow in suspension culture (i.e., cells dispersed in liquid medium andunattached to any surface) and to grow in a medium without serum (whichis produced from blood by the removal of cells). serumfree suspensioncultures of cho cells greatly simplified processing problems and reducedcost. the absence of serum and the contaminating proteins it containedsimplified recovery and purification of tpa, and reduced degradation astpa was secreted from the cho cells. by using suspensions, and thusbeing freed from the constraints of surfacetovolume ratios inherent inroller bottle or similar techniques, it was possible to design large (12,000l) stirred bioreactors that could be readily scaled up and that would maintain high levels of volumetric productivity (mg tpa/lhr). the bioreactordesign issues were complex, as no one before had built a bioreactor thatcould supply sufficient oxygen and nutrient to the cells in such a largesystem while stirring gently enough not to damage the cells with highlevels of fluid shear. this required novel designs of reactor shape andimpeller, based on an understanding of the cellular growth kinetics, masstransfer, and fluid dynamics. the process required development of anovel largescale, lowshear, tangential flow filtration technology for therapid, aseptic removal of spent medium from cells.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine105other examples of important insight obtained by biochemical engineers arethe effects that physiological values of fluid stress have on cells. cells that lineblood vessels are normally exposed to blood flow. this flow places a mechanicalstress on a cell that not only alters cell shape but also its function. the mechanicalstresses alter expression of genes. the mechanisms by which this occurs in cellsare incompletely understood and a matter of active research.progress to datewhen one looks back at the last decade of the 20th century it is astonishing tosee what was achieved in the understanding of lifeõs machinery. decoding thesemysteries and producing a detailed molecular picture of how things work is acritical step. however, nowhere has the role of chemistry been better illustratedthan in the creation and development of new medicines and therapies.the success of the project depended on the ability of biochemical engineers, chemists, and life scientists to work together. success dependedon an integrated vision of the process and an understanding of how eachcomponent interacted with the other components.while production processes based on serumfree suspension culturesof cho cells are now common, the integrated approach to bioprocessdevelopment remains essential to success. chemists and biochemicalengineers need sufficient knowledge in the life sciences to interact fruitfully with biologists. the cell remains the òrealó bioreactor, but efficientprocesses required the design of macroscopic bioreactors and operatingstrategies that effectively couple to our knowledge of the cellular reactorshoused in humandesigned bioreactors.selective asthma therapyin the 1930s an unknown material was hypothesized that was proposed to cause a slow and sustained contraction of smooth muscle. itwas named the òslow reacting substanceó (srs). by 1940 a similar substance was reported to be found in guinea pig lungs and was called theòslow reacting substance of anaphylaxisó (srsa). over the next 40years, while no one could isolate, characterize, or synthesize this matecontinuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106beyond the molecular frontierrial, the belief was that srsa played a key role in human asthma. in1979, bengt samuelsson proposed a structure for srsa that was derived from arachidonic acid and the amino acid cysteine. he called itleukotriene c.co2hco2hoco2hohscysglygluco2hohscysglyco2hohscyslta4arachidonic acidcellular membranespla25lipooxygenaseglutamyl transferaseltc4ltd4lte4dipeptidasebronchoconstrictionreceptorltc4 synthetaseformation of leukotrienes via the arachidonic acid cascade.soon after, the complete structure of srsa was finally determined bytotal synthesis. srsa turned out to be a mixture of 3 substances nowknown as leukotriene c4 (ltc4), leukotriene d4 (ltd4) and leukotrienee4 (lte4) in which ltd4 was predominant. the jump from a biologicalobservation in 1938 to a molecular structure of ltd4 opened the door toa novel and selective treatment for asthma. the theory was that if onebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine107underlying the discovery of a selective asthma therapy are numerous advances in analytical and instrumental techniques as well as synthetic methods thatallow the construction of complex molecules. practical catalytic, stereospecific,and organometallic methods that permit a high level of stereochemical controlhave enabled production at the multiton level of molecules previously inaccessible even at the gram scale.nscoona+clohsingulair (montelukast)could find a molecule that specifically blocked the action of ltd4 on thelung, it would be possible to prevent the tightening of the airways found inasthma. eighteen years after samuelssonõs proposal, after the synthesisand testing of thousands of manmade compounds, singulair (montelukast)reached the worldõs pharmacies. leukotriene modifiers are recognized tobe the first important advance in asthma therapy in 25 years.this is just one example of how the chemical understanding of one oflifeõs processes at the molecular level resulted in the solution to a 60yearold problem. the selective ltd4 receptor antagonist was specifically designed to take the place of ltd4 on smooth muscle. such approachesñwhere the drug molecule does only what itõs intended to do,without indiscriminately binding to other receptors in the bodyñare aimedat selective therapies that are free of side effects. it is that selectivity,designing molecules with precision based on structural information, thatcharacterizes the state of the art of chemistry as we enter the nextmillennium.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108beyond the molecular frontierselectivity and antiinflammatory drugsthe theme of selectivityñbased on detailed understanding of molecular structure and functionñunderlies most recent therapeutic advances.sometimes a biochemical òrevisitingó of an old discovery enables dramaticimprovements in the quality of life. among the most widely used classesof medicines are the nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (nsaids) suchas aspirin and ibuprofen. used for years, these pain killers and arthritistreatments work by blocking the effects of arachidonic acid on an enzymecalled cyclooxygenase (cox). a major drawback to inhibiting cox isthat by doing so you inadvertently block its role in protecting the gastrointestinal tract. the resulting ulcerative gastropathy is responsible for alarge number of hospitalizations and deaths. recently it was discoveredthat cyclooxygenase is not a single enzyme but rather a family containingat least two nearly identical members: cox1 and cox2. while cox1is responsible for the good gastroprotective effects (and shouldnõt beblocked) cox2 is the enzyme involved with pain and inflammation (thereal target). the cox2 hypothesis stated that if one could invent aspecific cox2 inhibitor, it would be an effective antiinflammatory andanalgesic medication with substantially reduced gastrointestinal (gi)toxicity compared with the classical nsaidõs aspirin and ibuprofen.010,00020,00030,00040,00050,000annual mortality (united states)asthmansaidgastropathyhiv/aidsmotor vehicleaccidentsdiabetessignificant mortality is associated with nsaid gastropathy. g. singh and g.triadafilopoulos, epidemiology of nsaid induced gastrointestinal complications,journal of rheumatology, 1999, 26, 56, 1824, by permission of oxford universitypress.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine109again, detailed structural information at a molecular level was the key.once these òpicturesó were available slight chemical differences betweenthe cox1 and cox2 isoenzymes could be seen: cox2 had a sidepocket while cox1 didnõt. this meant that a molecule that could dockinto the cox2 side pocket (binding site) but not into cox1 would specifically block cox2 without touching cox1. in 1999 this hope wasrealized with the availability of cox2 selective antiinflammatories suchas rofecoxib and celecoxib that can be as much as 50fold selective forthe target.figure reprinted with permission from elsevier science (the lancet, 1999, 353,307314).oosoonncf3snh2oorofecoxibcelecoxibcontinuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110beyond the molecular frontiercox2 selectivity of marketed compounds. adapted with permission from t.d.warner et al. proceedings of the national academy of sciences, 96, 13, 7563(1999). copyright 1999 national academy of sciences, u.s.a.log [ratio of cox2 to cox1 inhibition]2.51.50.50.51.52.53.5> 50fold cox2 selective5 to 50fold cx2 selective< 5fold cox2 selectiverofecoxibmeloxicamcelecoxibnimesulidediclofenacpiroxicamketorolacindomethaciinaspirinibuprofennaproxenspecificity and therapy for the human brainnowhere is the need for specificity so great as in trying to design therapies for the human brain. here there are numerous receptors that affectour moods, sleep, alertness, memory, and coordination. even though theimportance of serotonin (5hydroxytryptamine, 5ht) had been known toneuroscientists for over 100 years, it wasnõt until the discovery of drugsbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine111like prozac (fluoxetine hydrochloride) and paxil (paroxetine hydrochloride) that selective antidepressive drugs became available. the antidepressive effect results from inhibition of serotonin uptake by neurons inthe brain, thus ensuring that circulating levels are adequate. the selectivity results from selective binding compared with older drugs (tricyclics)that were less discriminating in their binding to other brain receptors. thenet result is fewer side effects. as the molecular basis of memory andbehavior become clearer, we will see a leap in the effectiveness andspecificity of drugs for the central nervous system.the arrival of the year 2000 coincided with a milestone in modern science; many believe that deciphering the human genome will provide aroad map for therapeutic intervention. we are already seeing medicinesthat act not directly on a target tissue but on receptors that regulate thetranscription of genes. the ability to òtuneó the molecular signaling thatcontinually occurs in our bodies will eventually allow for more exquisitecontrol of the cellular processes of life. if todayõs chemistry lets us turnthings on or off by blocking or unblocking receptors and enzymes,tomorrowõs molecules will be able to balance complex metabolic processes like growth and aging by fine tuning the regulation of genes andtheir products.ohnf3cnhooofprozacpaxilchallenges and opportunities for the futurethe opportunities for discovery and invention at the interface of chemistry,engineering, and biology are enormous, and many examples have been describedin the preceding sections. this interface represents a true research frontierñonethat is critical to our ability to develop new chemistry for the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of human disease. the continuing challenge is to discover thechemical identity of all the molecules that make up living organisms and the waythey bind to each other and organize into biological structureñmembranes andcell structures such as nuclei, ribosomes, etc.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112beyond the molecular frontierribosomesthe nucleotide sequences of the genes encoded in dna are transcribed into the same sequences of messenger rna, again carrying thegenetic code, and these rnas direct the synthesis of proteins with defined sequences of amino acids. protein synthesis occurs in a cellularmachine called a ribosome, which takes in messenger rna and someamino acids linked to transfer rna and uses base pairing to direct theirassembly into a protein. the base pairing occurs because each kind ofamino acid is attached to a different transfer rna, one that carries acode for that particular amino acid. thus messenger rna plays the roleof template for protein synthesis, and transfer rna guides the aminoacids to the correct spot. assembling the protein still requires a catalystto link the amino acids together.essentially all biological catalysts in the modern world are themselvesproteins, enzymes. however, in 1989 sidney altman and thomas cechreceived the nobel prize in chemistry for showing that rna itself couldact as a catalyst for some biological reactions. this led to the idea that inan earlier time, as life was evolving, rna may have been both the information molecule (a role usually played by the more stable dna now) andthe catalyst (the role that protein enzymes now play.) since this ideaindicates that in early times the synthesis of proteins was catalyzed byrna, not by protein enzymes, the intriguing question is whether this isstill true today.ribosomes are complex structures consisting of one small rna molecule and two large ones together with some 50 to 60 different proteins.their general shape had been determined by electron microscopy someyears ago, but a major breakthrough occurred in 2000. xray diffractionwas used to determine the detailed molecular structure of a ribosomalparticle that consists of almost all the molecules in a ribosome andexhibits the full catalytic and regulatory functions of a ribosome.3 thetrick was to get this large particle, about 100 times as large as a simpleprotein enzyme, to crystallize so the xray technique could be applied.the results are striking, but for the real details it is important to consultthe original articles). such a detailed structure can help medicinalchemists to develop useful drugs that bind to the ribosome, but the moreimportant result has to do with the catalytic center.the catalytic center of the ribosome, where the protein is actuallymade, is now seen to consist of rna, not of a protein enzyme! the many3n. ban, p. nissen, j. hansen, p. b. moore, and t. a. steitz, science, 289, 905, 2000;p.nissen, j. hansen, n. ban, p. b. moore, and t. a. steitz, science, 289, 920, 2000.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine1134g. w. muth, l. ortolevadonnelly, and s. a. strobel, science, 289, 947, 2000.proteins present help organize the structure, but they do not play a catalytic role. this is in line with the idea that the original process in early lifeforms used rna alone. as proteins were created in processes guidedand catalyzed by rna, some proteins were incorporated into the rnacatalytic unit during evolution and improved the ribosomeõs function. afollowup paper4 indicates a way in which the rna could carry out thecatalyzed synthesis of proteins. a particular adenosine unit in the catalytic rna has the correct properties to be able to assist the formation ofpeptide bonds, which are the links in proteins.all this is basic chemical research that has wide importance, determining the molecular structure of a component of living cells. simply, it tellsus the details of how proteins are now made, but more generally itstrengthens the picture of how life may have started in a world whererna was both information molecule and catalyst. it is a major advance inscientific understanding.the large ribosomal subunit at 2.4 † resolution. (a) the particle rotated with respect to the crown view so that its active site cleft can be seen. (b) the crownview. (c) the back view of the particle, i.e., the crown view rotated 180 about itsvertical axis. reprinted with permission from ban et al., science 289, 905 (2000).copyright 2000 american association for the advancement of science.one driver for new discovery will be the completion of the human genomeproject. as a result of this project, the locations and sequences associated with thetens of thousands of genes of the human genome will have been determined. inthe postgenomic era, then, we will know the dna sequences and genes of ahuman being, but that is only the start. what are the functions associated withthese sequences? we will need to isolate the proteins that are the gene products,beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114beyond the molecular frontierdetermine their structures, characterize their reactions and their partners in reactivity. to perturb the actions of these proteins, we will need to develop diversearrays of smallmolecule inhibitors and activators. while the human genomeproject gives us access to the library of the cell, we will need to learn much toexploit the information that we will have.for example, although we designate gene sequences by a onedimensionalstring of letters, the protein gene products they encode have threedimensionalarchitectures, and when properly folded they carry out biological function. acritical challenge in this postgenomic era will be to make the connections between protein sequence and architecture, and between protein architecture andfunction. we need to learn to predict how a protein folds and the relationshipsbetween a folded structure of a protein and its function. indeed, in reaching thatlevel of chemical understanding, we can then seek to design new functions forproteins. both combinatorial and rational design strategies may be applied in theconstruction of novel biologically based catalysts.genomics and gene arrays will become increasingly important in strategiesto prevent disease. today, for example, we make use of simple assays such as thepsa (prostate screening antigen) test in the early detection of prostate cancer.transcriptional profiling using gene chip technology will likely facilitate analogous tests for all cancers by simultaneously measuring all relevant mrna levels.we will be able to determine what mrnas or small natural products rise in concentration in association with cancers, and hence use detection methods for thesemolecules in cancer prevention. a challenge resulting from the enormous amountof information associated with such transcriptional profiling will be the determination of causal relationships, and of the partners and pathways associated withcellular transformation. indeed, a major intellectual challenge to the chemicalsciences is developing a systematic framework and computational tools to relatemicroarray data, as well as data on protein levels, to a description of the dynamicregulatory networks controlling cellular functions.proteomics is a combination of experimental and analytical tools to determine the total protein content of a cell or tissue. while genomics identifies thepotential proteins in an organism, proteomics provides information on which proteins are actually present in a tissue under specific environmental conditions andaccounts for the physiologic history of the tissue. proteomic information is difficult to obtain due to the large amount of chemical heterogeneity displayed byproteins and our inability to amplify the amount of proteins in a sample. in contrast, polymers of nucleic acids are rather more chemically homogeneous and canbe amplified using the chemical technique of polymerase chain reaction (pcr).currently much proteomics work is accomplished using a technique called twodimensional gel electrophoresis. this technique is slow, requires highly skilledtechnicians, and many proteins in a cell are too rare or too hydrophobic (waterhating) to be resolved by this technique. nonetheless, 2d gel electrophoresis hasbeen used successfully to monitor prion diseases (e.g., mad cow disease) andbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine115shows promise in the diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders such as alzheimerõs disease. a major opportunity in the chemical sciences is the development of microarray technologies that can provide more rapid and completeproteomic information. the techniques of biotechnology applied on the nanoscalemay result in miniature devices that can be used in a massively parallel fashion todo rapid separation and analysis of dna, rnas, or protein solutions.progress in genomics and proteomics offers opportunities also in the diagnosis and treatment of disease. we will soon be able to develop the chemistry necessary to routinely detect genetic variations in individuals, and to do so for a fullrange of genes. in fact, some pharmaceuticals that are largely effective and mightrepresent medical advances currently fail during clinical trials as a result of anadverse reaction within a genetic subpopulation. with genetic screening, and abetter understanding of the underlying biochemistry, we will be able to tailormake therapies for patients based on their genetic dispositions.more generally, as described earlier, medicinal chemistry has greatly contributed to the fight against disease, but there are still major challenges ahead. forexample, we donõt yet have generally effective drugs to treat viral diseases, suchas influenza or ebola (although some trials of a new drug for the treatment ofinfluenza indicate that it decreases the length of the infection). this is critical.imagine the problem if the hiv virus that causes aids, or the ebola virus thatkills quickly, were able to be transmitted by the bite of a mosquito, as some otherless lethal viruses can be. until we have effective medicines to cure such viralinfections, humanity is at great risk.another problem is bacterial resistance to antibiotics. as doctors have treatedpeople with the available antibiotics that medicinal chemistry devised in the past,they have selected for strains of bacteria that are resistant to those antibiotics.there is now a race against time by medicinal chemists to devise new antibioticsthat will work against the resistant organisms. if we do not succeed, many bacterial infections that we thought had been cured will emerge again as major threatsto our health and life.we still need much better medicines to cure cancer, heart disease, stroke, andalzheimerõs disease. we need better drugs to deal with obesity, diabetes, arthritis, and schizophrenia. the treatments of diabetes, arthritis, and mental defectssuch as schizophrenia or manic depression are not yet cures, just ways to keep thesymptoms under control. cures are needed. insights from genetics may help guideus toward elegant and rational cures, but we will also make use of screens toidentify natural products and libraries of randomly generated synthetic compounds (combinatorial chemistry). a semiempirical approach may be the besthope over the next two decades to yield drugs to alleviate these diseases.many of the natural products may come from òunusualó organisms and maybe difficult to synthesize. in those cases, it will be necessary to develop appropriate bioprocesses to produce, recover, and purify these compounds. both chemistsand biochemical engineers will be involved in creating such processes.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116beyond the molecular frontierbut medicinal chemistry will also change in basic ways. indeed, we are entering a completely new era of molecular medicine. we will develop technologies to screen the effects of small molecules on large arrays of gene products,from enzymes to receptors, and doing so will require advances in fields rangingfrom biochemistry to material design. we will develop the tools to create genomic maps of proteinprotein contacts and chemical tools to decipher the hierarchy of those contacts. our ability to digest and exploit the enormous informationwe obtain will also provide challenges in computation, in structure prediction,and in our quantitative understanding of molecular recognition. as a result, fundamentally new strategies will be developed to attack disease on a molecularlevel. for example, it is already clear that strategies to fight cancer are shifting,from those centered on maximizing toxicity in cancerous cells to those where weactivate or harness different signaling pathways of the cell, depending on whetherthe cell has undergone transformation from normal to cancerous.among the fundamental new strategies, and certainly an important step to betaken by chemists in this new era of molecular medicine, will be developing ageneral understanding of how small molecules can be utilized to regulate geneexpression and signal transduction. the goal is the design of small molecules notsimply as general poisons to the cell or to some cellular function, but instead asreagents that turn off or turn on critical pathways. this challenge depends uponadvances also in our understanding of molecular recognition. when a protein orsmall molecule binds to a particular receptor, an ensemble of weak noncovalentcontacts are specifically arrayed in threedimensional space to facilitate this recognition of one molecule by another. chemists are now working on general strategies to achieve highly specific molecular recognition, and doing so is a first stepin the rational design of new drugs as regulators of cellular processes.associated with this question is how to target these small molecules to sitesof specific action in the cell or tissue. we have, for example, made substantialprogress in delineating how some small molecules and metal ions are traffickedthrough the cell. can we apply this knowledge to invent strategies for targetingsmall molecules to specific organelles within the cell? our current understandingof what controls cell permeability and bioavailability is primitive, often not appreciably more advanced than òoil versus water.ó as we develop a molecularperspective concerning the trafficking of molecules into and through the cellñaswell as the chemistry underlying what distinguishes the surfaces of differentcellsñwe will establish a more rational approach to targeting molecules morepowerfully, and even with tissue specificity.because cells and the body respond not only to genetic information but alsoto environmental cues, any analysis must take into account the time and environmentdependent nature of the biological system. because of their training in analysis of integrated systems, biochemical engineers should be able to contribute integrated, quantitative models of these biological systems to guide the selection oftargets for intervention and the synthesis of a precise delivery system. in somebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine117cases these devices will need to be òsmartó devices to respond to a current physiological state. an example of such a device, already in research and development,is one to monitor blood glucose levels and to release insulin in response to changesin blood glucose level. this device would effectively mimic the responses of thenatural pancreas. other delivery systems may mimic viruses for dna delivery tospecific target cells as a more controllable method for gene therapy. indeed, thecontrolled delivery of macromolecular therapeutics with temporal and spatial control of therapeutic distribution is an important goal for chemists and chemicalengineers.controlled delivery of therapeuticsmany pharmaceuticals are designed to effect change in a single organor tissue. traditional methods of drug delivery using pills or injectionsrequire the pharmaceutical to enter the blood stream and to be dispersedthroughout the body (systemic delivery). often undesirable side effectsoccur in nontarget organs before a therapeutically useful level of theagent is achieved at the target organ or tissue. alternative methods ofdrug delivery are needed to deliver the drug to the right tissue, at the righttime, and at the right amount.as an example, consider treatment of a brain tumor. the brain protectsitself from the entry of potentially toxic substances through a bloodbrainbarrier, which is a highly organized cellular barrier to the transport ofsuch compounds from the blood into the brain. to administer a chemotherapeutic agent to the brain through injection into the blood stream maybe impractical since a very high concentration of the drug may be necessary for the drug to cross the bloodbrain barrier, and the side effects ofthe drug on other organs in the body may be toxic. robert langer developed a solution to this problem and related ones through the constructionof polymeric devices to release drugs at a predetermined rate for extended periods. in this particular disease, the brain tumor is removed andpolymeric disks filled with a chemotherapeutic drug are inserted. thepolymers have been carefully synthesized to be biocompatible and tobreak down at a known rate in bodily fluids. as the polymer matrix isdissolved, the drug is released slowly at high local concentrations formany weeks, killing residual cancer cells. since the polymer disks are inthe brain, the drug does not have to diffuse across the bloodbrain barrier.thus, the target, the brain, receives a high dose of drug in the area nearthe tumor, and the rest of the body experiences only low levels of thedrug. this therapy is currently in use and can significantly extend thesymptomfree lives of patients.continuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118beyond the molecular frontierlanger received the draper prize from the national academy of engineering in 2002 in recognition of his work on development of modernbiomaterials. the polymer used for controlled release of chemotherapeutic agents in the brain is only one example. other examples include theuse of such biomaterials for controlled release of large molecules (proteins or dna for gene therapy), as scaffolds for tissue engineering wherethey release growthpromoting signals, and porous aerosol particles forinhalation drug delivery. the controlledrelease drug delivery industry isestimated to have revenues of $20 billion a year with excellent prospectsfor continued growth. this industry is based on combining a knowledgeof polymer synthesis, polymer interaction with biological molecules, thekinetics of the reaction of specific chemical bonds in the polymer withwater or biological fluids, and the rate of mass transfer of molecules in apolymer matrix and in tissue.we will also look to the chemical details of biology for lessons in how tocarry out complex and important reactions under mild conditions. today, thechemical industry produces ammonia from nitrogen through a hightemperature,highpressure reaction that consumes lots of energy, yet microorganisms are capable of carrying out the same reaction at normal pressures and temperatureswithin the environment of the cell, using a metalloprotein catalyst called nitrogenase. structural insights into this and other remarkable metalloprotein catalystshave recently become available. but can we now harness that understanding todevelop new methods and new small molecular catalysts that incorporate the keyattributes of the natural enzymes? many of these enzymes, nitrogenase in particular, are capable of activating small, abundant, basically inert molecules throughmultielectron reactions. a tremendous challenge to the chemist lies in the designand application of catalysts, whether small molecules or materials, that can carryout such multielectron transfers to activate small molecules such as nitrogen,oxygen, and methane. imitating some aspects of life, biomimetic chemistry isnot the only way to invent new things, but it is one of the ways.we will look to chemical biology for guidance not only in designing newsmaller catalysts but also in devising methods to assemble large molecular machines. replication, transcription, and translation, as well as other critical cellularfunctions, appear to be carried out through the function of multiprotein/nucleicacid particles. advances in xray crystallography coupled with other imagingmethods such as nmr and electron microscopy are now providing our first snapshots of these macromolecular machines, such as the ribosome in which proteinsare synthesized in the cell. a spectacular recent advance is the determination ofbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine119the threedimensional chemical structure of the multimolecular photosyntheticreaction center, for which johann deisenhofer, robert huber, and hartmut michelreceived the nobel prize in 1988. new advances in imaging will be needed todelineate these and still larger macromolecular assemblies at atomic resolution.these structural pictures provide a critical foundation for understanding how theyfunction. but how do these machines assemble? are they remarkable examplesof spontaneous supramolecular assembly or are they guided in some way in coming together? how do the parts of these assemblies function in concert? are macromolecular assemblies of such complexity required to carry out these functions?indeed, can we next begin to design novel macromolecular machines to carry outnew, still more complex functions? the construction and assembly of such machines would represent the first step in compartmentalizing chemical reactions.as such, it would represent the very first steps in a tremendous challenge to thechemist and chemical engineer, the design of a synthetic cell.sequencing the human genomethe year 2000 marked the completion of the human genomeprojectõs primary goal. through intensive efforts of both private andpublic agencies, the sequence for the three billion base pairs thatencodes the instructions for being human has now been determined.5as a result of the human genome project, we have determined thecomplete chemical structure, nucleotide by nucleotide, of the dna withineach of these chromosomes, the chemical structures that encode ourlives. it is an extraordinary accomplishment in chemistry.completing this sequencing of the human genome could only be accomplished by building upon discoveries in chemistry made over thepast 30 years. it was about 20 years ago that w. gilbert and f. sangershowed that small segments of dna could be sequenced directly usingchemical methods. about 10 years ago, instrumentation for automatedsequencing was engineered. and building upon all the advances in biotechnology of the last decades, from oligonucleotide synthesis to thepolymerase chain reaction and shotgun sequencing, biochemists in thelast 2 years have been able to increase the pace of analysis, so that fullgenomic maps can be deciphered in months.in this postgenomic era, what can we expect? mapping the humangenome brings not only a highresolution picture of the dna within our5j. d. mcpherson, et al., nature, 409, 934, 2001; j. c. venter, et al., science, 291, 1304,2001.continuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120beyond the molecular frontiercells but also the promise of molecularbased diagnosis and treatment ofdisease. therapeutics could be tailormade to take into account our individual genetic propensities. the cost of such pharmaceuticals will surelydecline as clinical trials take such genetic information into account. andpreventive medicine will certainly flourish as we begin to catalogue anddiagnose our individual genetic predispositions to disease. but none ofthis is likely to happen tomorrow or even next year. there are many moreconceptual advances in the chemistry of life that we need to achieve. atthe start of the 21st century, we may know the sequence of bases of thehuman genome, but we canõt yet read this sequence to know what reactions, what chemical functions, actually make us human.postgenomic therapieswe have already had a glimpse into the future with the recent approvalof a new approach for the treatment of adult onset, noninsulin dependentdiabetes (nidd). in this disease, also known as type 2 diabetes, thebody becomes increasingly resistant to insulin and loses its ability tocontrol sugar levels.the glitazone family of drugs acts to increase insulin sensitivity andthus increase glycemic control. they do this by acting upstream of agene! as selective activators (agonists) of a nuclear receptor calledppargamma (found in key tissues like fat and liver) they regulate transcription of the insulin responsive genes involved in the control of glucoseproduction, transport, and utilization. using the cellõs signaling machinery,the drugs help the body compensate by getting the cells back to wherethey should be: sensitive to insulin.nnosnhooch3osnhoonrosiglitazonepioglitazonebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the interface with biology and medicine121why all this is importantwhat are the details of all the chemical transformations that occur in a livingcell? how are these details affected by the physical organization of the cell, withvarious components such as membranes and ribosomes. how do these detailsdiffer among cells of different types (liver versus brain, human versus bacterial)?we can also begin to ask what chemical signals direct the development of a singlefertilized egg into the different organized tissues in a human being, and how suchsignals work. what is the chemistry of aging? what special chemistry operates inthe brain to store memories? underlying these functionsñfunctions that makehumans what they areñare chemical processes that remain to be discovered andharnessed.other opportunities will drive both basic discovery and invention. new andimproved drugs will be needed to fight disease and improve quality of life. at thesame time, better methods will be needed for delivery of these drugs, and a variety of new medical devices will depend on the work of chemists and chemicalengineers. while the engineering of tissue constructs has had commercial success, highly perfused or vascularized tissue remains problematic. artificial organs, such as an artificial liver, remain objects of intense research. commerciallyviable replacement organs are certainly more than a decade away. the primarychallenges are understanding the signals that tissues need to control proliferationand differentiation and constructing bioreactors and scaffolds that will providesignals in appropriate sequences.the explosive growth in our understanding of the chemical basis of lifeand its processes couldnõt come at a better time. the demographic shiftof an aging generation of baby boomers will sorely challenge the nationõsresources (both financial and human capital). the need for more effective and costefficient therapies will become paramount. as our understanding of the chemistry of the brain grows, intervention will be basedon new insights at the molecular level. selective therapies for problemsof memory and cognition, vision and hearing, pain, addiction, and sleepdisorders will be designed. the subtle control needed to balance metabolic processesñlike weight gain or loss and even agingñis already onthe horizon. at the same time the revolution in microprocessors, telecommunications, and materials will enable the production of human òsparepartsó: joints and valves, eyes and ears linked to the brain. even implantable endocrine systemsñminiature chemical factories that combine realtime analysis with the synthesis or release of therapeutic agentsñarebecoming a reality.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122beyond the molecular frontiera closely related challenge is the design of materials that interact with cellsor living tissues to promote desired biological responses. such responses mightbe cell attachment, cellular differentiation and organization into functional tissue,or promotion of ingrowth of bone into an artificial prosthesis such as an artificialhip.the coupling of the techniques of microfabrication on silicon with cells orbiological molecules also offers great promise. devices at the natural length scalesof biological systems will facilitate the use of biosensors that can be implanted.they will also aid the development of models having biological components thatcan be used to gain predictive insight into in vivo systems. such nanoscale devices may mimic the biochemical interactions in the body by connecting òtissueócompartments in ways that mimic the bodyõs circulatory system. a particularmodel that would be useful would be of the bloodbrain barrier, to predict whichdrugs or chemicals may enter the brain.while we have very functional processes for manufacture of therapeutics,there are significant challenges left to the process chemical sciences. the unitedstates faces a nearterm crisis in the production of therapeutic proteins from mammalian cell culture due to the absence of sufficient facilities. mammalian cellculture is both expensive and has low yields; it is used to ensure that all of theposttranslational proteinprocessing steps (e.g., glycosylation or specific addition of certain sugar complexes to predetermined sites on the protein) are humanlike. can we find ways to alter cellular machinery in other, more productive hostcells, to produce large amounts of proteins with humanlike posttranslational processing? another challenge comes from the need to respond to bioterrorism(chapter 11). we need new methods to produce large amounts of protective antibodies or vaccines in a matter of weeks rather than years. in addition, ways areneeded to integrate better genomic, proteomic, and advanced computational methods with metabolic engineering to inexpensively produce large amounts of nonprotein products.this listing of challenges for the future is not exhaustive, but it should provide the reader with a sense of vast possibilities for the interface of the chemicalsciences and engineering with biology. these are complex scientific problemsrequiring multidisciplinary research. research at the interfaces of many disciplines requires greater understanding of neighboring fields. we are left with atraining paradoxñwe need highly skilled specialists who are also generalists. inaddition, we have a funding paradoxñsuccess requires support of both fundamental research and crossdisciplinary research. with collaborative efforts theseparadoxes will disappear, and we will realize the incredible potential that liesbefore us. the early part of the 21st century will be known as the golden age ofthe chemistry of life.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥invent improved structural materials that are stable at high temperatures and easily machined.¥invent materials with useful electrical and optical properties, includinghightemperature superconductivity.¥invent materials that are lighter, stronger, and more easily recycled.¥invent materials for surface protection (paints and coatings) that aretruly longlasting and rugged.¥understand and utilize the properties of nanoscale materials and materials that are not homogeneous.¥build materials with the kind of actuating response found in physiological systems such as muscle.¥develop and process materials in which complex structural assemblyoccurs spontaneously or with minimal guidance and in useful timescales to produce durable systems with diverse utility.¥create nanomaterials technology from nanoscale chemical science.1238materials by design11as part of the overall project on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century, aworkshop on materials and manufacturing will lead to a separate report. the reader is urged to consult that report for further information.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124beyond the molecular frontiergoalsa material is defined as òthe substance or substances out of which a thing ismade or composed.ó2 understanding materials therefore necessitates a marriagebetween understanding substances and knowing how to assemble them into useful structures. materials with specially tailored properties are at the core of nearlyall interesting assemblies that are not living, and many that are. chemical scientists synthesize, characterize, produce, and construct with materials. moreover,they do this at length scales from molecules at the nanometer level, to polymersand electronic devices at the submicron scale, and to ceramics and cement inlargescale structures. revolutionary developments are being made in all aspectsof materials science. the materials sector of the chemical sciences is vital, bothfundamentally and pragmatically, for all areas of science and technologyñaswell as for the societal needs in energy, transportation, national defense, and medicine.the overall goal of materials research within the chemical sciences is toexplore, design, and controlñthrough synthesis and processingñthe relationships among structure, properties, composition, and processing that determinethe useful behavior of all materials. the chemical sciences are especially powerful (as they are in all areas of synthesis and manufacturing) in molecularlevelconstruction of material structures. though the domain of materials chemistry israpidly expanding, it remains underdeveloped.a frontier challenge in the chemical sciences is to investigate the chemistryand properties of single isolated molecules and compare that behavior with theaverage molecular behavior in an assembly, solution, or condensed phase of molecules. many parts of the chemical sciences are concerned with the collectiveproperties of materials in condensed phases, which have a variety of intriguingand controllable properties. today, we recognize fully that the most interestingmaterials are functional systems, derived from our evolving knowledge of structurefunction relationships. catalysts are superb examples of chemically functional materials, and the area of catalytic materials is an exemplary branch ofmodern functional materials science. responsive materials, often consisting ofsofter materials, give rise to many kinds of functionality, such as sensing andactuation.composites are an important class of solid materials, whose history goesback to ancient times. for example, bricks made only of clay were not as strongas those in which straw was mixed with the clay. now we use clay as the filler innew polymeric composites to enhance their mechanical properties. the ionic con2random house websterõs unabridged dictionary, v2.2 for 16bit windows systems, copyright1999, random house, inc.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design125ductivity of the polymer electrolytes used in energy storage systems also can beenhanced by addition of tiny clay particles. another example is found in buildingconstruction, where concrete is reinforced with steel rods to producing a composite in which the components mutually reinforce the overall strength. other recentexamples are the graphitic materials used in tennis rackets and golf clubs, wherelong strands of carbon fibers are combined with resins. the science of the boundaries or interfaces between phases, and aggregates of matter with sizes betweenthe molecular and the macroscopic, has become a vigorous part of the chemicalsciences. constructing nano and microstructures of any complexity requires jointmodules or elements through interfaces.the goals of molecular understanding, synthetic control, and novel fabrication of various materials are inherently based in the chemical sciences and technology. the goal of applied chemistry and chemical engineering is to convertavailable substances into useful materials, normally by changing their molecularcomposition and arrangement, through controlled synthesis, processing, andmanufacturing methods.chemical scientists seek to understand the properties of materials in whichthere is organization of the components. chemistry is the original syntheticnanotechnology (as biology is the original natural nanotechnology); chemistshave been designing and executing constructions requiring placements of atomswith subnanometer precision for most of the last century. chemical engineers arenow aiming to do this on larger scales. as selfassembly and nanotechnologymove from laboratory demonstrations to more widespread means of fabricationand manufacturing, the variety of materials available to technology and societywill grow enormously. new catalytic chemistry and processes, such as the revolution in metallocene catalysts, is an area where chemists and chemical engineersare creating new routes to macromolecular structural control at the nanometerscale.methodologies of synthetic chemistry (chapter 3) must be adapted to achievethe full potential of chemical materials science and technology. this in turn willallow chemists and chemical engineers to characterize the synthesis of supramolecular entities and the threedimensional character of materials. our abilities toachieve these goals in new materials synthesis are enhanced by intricate optical,micromechanical, and spectroscopic probes, just as they are by the use ofnoncovalent bonding, selfassembly, and assembly directed by forces such asfluid mechanical or electric fields. the miniaturization and diversification of synthesis through biological or combinatorial approaches provide unprecedentedopportunities. chemical science should take better and broader advantage of naturally abundant substances to produce building blocks for molecular (or larger)assemblies. surface science applied to materialsñparticularly to organic materialsñis of growing importance and will expand significantly with the development of new materials for biotechnology, medicine, information technology, andnanotechnology.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126beyond the molecular frontierto achieve these goals will require, among many other things, a dramaticincrease in the interactions among chemists, engineers, biologists, and physicists.progress to datesince early civilization humans have been interested in the properties of thevarious minerals found in the earth. the discovery that materials we now recognize as iron oxides could be heated with charcoal to produce iron led to wonderfulnew tools in the iron age, while similar transformation of other minerals led tocopper, tin, and other metals. although we think of them as common, few metalsare naturally occurring; they are produced by chemical reactions of their naturallyoccurring compounds. one of the earliest synthetic materials is glass, producedover 5,000 years ago by heating various natural minerals together. clearly, thediscovery, refinement, and creation of materials has arisen from the chemicalsciences and processing technology (and sometimes vice versa).synthetic polymers and selfassemblythe story of polymers is one that shows enormous effects on human life.though polymer science revolutionized 20th century life and is now a welldeveloped academic field, polymer synthesis is still progressing rapidly. syntheticpolymers have often consisted of long chains of identical subunits. sometimesthe synthetic polymer chains have crosslinks between the chains (in proteins,crosslinks within a chain help determine a specific folded geometry). for manyyears, copolymers have also been produced to gain the beneficial properties frommore than one monomer. glassy polymers can be blended with rubbery ones togenerate desirable mechanical properties. block copolymersñproduced with longruns of one or the other monomerñphase separate on a nanoscopic scale (typically 10 to 50 nm) that is determined by the block molecular weight. thesemicrophaseseparated polymers often have remarkably better properties thanblends of the two components, and are an early example of using selfassembly toproduce new materials.the architecture of macromolecules is another important synthetic variable.new materials with controlled branching sequences or stereoregularity providetremendous opportunity for development. new polymerization catalysts and initiators for controlled freeradical polymerization are driving many new materialsdesign, synthesis, and production capabilities. combined with stateoftheartcharacterization by probe microscopy, radiation scattering, and spectroscopy, thefield of polymer science is poised for explosive development of novel and important materials. new classes of nonlinear structured polymeric materials have beeninvented, such as dendrimers. these structures have regularly spaced branchpoints beginning from a central pointñlike branches from a tree trunk. new strucbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design127tures create new possibilities for applications, a direction that will continue todrive materials chemistry.highmolecularweight polymers can be useful as solid materials and in solution, and lower molecular weight polymers can make liquids that are unusual incharacter. synthetic adhesives illustrate liquidphase materials that crosslink orpolymerize when they set. waterbased paints are another example, liquids withsuspended solid polymer particles that form uniform solid films during drying.socalled liquid crystals illustrate another exciting example of complex fluidmaterials; these are liquidphase materials made up of anisotropic, usually fairlyrigid, molecules of high aspect ratio that have strong electric dipole moments.such molecules are prone to adopt preferred orientations, especially under theinfluence of surfaces, electric fields, and flow processes. control over preferredorientations gives high anisotropic strength of materials and switchable opticalproperties, making them useful in displays such as those on digital watches andlaptop computers.multicomponent systems having molecules of macromolecular size and heterogeneous composition can be exquisitely sensitive to the delicate balance ofintermolecular forces. the fine interplay among a suite of noncovalent interactions (e.g., steric, electrostatic, electrodynamic, and solvation forces) dictatesmicrostructure and dynamics. molecular organization and interaction cause collective and cooperative behavior to dictate macroscopic properties. often the balance of forces is such that selfassembly occurs to generate aggregates, arrays, orother supramolecular structures. large molecular size enables amplification of asmall segmental effect into a large intermolecular effect. selfassembly can amplify the small forces between small objects to produce largescale structuresuseful for macroscopic creations for patterning, sieving, sorting, detecting, orgrowing materials, biological molecules, or chemicals. learning to understandand harness intermolecular interactions in multicomponent polymer and composite systems offers huge challenges, as well as opportunities to mimic nature, whichhas learned to do this in many instances.selfassembled monolayers (sams) are ordered, twodimensional crystalsor quasicrystals formed by adsorption and ordering of organic molecules or metalcomplexes on planar substrates. development of these monolayers is based onearly studies in which chemists learned to attach chemicals to surfacesñfor purposes ranging from adhesion to chromatography to electrochemistryñbut oftenwithout strong ordering in the monolayers. the ordered structures have made itpossible to develop a rational surface science of organic materials. they providethe best current example of the power of selfassembly to make possible the design of the properties of materials. they have made routine the control of wetting,adhesion, and corrosion in certain systems, andñthrough soft lithographyñtheyhave provided a new approach to microfabrication that is uniquely chemical in itsversatility. they have also greatly advanced the field of biomaterials by making itpossible to control the interface between cells and synthetic materials at the molecular level.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128beyond the molecular frontiersoft lithographybuilding ever smaller devices has been a dominant trend in microelectronics technology for 50 years. the technology used for this type offabrication is photolithography. this astonishingly sophisticated technology is a kind of photography: the pattern that is to be a part of thecircuit is formed by shining ultraviolet light through a mask (a pattern ofchromium on silica), through a reducing lens, onto a thin film of photosensitive polymer (a photoresist) covering the surface of a silicon wafer.after exposure, the exposed polymer differs in its solubility from unexposed material, and a suitable solvent allows the selective dissolution ofeither exposed or unexposed regions. the exposed regions are thentreated (by deposition of metal, etching, or implantation of ions) to makea part of the final device.photolithography is the basis of one of the technologies that has genuinely changed the worldñit has made possible the computing and information revolution. but it is not suited for making every possible type ofsmall structure. as the advantages of òsmalló have become obvious inmicroelectronics, researchers have searched for ways to make smallchannels (for analysis of fluids or for synthesis), small machines (socalled microelectromechanical systems, or mems, for accelerometersand display projectors), and small optical systems (for optical communications). such targets for fabrication all have different requirements inmaterials and costs, and photolithography is not a òone size fits allótechnology.an alternative to photolithography has been developed that isñformany applications in chemistry and biologyñmore versatile and muchless expensive. this technology depends on a òback to the futureó strategythat produces micron and nanometerscale patterns by stamping, printing, and molding. the element in these methods is a stamp or mold thatis fabricated in a transparent, chemically inert elastomer, poly(dimethylsiloxane) (pdms). because the stamp can deform, it is called soft; theorganic materials that are printed and molded are also called soft matterby physicistsñhence the name soft lithography. patterns of small features are embossed in the surface of the element; when it is òinkedó witha suitable ink, it can print lines that are <100 nm in width (that is, the sizeof a line of 200 gold atoms). as illustrated here, when the recessedregions are filled with a polymer, and the pattern is transferred to a surface, the resolution is <10 nm. if the stamp is sealed to another surface,the patterns become microchannels for analysis of nucleic acids, proteins,or cells.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design129soft lithography. figures ac illustrate a softlithographic technique calledmicrocontact printing. a pdms stamp with features in basrelief is coated with anethanolic solution of octadecanethiol, and placed in contact with the surface of athin metallic film (3050 nm) of gold, silver, or palladium. a selfassembled monolayer (sam) of octadecanethiolate forms on the surface of the metal in the regionswhere it contacts the pdms stamp. the stamp is removed and the regions of themetallic film without a sam are dissolved by wetchemical etching. figure d is aschematic diagram of a long, serpentine, palladium wire (2 m) with contact padsthat are connected to the wire at every 0.25 m along the length of the wire; it is apart of a sensor for hydrogen. figure e is a sem image of a section of the pattern.drawings ac courtesy of george m. whitesides; de reprinted with permissionfrom d. b. wolfe et al., applied physics letters 80, 12, 2222 (2002).soft lithography is very simple, and it does not require expensiveinstrumentation or access to clean rooms. it does not give the lateralaccuracy of photolithography, but it is much less expensive. the size ofthe features it can make is not limited by optical diffraction, but rather byvan der waals contacts and by deformations in the polymer used. it hasbecome a tool that is widely used in chemistry to make micro andnanostructures. it also has helped to open doors to chemists wishing toplay an active role in many areas of cell biology, bioanalytical chemistry,microfluidics, optics, and new forms of electronics such as òallorganicóelectronics: that is, electronics that does not rely on silicon, but insteaduses organic or organometallic compounds as conductors, semiconductors, and insulators.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130beyond the molecular frontiermicelles, liposomes, shelllinked particles, and vesicles are all results of thespontaneous selfassembly of amphiphilic molecules to form enclosed or aggregate structures that contain solvophobic regions surrounded by solventlovingmoieties. in all of these structures, opportunities abound to exploit them for chemical separations, controlled release, directed transport, and synthesis. fundamentalstudies of these organized systems have increased in the recent decade. the pursuit is often biologically inspired, but in creating mimics we still fall short of thenatural systems. combining this activity with concerted synthetic chemistry andbiochemistry provides great potential for the future.electronic, optoelectronic, photonic, magnetic,and superconducting materialsthe properties of modern electronic, optoelectronic, photonic, and magneticdevices provide another story of great science that has affected most of humankind. electronic devices require special materials: materials that emit light whenstruck by a beam of electrons for use in television screens and computer monitors, materials to make the semiconductors that are the heart of electronic andmicroelectronic circuits, and materials that are used in magnetic memory storagedevices for computers.classical electronic circuits and communication lines are made of metal toconduct electricity. now we have the prospect of massively communicating byoptical signals. the great progress in the use of optical fibers to permit light totravel in and between devices results from major achievements in materials processing. special surface coatings on the fibers reduce signal degradation; opticalswitches allow connections with devices communicating through optical fibers.the optical fiber revolution provides very high speed plus the ability to packmuch more information into a given transmission.there is considerable interest in developing new types of magnetic materials,with a particular hope that ferroelectric solids and polymers can be constructedñmaterials having spontaneous electric polarization that can be reversed by anelectric field. such materials could lead to new lowcost memory devices forcomputers. the fine control of dispersed magnetic nanostructures will take thestorage and tunability of magnetic media to new levels, and novel tunneling microscopy approaches allow measurement of microscopic hysteresis effects in ironnanowires.one of the most exciting properties of some materials is superconductivity.some complex metal oxides have the ability to conduct electricity free of anyresistance, and thus free of power loss. many materials are superconducting atvery low temperatures (close to absolute zero), but recent work has moved the socalled transition temperature (where superconducting properties appear) to higherand higher values. there are still no superconductors that can operate at roomtemperature, but this goal is actively pursued. as more current is passed throughbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design131a superconductor the transition temperature moves lower; consequently, high electrical current tends to make the materials lose their superconducting ability. thedevelopment of a full, predictive theory of hightemperature superconductivitywould be a major asset to the realization of practical materials in this area. thematerials studied to date are also difficult to processñthey are easily corroded orbrittleñthus motivating further study of novel processing or assembly techniques.if practical superconductors can be made that will conduct appreciable currents atreasonable temperaturesñperhaps even from organic materialsñit may becomepossible to transfer electric power over long distances with high efficiency, and toexploit magnetic levitation for transportation systems.quantum computationthe first demonstration of continuous electrical tunability of spin coherence (the state and degree of alignment of electronic spins) in semiconductor nanostructures has recently been made. this opens possibilitiesfor the field of quantum computation by permitting properties other thanelectronic chargeñand particularly the quantum property of spinñto bemanipulated for computing purposes. spin, often described by analogywith rotation of the earth, is a quantum property of electrons (and someatomic nuclei) that must have one of two possible values analogous toclockwise or counterclockwise rotation of a rotating body.while magnetic fields are conventionally used to manipulate spins infamiliar magnetic devices like harddisk drives, this demonstration of electrical control of aligned spins represents a significant step toward makingnew spinbased technologies. one future technology is quantum computing, where many schemes make use of electron spin states as bits ofinformation analogous to the 0 and 1 of binary computing. unlike ordinary bits, quantum bits can be any combination of both 0 and 1 simultaneously, corresponding to a continuous range of possible directions.by classical mechanics, magnetic fields can modify the behavior ofspins by inducing precession, which is an additional rotation of the spinaxis with respect to the magnetic field. while the speed of electron spinprecession in a magnetic field is generally fixed by the particular materials used, recent research has shown that both the speed and direction ofprecession can be continuously adjusted by applying electric fields inspecially engineered quantum structures.3 it is more fitting to refer tocontinues3g. salis, y. kato, k. ensslin, d. c. driscoll, a. c. gossard, d. d. awschalom, nature,414, 619, 2001beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132new magnetooptical spin control for spintronics. courtesy of david awschalom and peter allen.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design133these devices as gates rather than switches because they perform continuous tuning of electron spin. instead of the òoffó and òonó options for aswitch, a gate operates across a continuum in the same way that lightscan be dimmed by a rheostat.such spin gates are an example of the rapidly developing field ofspintronics, which studies electronic devices that are based on electronspin. spintronics uses magnetic fields to manipulate the distribution ofspin coherence, whereas electronics uses electric fields to manipulatecharge distribution. this raises the question, what might spintronics dothat electronics cannot? in addition to the longerterm goal of quantumcomputing, spintronics offers the nearterm possibility of revolutionizingthe way we think about piecing together different technologies.the creation of nanoscale sandwiches of compound semiconductorheterostructures, with gradients of chemical composition that are precisely sculpted, could produce quantum wells with appropriate properties.one can eventually think of a combined device that incorporates logic,storage, and communication for computingñbased on a combination ofelectronic, spintronic, photonic, and optical technologies. precise production and integrated use of many different materials will be a hallmarkof future advanced device technology.the opportunities to develop new structures for computing, quantumcomputation, and spintronicsñtogether with other areas in molecularelectronicsñraise important issues about the role of computation in thechemical sciences (chapter 6). in order for chemical scientists to play amajor role in converting clever new ideas for computational devices intofullfledged computers, they will have to become increasingly competentin the architectures, algorithms, and protocols that are necessary forreliable computation.ceramics, carbon structures, and crystal engineeringinorganic substances are the components of ceramics, such as those in dinnerplates. ceramics have important industrial uses as well; a typical example is theceramic insulating materials that are used to suspend power lines. ceramics aretypically poor conductors of heat and electricity, and they perform well at hightemperatures. consequently, they find applications that take advantage of theseproperties. some use of ceramics in automobile engines is being developed toachieve improved fuel efficiency at highertemperature operation. the fragilityof current ceramics and the difficulty in machining them (relative to machiningbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134beyond the molecular frontiermetals) are still problems for such uses. one approach to ceramics with betterproperties is to overcome their fragility by incorporating them into composites.as chemistry moves from pure materials to organized systems of different materials, composites are leading the way. a challenge for the future is to inventimproved structural materials, probably composites based on resins or on ceramics, that are stable at high temperatures and easily machined.carbon atoms in pure form can be obtained as materials having two classictypes of molecular structure: diamond and graphite. in diamond each carbon atomis linked by equivalent single bonds to four neighboring carbons. the result is aclear very hard material that is used for cutting, in saws with tiny diamonds imbedded in the blades, as tough coatings for metals, and in other industrial uses aswell as in jewelry. by contrast, each carbon atom in graphite is linked to onlythree neighboring carbons, in a sheet, and some of the electrons are in delocalizedpi orbitals that permit them to move easily along the sheets. the extensive aromaticity of carbon sheets leads to electronic transitions with energies in the visiblelight region, so that graphite absorbs throughout the visible region and is a blackmaterial. in addition, the mobility of the pi electrons in graphite makes it anelectrical conductor, in stark contrast to the insulating properties of diamond.a new type of structure has recently been discovered in which the sheets ofgraphitelike carbons are curved. the first example, called fullerene (after thegeodesic domes of buckminster fuller), has 60 carbons in a sphere. it resemblesa soccer ball with its five and sixsided polygons (in contrast to graphite, whichresembles a floor tile pattern, with hexagons only). a nobel prize was awarded in1996 to robert f. curl, jr., harold w. kroto, and richard e. smalley for theirdiscovery of fullerenes. instead of curling into a sphere, the sheets of carbon withhexagons can also curve into tubes with diameters on the order of 1 nm (oftencalled nanotubes), tiny whiskers that are sometimes quite long. because of theelectrical conductivity of pi electrons, these tubes are also electrically conducting, somewhat like graphite. while they are already used in research instrumentsto probe microscopic structures, one of the challenges is to use these new structures in miniature devices, or as building blocks for organized chemical structures.the importance of crystal form often is underappreciated. in many applicationsñfrom drugs (in which bioavailability may be determined by crystal form)to explosives (where crystals may differ in stability) and optical devices (wherethe nonlinear optical properties required for the device are based on a particularcrystalline architecture)ñthe correct crystalline form is essential to obtaining thedesired chemical and physical properties of a material. crystallization has longbeen an art rather than a science; sometimes the same substances will exhibitpolymorphism and adopt different crystalline forms depending on the crystallization conditions. crystal engineeringñthe prediction and control of molecularcrystal structures based on the constituent molecular structuresñis on the vergeof becoming a science. the current generation of computers is finally powerfulbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design135enough to rationalize the crystal structures of simple, relatively rigid, organicmolecules. as computer capability increases, and as the sophistication of the programs used increases, it seems very probable that it will soon be possible to predict the structures of crystals. learning to template or guide desired organizationof molecules will have great utility.layered materials and surface modificationthe scale of components in complex condensed matter often results in structures having a high surfaceareatovolume ratio. in these systems, interfacialeffects can be very important. the interfaces between vapor and condensed phasesand between two condensed phases have been well studied over the past fourdecades. these studies have contributed to technologies from electronic materialsand devices, to corrosion passivation, to heterogeneous catalysis. in recent years,the focus has broadened to include the interfaces between vapors, liquids, or solids and selfassembled structures of organic, biological, and polymeric nature.in a simple material, its surface properties are dictated by the properties ofthe bulk, which are not necessarily desirable. for example, we may need a bulkmaterial for its strength but want to make a medical deviceñsuch as an artificialheartñwhere the surface must not cause a reaction leading to rejection or bloodclotting. this leads to the challenge of learning how to add biocompatible surfacelayers to materials. this challenge is not yet fully met, but interesting approachesto creating biomimetic functionality on surfaces are rapidly emerging. this fieldis an example of the transition of chemistry from pure materials to organizedsystems and materials, in this case the organization being the modification of thesurface with a different material for a biofunctional purpose.the ability to modify surfaces by attaching chemicals to them has for yearsencouraged scientists to attempt to design surface adhesive and wetting properties. the advent of selfassembled monolayers, including mixtures of moleculesin a monolayer, has led to more detailed control and understanding of surfaceadhesion and wetting. this capability has been extended with the use of novelmonolayers to alter liquidcrystalline anchoring processes, surface friction, andbiocompatibility. important applications of this approach have arisen in microfluidics and liquid crystalline displays. work pioneered by nuzzo and allara atbell laboratories in the early 1980s with thiol selfassembled monolayers ongold has led to a great deal of research, much of which has been revolutionary.thus the study of surfaces has emerged as an important focus in the chemicalsciences, and the relationship between surfaces of small systems and their performance has emerged as a major technological issue. flow in microfluidic systemsñfor example, in micromechanical systems with potential problems ofstiction (sticking and adhesion) and for chemistry on gene chipsñdepends on theproperties of system surfaces. complex heterogeneous phases with high surfaceareasñsuspensions of colloids and liquid crystalsñhave developed substantialbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136beyond the molecular frontiertechnological importance. in certain size ranges, we have seen new and scientifically engaging phenomena, such as electron tunneling through nanometerthickinsulators and diffraction of light in photonic bandgap crystals. new tools andsystemsñfrom scanning tunneling microscope and atomic force microscope(stm and afm) to selfassembled monolayers and carbon nanotubesñhave fundamentally changed our ability to characterize and prepare these complex systems. finally, microelectronicsñcomplex systems of small functional components fabricated in silicon and silicon dioxide, and other materialsñhave becomeso important that we must develop the science and technology relevant to futuresystems of small components, whether based on microelectronics or other technologies. the microelectronics industry is entirely based on chemical processing,using such techniques as chemical vapor deposition (cvd), plasma processing,etching, and electroless deposition.nanomaterialsas the analytical, synthetic, and physical characterization techniques of thechemical sciences have advanced, the scale of material control moves to smallersizes. nanoscience is the examination of objectsñparticles, liquid droplets, crystals, fibersñwith sizes that are larger than molecules but smaller than structurescommonly prepared by photolithographic microfabrication. the definition ofnanomaterials is neither sharp nor easy, nor need it be. single molecules can beconsidered components of nanosystems (and are considered as such in fields suchas molecular electronics and molecular motors). so can objects that have dimensions of >100 nm, even though such objects can be fabricatedñalbeit with substantial technical difficultyñby photolithography. we will define (somewhat arbitrarily) nanoscience as the study of the preparation, characterization, and use ofsubstances having dimensions in the range of 1 to 100 nm. many types of chemical systems, such as selfassembled monolayers (with only one dimension small)or carbon nanotubes (buckytubes) (with two dimensions small), are considerednanosystems.whether there is currently a nanotechnology is a question of definition. ifone asks whether there are (or are soon likely to be) commercial electronic fluidic, photonic, or mechanical devices with critical lateral dimensions less than 20nm, the answer is òno,ó although there may be in 10 to 20 years. there is, however, a range of important technologiesñespecially involving colloids, emulsions,polymers, ceramic and semiconductor particles, and metallic alloysñthat currently exist. but there is no question that the field of nanoscience already exists.the current, intense interest in ònanoó is based on the (correct) perceptionthat the study of nanoscience has exploded. as new tools have become availablefor the preparation and characterization of systems with these dimensions, theopportunities in the chemical sciences have grown enormously. the attentionbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design137also results from the as yet untested proposition that nanoscience will eventuallyrevolutionize existing areas of important technology, especially microelectronics.there is great interest in the electrical and optical properties of materialsconfined within small particles known as nanoparticles. these are materials madeup of clusters (of atoms or molecules) that are small enough to have materialproperties very different from the bulk. most of the atoms or molecules are nearthe surface and have different environments from those in the interiorñindeed,the properties vary with the nanoparticleõs actual size. these are key players inwhat is hoped to be the nanoscience revolution. there is still very active work tolearn how to make nanoscale particles of defined size and composition, to measure their properties, and to understand how their special properties depend onparticle size. one vision of this revolution includes the possibility of making tinymachines that can imitate many of the processes we see in singlecell organisms,that possess much of the information content of biological systems, and that havethe ability to form tiny computer components and enable the design of muchfaster computers. however, like truisms of the past, nanoparticles are such anunknown area of chemical materials that predictions of their possible uses willevolve and expand rapidly in the future.several techniques are now available for the fabrication of nanostructures.these techniques arise from four approaches, and their simultaneous applicability to a common set of targets is one of the reasons for the excitement in the field.the first set includes the classical techniques developed from microfabrication:¥electron beam writing, which is the most important, although xray anddeep uv photolithographies may also contribute;¥use of scanning probe devices to move individual atoms or to write patterns;¥preparation of colloids, vesicles, emulsions, buckytubes, and selfassembled monolayers using chemical selfassembly methods (some with historiesthat date back to the beginning of chemistry);¥soft lithography and nanoimprint lithography, which use printing, molding, and embossing technologies developed on the macroscopic scale to replicatestructures at the nanoscale.the characterization of simple nanostructures is now possible with remarkable detail, but is highly dependent on access to the tools of measurement scienceand to scanning probe microscopies.these methods have made available a set of nanostructured systems thathave begun to reveal the characteristics of nanoscale matter. the long list ofdiscoveries in the last decade includes:¥òquantum boxó behavior in colloids of semiconductors precipitated fromsolution;beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138beyond the molecular frontier¥quantized capacitive charging of metal nanoparticles coated with low dielectric monolayers;¥a range of electrical properties in carbon nanotubes grown from vaporphase precursors using metallic catalysts (with the highest observed conductivities comparable to those observed in graphite);¥high mechanical strength of buckytubes (combined with the abovementioned electrical properties) that makes them possible candidates for ònanowiresó;¥remarkably regular nanostructures in phaseseparated block copolymers;¥functional transistors prepared in organic semiconductors with 100nanometer gate widths;¥membranes containing nanopores with controlled interior functionality;¥versatile methods of preparing nanostructures that are based on simpleideas taken from printing, writing, molding, and embossing, and that have madeit possible to prepare certain nanostructures without use of expensive apparatus.two important conclusions have emerged in this field. first, the methodsemployed for microelectronicsñphotolithography using uv wavelengthsñareunlikely to provide inexpensive access to nanostructures. second, the techniquesof chemistry and chemical engineeringñalthough very early in their developmentñwill be able to provide nanostructures with a wide range of compositionsand properties, and at costs that are very low compared to those prepared by ebeam or other òconventionaló techniques for fabrication at small dimensions. inparticular, chemical affinities should make it possible for tiny structures and devices to selfassemble spontaneously, an appealing idea for largescale manufacturing.challenges and opportunities for the futuremany of the challenges of the formation and processing of new materialswill be met with advances in the chemical sciences. there are some revolutionarythings happening in materials: organic electronics and spintronics, attempting toreplace classical silicon electronics, the exploration of singlemolecule electronics to achieve the ultimate in size reduction, sophisticated biocompatible materials for tissue engineering, implants, manmachine hybrids, ferromagnetic organicmaterials, materials with negative index of refraction, nanoelectronics, and functional colloids.selfassembly and nanotechnology are advancing rapidly, but the challengestill remains to develop a means of fabrication and manufacturing. the rapiddevelopments in synthetic chemistry produce myriad new polymeric and composite materials. these advances are enhanced by progress in optical, micromechanical, and spectroscopic probes. the miniaturization and diversification ofsynthesis through biological or combinatorial approaches provide unprecedentedbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design139opportunities. the approach to the future should be a holistic one, with syntheticadvances moving in concert with assembly and microstructural control. summarized below are a few of the leaps that can be viewed as important aspirations forthe chemical science community.templatingthe development of templated synthesesñof metallic, ceramic or semiconductor particles, wires using novel synthetic and selfassembling structures suchas dendrimers, micelles, and nanotubesñis in its infancy. this is a prime example where synthetic advances in the creation of new lipids, surfactants, andamphiphilic polymers work together with probes of structure and function of infinitesimal wires or particles. new techniques such as scanning microscopy mustbe developed to follow the electronic and magnetic processes occurring in thesmall systems. spectroscopists, microscopists, engineers, and chemists must worktogether at the frontiers involving techniques developed by those from disparatefields of electronics and biology.higher order structuresthe ability to program synthetic polymers with the correct information toselfassemble, recognize analytes, or provide biological function seems fairly futuristic. however, the close interplay between chemical composition and physical interactions makes this a possibility; new synthetic approaches involving controlled living polymerizations and biological synthetic pathways allow control ofmolecular composition. additional research on the balance of physical forcesdriving selfassembly, recognition, field responsive behavior, and biological compatibility should be closely tied to the synthetic efforts.new approaches in synthetic chemistry and biochemistry pave the way fortremendous advances in selfassembly. highly controlled living polymerizationswill allow the creation of ever more complex macromolecules having prescribedarchitectures (branching, stereoregularity) and chemical specificity. the futurewill hold the opportunity for chemists to make molecules of size and complexityapproaching protein structuresñand to fold and assemble them. then, mimicking nature becomes a question of choosing important problems and technologiesneeding improvement or intervention. by creating the appropriate molecules, patterning them on the appropriate surfaces, and providing them with the appropriate functions, we can think of mimicking the most chemical of senses: taste andsmell. these analytic advances, when taken in parallel with the computationaland electronics revolution, suggest the possible creation of the robots and gadgetsthat were previously envisioned only in science fiction.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140beyond the molecular frontiersemiconductor processingwe need novel materials to maintain the computer revolution, since we maybe reaching the limits of òtop downó miniaturization. instead of etching pieces ofsilicon to produce electronic circuits that are smaller and smaller, there is thehope that òbottom upó design will work. in other words, selfassembly of molecules or nanoparticles offers the potential for construction of miniature electronic circuits that will be faster and will permit more computer power in a givenspace. promising physical approaches involve softlithography or crystal ornanoparticle growth, but other processes doubtless will emerge as the field ofnanoparticle science evolves.chemical scientists will seek new methods of generating nanostructures witha range of materials and processes that rely on ideas common in chemistryñselfassembly, diffusion, phaseseparation, catalysis, wettingñto make these structures accessible and inexpensive.in terms of technology, it is too early to predict what will emerge fromnanoscience, although it is clearñfor a field as fundamental as this oneñthattechnologies will surely emerge. candidates for early success include systems ofphotoluminescent colloids in which the same materials base provides any desiredcolor simply by tailoring the size (for displays); compact disks with <50nanometer pits (for very dense memory devices that will require near field recordingtechnology); and optical elements for manipulating extreme uv and xray light.in the longer term, there will be, at minimum, demonstrations of informationprocessors having key components with nanometer dimensions (perhaps made oforganic or organometallic materials) and probes for exploring the interior of thecell.as selfassembly and nanotechnology move from curiosities and demonstrations to more serious means of fabrication and manufacturing, the need for characterization tools, especially those that can meet the time scales for realtimeprocessing, will grow enormously.molecular electronic materialsimproving the molecular control of addressable, switchable, or conductingmolecules that have extremely high purity, selectivity, or specificity is a goalwithin reach in the coming decades. this will require the combination of synthetic and processing strategies, such as recognition and controlled binding, totailor oligomeric materials with finely tuned properties. in this field, the chemicalsciences will have to interact creatively with computer science and engineering inorder to turn promising molecular switching ideas into practical computer architectures.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design141composite and hybrid materialsas the ability to control materials moves to molecular dimensions, the expectations for composite materials will grow. rather than relying on incorporation of macroscopic particles or fibers as discussed above, one can hope to createimportant marriages between disparate materials that will allow the developmentof new material properties. combining this synthetic expertise with physical patterning, selfassembly, deposition, or quenching techniques will lead to the creation of new materials with optimal properties. organized nanocomposite materials can be important for photonic band gap materials as well as membranes andcatalysts with high selectivity.surface modification and interfaces with biology and electronicsthe connection between biological function and a useful electrical signal isthe capstone of sensor technology that will change medical, environmental, andpersonalprotection strategies in the coming decades. the link between biologyand electronics is through the chemical sciences. the ability to mimic nature andreliably anchor biologically active moieties to a surface is in its infancy. hereanother level of complexity and functional integration are possible. coupling thephysical chemical means to manipulate interfaces with synthetic strategies inspired by nature provides powerful opportunities for gains in environmental andmedical devices. as an example, the recent understanding of virus phage packaging, combined with the ability to inject dna into a host or a host mimic, opensthe way for molecular scientists to develop new therapies and delivery strategies.another challenge is the construction of materials with the kind of actuating response found in physiological systems such as muscleñsoft materials in which alargeamplitude mechanical response could be produced in response to a smallamplitude stimulus.capitalizing on selfassembly and nanoscience will enhance the ability toscreen drugs for individual sensitivities. advances in drug discovery, combinatorial synthesis, and screening with sensors that have the ability to detect multitudes of specific genetic matchesñmarrying microelectronics and selfassemblyñare expected to be nearterm breakthroughs. then the creation of advancedforms of òin the fieldó or òin the officeó tests for chemical risks, pharmaceuticalcompatibility, or environmental hazards will be possible.the processing of materials through selfassembly will also have to meetseveral kinds of challenges that arise from scaling up in physical size and speed,and in complex shapes. little has been done with complex shapes and nonplanarsurfaces. can processes that work on glass slides or mica or 4inch silicon wafersbe scaled up to very large surface areas, such as continuously moving webs ofpaper, film, or tape, or surfaces of tubular biomaterials? building large volumesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142beyond the molecular frontierof nanostructured, selfassembled materials in three dimensions may be even morechallenging than scaling up to large surfaces.processing speed presents different challenges. since selfassembly is a process that moves down a free energy gradient, there is a predetermined end point;but it is not known how to anticipate its speed. study of the kinetics and dynamicsof selfassembly processes will be necessary to bring this field to a level comparable to traditional methods of synthetic chemistry and chemical engineering.few studies of kinetics of assembly processes have been pursued, in part becausefollowing the assembly process presents analytical difficulties. practical processing rates will certainly have to be much faster than those of typical current research laboratory practice. the free energy landscapes along the paths towardselfassembled products are not fully explored. local minima and metastablestates lurk but are uncharted, and it is often not appreciated when they are occupied or when they are trapping the process far from the desired equilibrium state.the challenges of kinetics and of metastable states raise the question of catalysisand whether routes to assist, accelerate, and guide selfassembly processes can bedeveloped.selfassembly processes in nature are sometimes catalyzed by enzymes. zeolites are, in many ways, the inorganic counterparts of enzymes, with their abilityto selectively bind other substances and perform catalysis. can templates or catalysts be effective in increasing rates and reducing defects in a wide range ofnanostructured materials?one of the most general forms of the surface modification of materials ispainting. we have become used to the idea that paints, while serving their important function of preventing corrosion and water damage, need to be renewed on aregular basis, with a significant cost in labor and materials. one less glamorouschallenge that could make a significant contribution to modern life is the invention of longlasting paint, perhaps 100year paint. in addition, it would also bedesirable that this longlasting paint be easily cleaned, perhaps simply by naturalrain, and that it have a mechanism to repair damage to itself. we are used to theidea that our body can repair wounds; it is an important challenge to devise methods by which synthetic materials would also have this woundhealing ability. asone approach, the wound might expose pools of monomer that could spontaneously fill the void and solidify.green materials and ecotechnologyother challenges facing materials scientists have to do with the environment.we have traditionally made materials that are as stable as possible, so they willlast a long time and not need to be replaced. this longevity has the undesirableconsequences of creating waste that requires significant energy to process, or elseit clutters the landscape when discarded. as one approach, chemical scientistsand engineers need to focus on recycling and materials that can be easily rebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design143cycled. another approach is to produce materials that undergo rapid degradationinto invisible and harmless substances. some progress has been made by incorporating ketone groups into polyethylene so that sunlight will break chemical bondsand cause the polymer to disintegrate into tiny particles. however, these materials are not yet economically attractive, and more efforts of this kind are needed.this is part of the general need, discussed in chapter 9, to make materialssuch as insecticides or refrigerants that will degrade in the environment ratherthan cause problems with bird life or with the ozone layer in the stratosphere. inaddition, as the world demand for synthetic materials grows, new renewable resources for chemical feed stocks must be sought, and we must reconsider ourcurrent infatuation with burning the petroleum reserves that are important feedstocks (as discussed also in chapter 10). zeroeffluent processing plants alsoneed to be developed. there are innumerable opportunities for advanced chemical processing of materials to create micro and nanodevices for environmentaland ecological monitoring.another challenge is to develop methods to replace the volatile organic solvents that are used in many industrial procedures. one choice is water as a solvent; it is easily repurified, and has a harmless vapor. another choice is supercritical carbon dioxide, a good solvent for many organic substances. it is not asinnocuous as is water, but carbon dioxide can be easily recovered and reused. it iscurrently used to remove caffeine from coffee, and is being developed as a drycleaning solvent to replace organic solvents (chapter 9).analysis and simulationadvances in computational capability have raised our ability to model andsimulate materials structure and properties to the level at which computer òexperimentsó can sometimes offer significant guidance to experimentation, or atleast provide significant insights into experimental design and interpretation. forselfassembled macromolecular structures, these simulations can be approachedfrom the atomicmolecular scale through the use of molecular dynamics or finiteelement analysis. chapter 6 discusses opportunities in computational chemicalscience and computational materials science.molecular dynamics simulations are capable of addressing the selfassemblyprocess at a rudimentary, but often impressive, level. these calculations can beused to study the secondary structure (and some tertiary structure) of large complex molecules. present computers and codes can handle massive calculations butcannot eliminate concerns that boundary conditions may affect the result. eventually, continued improvements in computer hardware will provide this addedcapacity in serial computers; development of parallel computer codes is likely toaccomplish the goal more quickly. in addition, the development of realistic, timeefficient potentials will accelerate the useful application of dynamic simulation tothe selfassembly process. in addition, principles are needed to guide the selecbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144beyond the molecular frontiertion of initial configurations; the proper initial conditions accelerate convergenceand minimize problems associated with metastable configurations.molecular calculations provide approaches to supramolecular structure andto the dynamics of selfassembly by extending atomicmolecular physics. alternatively, the tools of finite element analysis can be used to approach the simulation of selfassembled film properties. the voxel4 size in finite element analysisneeds be small compared to significant variation in structureproperty relationships; for selfassembled structures, this implies use of voxels of nanometer dimensions. however, the continuum constitutive relationships utilized for macroscopicsystem calculations will be difficult to extend at this scale becausenanostructure properties are expected to differ from microstructural properties. inaddition, in structures with a high density of boundaries (such as thin multilayerfilms), poorly understood boundary conditions may contribute to inaccuracies.image analysis is an important aspect of many areas of science and engineering, and imaging will play an important role in characterizing selfassembledstructures as well as in online process control. development of effective noiseidentification and suppression, contrast enhancements, visualization, pattern recognition, and correlation algorithms should be coopted where possible andadapted to the analysis of selfassembled structures.models of the selfassembly process also will be important. because selfassembled structures can be diverse, those models are likely to be highly complex. sensitivity analysis can be an important approach to the identification andcontrol of critical parameters.adaptive and responsive materialsan area of great promise for the future is that of materials for which properties change in response to external influences. the most prominent is giantmagnetoresistive (gmr) materialsñmaterials for which the electrical conductivity can change by a few percent under the application of an external magneticfield. gmr materials moved from a laboratory curiosity to the dominant technology in computer memories within a decadeña startling example of how a newmaterial can completely change a major industry. the invention of new materialshas been an area in which the united states has played a central role; the currentemphasis on focused, shorterterm projects has, however, made it very difficult tosupport a lively activity in new materials, which by definition are far from a finalproduct.among the adaptive materials currently on the forefront are liquid crystals,electro and magnetorheological (er/mr) fluids, thermo and physioreponsivegels, and shape memory alloys. in all but the last case, these systems involve4a voxel is a volumepixel. while a pixel is a twodimensional point that has the attributes of heightand width, a voxel is a threedimensional point with the attributes of height, width, and depth.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design145fluidsolid interfaces, complex or dispersed suspensions, and external fields. thus,all of the directions outlined above for selfassembly and interfaces come intoplay when pursuing these òsmart fluids.ó improvements in synthesis and spatialresolution of the external fields through softlithography (selfassembled monolayers, etc.) will provide new capabilities of control and tuning of these complexfluids.tools, resources, and infrastructuresthe area of complex condensed matter depends crucially on the availabilityof appropriate tools for both fabrication and characterization. these tools are ofòintermediateó size: they are neither a test tube nor a synchrotron. typical toolsñscanning probe microscopes, xray photoelectron spectrometers, electron microscopes, clean roomsñcost from $0.1 million to $5 million. they are sharedusefacilities, but they must be local to the user groupñtravel to distance facilities forroutine measurements is not practical.simulations in this area also require access to highlevel computational capabilities. by definition, simulations involve both large numbers of atoms and dynamic behavior; both consume large numbers of cpu cycles. because the field isso demanding on computer time, analytical theory is very important, even if ityields only approximate solutions.many of the tools required for the nanoscience revolution in materials involve sophisticated experiments requiring leadership, training, and infrastructure.user facilities such as highresolution electron microscopes, synchrotrons andnmr facilities need to be easily accessible and provide adequate support forefficient experimentation.the nanometer to micrometerscale dimensions of supramolecular assemblies present many challenges to rigorous compositional and structural characterization. development of adequate structureproperty relationships for these complex hierarchical systems will require improved measurement methods andtechniques. the following areas constitute critical thrusts in instrument development.¥many techniques ideally suited for nanostructure characterization unfortunately depend also on the substrate properties. for example, the reflectivity andconductivity of a substrate play an important role in the successful execution ofthe instrumental method. hence, substrateindependent techniques are needed sothat structure and/or behavior of the material can be investigated in a confinedgeometry, decoupled from the potentially invasive effect of the substratematerial interface.¥feedback provided by online monitoring of selfassembling processeswill play an increasingly important role in controlling the microscopic and macroscopic architecture of molecular assemblies. successful adaptation of charbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146beyond the molecular frontieracterization methods for noninvasive in situ monitoring will require miniaturization of many of the analytical devices commonly used for interrogating selfassembled structures. the revolution in microscopic identification and controlprovides new opportunities for chemists and chemical engineers. promising routesto achieve this goal include the use of optical fibers in spectroscopic methods andthe development of memsbased analytical instrumentation.¥order and polydispersity are key parameters that characterize many selfassembled systems. however, accurate measurement of particle sizes in concentrated solutionphase systems, and determination of crystallinity for thinfilmsystems, remain problematic. while inverse methods such as scattering and diffraction provide measures of these properties, often the physical information derived from such data is ambiguous and model dependent. hence development ofimproved theory and data analysis methods for extracting realspace informationfrom inverse methods is a priority.¥use of diverse techniques provides significant structural information indispersed and thinfilm systems. if significant advances in source intensities (e.g.,higher neutron and xray fluxes, higher power diode lasers) and photon detectortechnology (e.g., high quantum efficiency, large bandwidth chargecoupled devices, ccds) are achieved in the near term, these methods could be extendedreadily to studies of nanoscale features. since the experimental and theoreticalframeworks for these techniques are well established, extension to smaller lengthscales should be straightforward.¥the already critical need for molecularscale compositional mapping willincrease as more complex structures are assembled. currently, electron microscopy, scanning probe microscopy (spm) and fluorescence resonance energytransfer (fret) are the only methods that routinely provide nanometer resolution.in contrast to the mature instrumental techniques discussed above, a hithertononexistent class of techniques will require substantial development effort. thenew instruments will be capable of measuring the thermal (e.g., glass transitiontemperatures for amorphous or semicrystalline polymers and melting temperatures for materials in the crystalline phase), chemical, and mechanical (e.g., viscoelastic) properties of nanoscale films in confined geometries, and their creationwill require rethinking of conventional methods that are used for bulk measurements.why all this is importantmaterials science and engineering is inseparable from chemistry and chemical engineering. the importance of materials is illustrated by the effects theyhave on the quality of human lifeñunderscored by the way our society uses newbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.materials by design147materials and the technology they spawn to define epochs in history. the list ofthe 20 greatest engineering achievements of the 20th century, compiled in 2000by the national academy of engineering,5 contains many entries (for example,highperformance materials, automobiles, airplanes, electronics, computers, telephones, and fiber optics) that depend essentially on advances in materials scienceand engineering. from synthesis to processing to commodity manufacturing ofmaterials, the tools of chemical science and engineering will be essential to defining the next century in these terms. new materials with predictable propertieswill provide worthy and formidable targets for design and synthesis, while processing and manufacturing these new materials will present significant challenging new objectives for chemical processsystems engineering.the science of materials reflects the way that chemistry has changedñfroma field concerned only with atoms and molecules and their properties in isolation,to a field increasingly concerned with organized interactive systems. this changeopens opportunities and challenges in fundamental science that will let us ask notjust: what are the chemical components of that stuff? we will be asking as well:how do those components interact to produce the properties of that stuff? theanswers to such questions will greatly add to our understanding of the chemicaluniverse.5http://www.greatachievements.org/beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥elucidate the entire complex interactive chemistry of our biosphereñthe atmosphere, the earth, and its lakes, rivers, and oceansñand provide the scientific basis for policies that preserve our environment.¥ensure that chemical manufacturing and chemical products are environmentally and biologically benign, never harmful.¥learn how to make products that are stable over their necessary lifebut then undergo degradation so they do not persist in the environment or in living creatures.¥invent agricultural chemicals that do not harm unintended targets inany way and are not overly persistent.¥develop selective catalysts that enable the manufacture of useful products without producing unwanted waste products and without usingexcessive energy.¥invent processes for the generation and distribution of energy that donot release greenhouse gases or toxic contaminants into the atmosphere.¥help humans control their population growth by inventing birth controlmethods that are safe and effective, inexpensive, and widely availableand accepted.1489atmospheric and environmental chemistry11as part of the overall project on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century, aworkshop on the environment will lead to a separate report. the reader is urged to consult that reportfor further information.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.atmospheric and environmental chemistry149goalschemists and chemical engineers want to understand the chemical composition and behavior of the earth, its rivers, lakes, and oceans, and its atmosphere.what are the complex interactions among these systems that occur naturally, howare they influenced by human activity, and what will be the chemical and physical consequences that affect our environment? to what extent can the knowledgeand capabilities of chemists and chemical engineers be used to understand andprevent or correct problems, either by direct chemical intervention or by guidingchanges in human behavior? as a society, we want to be assured that the productswe use are safe for us and our environmentñand to be sure that the methods oftheir production do not harm us, our children, or our environment. the safety ofour environment is not a local issue. concerns about global climate change makeit clear that chemists and chemical engineers will want to helpñand will need tohelpñin addressing these important scientific issues on a worldwide basis.systems in placeñranging from laws and policies of government regulatorybodies to voluntary programs of the industryñare intended to anticipate, detect,and prevent unacceptable risks to the public, both now and in the future. theability of chemists and chemical engineers to meet these challenges, as contributors to and beneficiaries of the chemical enterprise, requires that they utilize thebest science available today and aggressively advance that science in the future.this ability will also be enhanced by educational effortsñnot only efforts by thescientific community to increase public understanding of science and technology,but also changes in the ways that engineers and scientists are educated. greaterunderstanding of the societal implications of their work by scientists and engineers will enhance our stewardship of this planet.progress to dategeochemists have made major progress in learning about the chemistry ofthe earth and its components, including rivers, lakes, and oceans. much of thisinvolves such fundamental theories as thermodynamics, but on a scale muchlarger than the molecular level that has been the past focus of the chemical sciences. in the last decade, the chemistry of the atmosphere has also been elucidated in much more detail. a field called earth systems engineering is emerging,and it will require further development, with the chemical sciences and engineering as a crucial component. this field will address matters such as global warming, carbon sequestration, and environmentally benign manufacturing. it will alsoaddress new analytical, computational, and assessment techniques through whichglobalscale interactions in complex systems can be better understood and optimized. earth systems engineering is made even more intricate and involved by itsinternational character. the factual, quantitative, and analytical input that can besupplied by chemical scientists will be of great value in this endeavor.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150beyond the molecular frontierchemists and chemical engineers have identified the processes that convertordinary oxygen molecules (o2) into ozone (o3) in the high altitude ozone layerof the stratosphere, under the influence of ultraviolet light from the sun. furthermore, chemists and chemical engineers have elucidated, through both experimentation and computational modeling, the processes by which extremely stable anthropogenic (humangenerated) gases such as chlorofluorocarbon refrigerantscause degradation and depletion of the ozone layer. the ozone layer plays animportant protective role for life on earth by blocking veryhighenergy ultraviolet light; consequently, this fundamental atmospheric chemistry has importantpractical consequences. similar understanding of the interaction of anthropogenicmaterials with water and with the minerals of the earth is also being developed bygeochemists.the chlorofluorocarbon effect on the ozone layer illustrates another chemical concernñthe special problem that can arise when materials released into theenvironment are able to act as catalysts. if every chlorine atom generated in theupper atmosphere simply destroyed one ozone molecule, the effect would be minimal. but chemists have elucidated the catalytic cycle by which each chlorineatom destroys thousands of ozone molecules. it is particularly important for chemists to study and understand which substances can have such catalytic effectsñand to learn how to prevent the release of such substances into the environment.the interaction of gases such as carbon dioxide (co2) with earth and waterhas also been investigated. carbon dioxide is in most respects a harmless moleculeñthe product of human, animal, and plant respiration and the starting material for the growth of plants by photosynthesis. it is also produced by burningcarbonaceous fuels for energy, and in converting limestone to lime for cementproduction. it is now becoming clear that too much carbon dioxide in the atmosphere can contribute to what is called the greenhouse effect. the temperature ofthe earthõs surface is governed by what happens to the energy in incident sunlightñhow much of it is reflected back into space versus how much is retained byconversion into thermal energy, and how much of that is reemitted back intospace as infrared radiation. there is a delicate balance among these processes,and a change in that balance can affect the overall temperature of the earth. greenhouse gases absorb some of this infrared radiation and prevent its transmissionback into space. other gases, particularly water vapor, also contribute to the greenhouse effect, but carbon dioxide is of particular importance because co2 levelscorrelate with human activity. for this reason there has been extensive debateabout the extent to which global climate change is anthropogenic.recent estimates indicate that the level of carbon dioxide in the atmospherehas increased by a third since the beginning of the industrial age, and that itcontributes significantly to global warming. other major contributors includemethane, tropospheric ozone, and nitrous oxide. methane is the principal component of natural gas, but it is also produced by other sources such as rice paddiesand farm animals. tropospheric ozone is generated naturally and by the sunlightbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.atmospheric and environmental chemistry151induced reactions of combustion byproducts, and nitrous oxide is formed in microbial reactions, in part from nitrogencontaining fertilizers, and as a byproductof some chemical processes. carbon dioxide and methaneñgenerated by humanactivityñappear to be making the greatest contributions to global climate change.both gases are more abundant in the atmosphere than at any time during thepreceding 400,000 years.2 solution of this inherently chemical problem will require major contributions by chemists and chemical engineers.at one point it was assumed that the earth, its oceans and rivers, and itsatmosphere were so vast or selfcleansing that we could discharge anything intothem without damage to our planet. we now know this is not true. currently, wemust deal with toxic waste dumps, with smog, with acid rain that kills forests, andwith pollution of rivers and the ocean by chemical discharges. how did this happen?part of the problem is simply the slow accumulation of materials releasedinto the environment. any single activity may seem small and harmless, but allsuch activities add up. the combustion of fossil fuels has long been recognized asa major source of air pollution. for example, burning petroleum components ingasoline and diesel engines of vehicles can lead to air pollution by emission ofunburned hydrocarbons and sulfur and nitrogen oxides produced during the combustion process. when this was realized, fuels were refined differently to reducesulfur content and vehicles were fitted with catalytic converters, designed bychemists and chemical engineers, to remove the hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides from vehicle exhaust. the catalytic converter was introduced in the u.s.automotive industry and is now used worldwide, an excellent example of thebeneficial global effects of chemical science and technology. fuel efficiency wasalso increased, so less fossil fuel had to be burned per mile traveled. this hasprovided major improvements, but the real solution may come from a change toother forms of energy production for transportation, as described in chapter 10.the chemical process industries make a huge contribution to civilization, butthey have the potential for environmental pollution. during the early growth ofthe industry, many chemical companies built their plants in river valleys. theplants used the river water and subsequently returned it to the river with watersoluble byproducts, while they discharged gaseous byproducts into the air.water and air pollution were serious problems near these plants. in recent decades, chemical manufacturing has undergone a revolution. almost all chemicalmanufacturers in the united states, and increasingly worldwide, subscribe to aprogram called responsible care.3 in brief, it involves a pledge by the manufacturers to make only products that are harmless to the environment and to its livingoccupants, and by processes that are also environmentally and biologically benign.2climate change science: an analysis of some key questions, national research council, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 2001.3http://www.americanchemistry.com/beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152beyond the molecular frontieranother important initiative is called green chemistry,4 developed as part ofefforts to reduce pollution at the source; it is defined as òthe design of chemicalproducts and processes that reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazardous substances.ó5 originated in the united states (where prestigious awards foraccomplishments in this area are given annually), it is increasingly becoming aworldwide program.benign processes help make chemical plants into good neighbors, and theiroperators into good citizens, but the products themselves are now being examined with a new perspective. for example, ddt (invented by paul mller, whoreceived a nobel prize in 1948 for this invention) was an effective insecticidethat greatly reduced the occurrence of insectborne diseases such as malaria. however, its widespread use caused problems, because it is too stable. ddt persists inthe environment and enters the food chain, a phenomenon that led to the nearlycomplete elimination of ddt use after it was shown to interfere with bird reproduction. at one point it was believed that persistence was a good thing, since theinsecticide would keep on working, but it is now recognized that persistent chemicals can accumulate in the environment and lead to new or unexpected problems.a similar situation is found with the herbicides that help make agriculturemore productive by controlling weeds. advantages are now recognized for herbicides having limited persistence, lasting long enough to do the job and then harmlessly disappearing.persistence was also the unforeseen problem with the role of chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs) in degrading the earthõs ozone layer. cfcs were invented toreplace toxic and dangerous gases (such as sulfur dioxide) that had been used asthe working fluid for compressors in early refrigerators and air conditioners. indeed, cfcs are so unreactive under normal conditions that they are quite harmless to humans and other living things. however, they are so stable that theydiffuse throughout the atmosphere. when they reach the stratosphereñwhere theozone layer is foundñthe greater intensity of highenergy radiation from the sunfinally causes slow decomposition of the cfcs. this decomposition process produces chlorine atoms that catalyze the destruction of ozone in a chemical sequence that is now well understood. for elucidating these chemical processes inthe stratosphere, paul crutzen, mario molina, and f. sherwood rowland receiveda nobel prize in 1995.while the high stability and persistence of cfcs provided a major advantagefor such applications as refrigeration and air conditioning, escape of the gasesinto the air has resulted in unacceptable changes in the upper atmosphere. thesolution to the problem is to invent new relatives of cfcs that are adequate coolants but are less environmentally persistent. chemists have indeed created suchnew substances, which are now replacing cfcs.4http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/index.htm5http://www.epa.gov/greenchemistry/whatis.htmbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.atmospheric and environmental chemistry153green chemistrya common definition of green chemistry, which clearly encompassesconsiderable chemical engineering as well, is òthe design, developmentand implementation of chemical processes and products to reduce oreliminate substances hazardous to human health and the environment,ó(p. t. anastas and j. warner, green chemistry theory and practice,oxford university press, oxford, 1998). a more recent article expandsthis definition to twelve principles (m. poliakoff, j. m. fitzpatrick, t.r.farren and p.t. anastas, science, 297, 807810 (2002).1.it is better to prevent waste than to treat or clean up waste after it isformed.2.synthetic methods should be designed to maximize the incorporation of all materials in the process into the final product.3.wherever practicable, synthetic methodologies should be designedto use and generate substances that possess little or no toxicity tohuman health or the environment.4.chemical products should be designed to preserve efficacy of function while reducing toxicity.5.the use of auxiliary substances (e.g., solvents, separation agents,and so forth) should be made unnecessary wherever possible, andinnocuous when used.6.energy requirements should be recognized for their environmentaland economic impacts and should be minimized. synthetic methodsshould be conducted at ambient temperature and pressure.7.a raw material or feedstock should be renewable, rather than depleting, whenever technically and economically practicable.8.unnecessary derivatization (blocking group, protection/deprotection,temporary modification of physical/chemical processes) should beavoided whenever possible.9.catalytic reagents (as selective as possible) are superior to stoichiometric reagents.10.chemical products should be designed so that at the end of theirfunction, they do not persist in the environment, and they break downinto innocuous degradation products.11.analytical methodologies need to be developed further to allow forrealtime inprocess monitoring and control before the formation ofhazardous substances.12.substances, and the form of a substance used in a chemical process, should be chosen so as to minimize the potential for chemicalaccidents, including releases, explosions, and fires.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154beyond the molecular frontiermany of the problems that affect our environment are the result of unexpected effects that accompany an entirely reasonable intention. the effect of cfcson the ozone layer is such a case. chlorofluorocarbons seemed to be perfectñthey were chemically stable and noncorrosive, and they were not at all toxicñasreplacements for the earlier toxic refrigerants. but then the ozone effect was discovered. similarly, ddt seemed to be a perfect insecticideñcontrolling mosquitoes and other insects that transmit diseaseñuntil its effect on birds was discovered. a more recent example is methyl tertiarybutyl ether (mtbe), a fuel additivethat improves the performance of gasoline in automotive engines. unfortunately,spillage and leakage from underground gasoline tanks has allowed mtbe to enter the ground water. this has led to concern about the biological effects of mtbeand a probable end to its use.to prevent or at least minimize such problems, we must better understandthe environment at all levels, including the fundamental chemical processes thataffect it. we have learned the lesson that when assessing the fate of new productsin the environment, we should not underestimate the potential of these to appearin unexpected places. the recognition, avoidance, or solution of complex environmental problems requires the expertise of a variety of science and engineeringdisciplines. only then will it be possible to produce realistic evaluations of hownew compounds will be distributed and will act in the ecosystem. in addition tochemistry and biochemistry, fields such as solution thermodynamics and transport phenomena in which many chemical engineers work, as well as earth sciences and environmental engineering, have crucial contributions to make.another environmental problem is the contamination of soil by heavy metalsor organics. these soilbased contaminants can produce health hazards by releaseof volatile substances, contamination of groundwater, or accumulation of heavymetals by plants growing in the soil. incineration has been used to treat soilsheavily contaminated by organic materials, but this approach is expensive andmay result in other environmental problems. the potential toxicity of contaminated soils is governed by a variety of factors; the factors that affect bioavailabilityof soilbound contaminants or the movement of contaminants in subsurface fluids are not well understood. close cooperation of chemists and chemical engineers will be needed to gain the necessary understanding.one promising form of treatment is bioremediation. microbes in the soil arecapable of converting organic chemicals to other compounds, and in the idealcase to co2 and h2o, and some microbes have been found to convert heavymetals to complexes with reduced toxicity. microbes can be harnessed throughaddition of nutrients, other chemicals, or specific microbes to enhance beneficialmicrobially mediated chemical reactions. however, the complex chemistry andbiology of subsurface soil systems makes it difficult to achieve predictable responses. a much deeper knowledge of the interaction of the chemistry of the soil,fluid movement, and microbial physiology is an important challenge to makingbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.atmospheric and environmental chemistry155bioremediation a fully practical technology. (see chapter 7 for discussion ofrelated matters).a halfcentury ago, people were only beginning to understand the extent towhich human activity could affect the environment, often in very negative ways.many of the early problems of pollution were the result of chemical processes,and òchemistryó received the blame. but òchemistryó has also provided solutions, and dramatic improvements have occurred. no longer do industrial plantsbelch foul smoke into the atmosphere, and no longer do chemical plants discharge brown or orange sludge into nearby streams and rivers. these improvements have been implemented by chemists and chemical engineers, and they havebeen implemented in ways that often have provided economic benefits to theunited states.this chapter has focused on the chemistry of the earth and its immediateatmosphere, but the concept of òenvironmentó need not stop with the earthõs atmosphere. molecular chemistry also goes on in space, and it is an area of interesting chemical science. large, although extremely diffuse, clouds of moleculesexist between the stars, and such clouds are believed to be the origins of stars. sofar, the chemistry in the clouds has been investigated not by direct sampling, butinstead by observing the light that is emitted from them. observations of suchlight in the microwave range have led to the identification of many remarkablesubstancesñand of the likely transformations that they undergo. chemists havesynthesized some of these unusual substances here on earth so their microwaveradiation can be compared with that from space, for identification of the spacemolecules. in addition, computational chemistry has reached the stage at which itis possible to predict the microwave radiation that some molecules would emit,again enabling earthbound scientists to obtain evidence for the structures of materials that exist only in outer space.challenges and opportunities for the futureconsiderable progress has been made in understanding the environment andthe chemical processes that affect the environment. however, the preceding discussion clearly shows that many challenges remain. chemical scientists mustlearn how to make useful substances that have limited persistenceñand will generate only completely harmless products when they degrade.a full understanding will be needed of the complex chemistry by which theatmosphere and the earth interact, including the dependence of global climate oncarbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere. is there a way to deal with thecarbon dioxide produced by burning coal and other hydrocarbon fuels so that itcauses no problem? chemical scientists will need to investigate effective ways totrap co2 that would otherwise build up in the atmosphere. alternatively, it willbe necessary to find ways to reduce the generation of carbon dioxide. as humanbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156beyond the molecular frontieractivity continues to destroy forests, will this affect the carbon dioxide cycle andlevels, and what can be done about that?supercritical processingtoday we are witnessing a ògreenó revolution as it pertains to manufacturing industriesõ implementation of carbon dioxide as a replacementfor their dependency on water and organic solvent usage. a major impetusfor this conversion is driven by a concern for our environmentñto reducea companyõs footprint on our planet by reducing their usage of solventsand water. in addition, because of the low heat of vaporization ofsupercritical co2 (sco2) relative to water and organic solvents, corporate motivations also include the reduction of energy usage associatedwith using co2based processes relative to conventional solvents andwater. however, beyond pollution prevention and energy efficiencyissues, sco2 is finding increasing appeal because of increased performance attributes associated with its inertness to many chemistries, to itsexceedingly low surface tension and viscosity, and to its adjustable solvent quality due to its compressibility, especially in the supercritical state.its critical temperature is conveniently located at 31c, and it is bothnontoxic and inexpensive. recently, sco2 has been or is in the processof being commercialized in:¥extraction processes for natural products including the decaffeinationof coffee and tea and the isolation of nutraceuticals, flavors, andfragrances¥the production of melt processable plastics based on fluoroolefins¥the replacement of toxic solvents used in professional garment òdryócleaning and critical/precision cleaning of manufactured goods¥coating/encapsulation technologies for pharmaceuticals, textileapparel, and manufactured parts such as in the automotive industry¥particle formation for use in drug delivery and xerographythese processes are enabled by breakthroughs in many areas. a fundamental understanding is emerging of the rational design of surfactantsfor sco2ñmolecules that reversibly selfassemble as the density of compressible sco2 is adjusted. such surfactants enable the stabilization ofpolymer colloids in sco2 for heterogeneous polymerizations and for theemulsification of numerous sco2insoluble substances including proteins,water, and catalysts to name a few. creative engineering unit operationshave been designed that allow for continuous reactions, automatedreaction/separation schemes, and novel membranebased separations.and finally, creative combinations of chemistry (novel compounds suchas sco2soluble functional polymers) with sco2based applications haveenabled entirely new processes.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.atmospheric and environmental chemistry157future commercial use of co2 will surely include such diverse applications as thinfilm deposition for microelectronics using recently developedpressurized spincoating and free meniscus coating instruments; in separations of valueadded products from fermentation broths in biotechnology fields taking advantage of the immiscibility of co2 with water; and asthe solvent in a broad range of synthesis including transition metal andenzymatic catalysis. all of these applications will lead to sustainablemanufacturing methods that are not only ecologically preferable, but inthemselves are enabled by working with a unique solvent that has thedensity of common liquids but the transport properties of a gas.humans affect the environment through simple living activitiesñthey generate waste. ordinary waste sites, in which people place trash and garbage, generate methane by microbiological action, and methane is one of the most potentgreenhouse gases. is this a significant problem, and if so, what can be done toprevent or solve it? will it be possible to recycle waste that we currently bury,perhaps ameliorating the problem of waste sites? and if so, could we recoversome of the chemicals and energy that were used to manufacture the discardedmaterials? chemists and chemical engineers will need to devise the ways in whichmaterials that are harvested from the earth can be recycled, not just discarded orburned. one of the approaches is bioremediation, in which microorganisms, perhaps genetically modified, are used to deal with the waste. this approach hasalready been used to some extent in dealing with oil spills. the ultimate goal issustainability: using and recycling materials so that we do not simply exhaust thesubstances we have inherited, thus leaving less for our descendants.the future production of chemicals will require continued awareness of possible unforeseen consequences, particularly with substances that persist in theenvironment. this will require investigation of how these substances interact withthe environment, and it will necessitate the invention of new substances. as notedabove, new and safe refrigerants will be needed that lack the persistence of cfcs.the worldõs food supply will depend on the discovery of new insecticides that donot harm unintended targets in any way and other agricultural chemicals such asherbicides and fertilizers that are neither harmful nor overly persistent. othersectors of the chemical industry will rely on the invention of new and selectivecatalysts that enable the manufacture of useful products, including polymers, without producing unwanted waste products and without using excessive energy.the existence of waste from past activities has created problems that willdemand the attention of chemists and chemical engineers. environmental cleanupñof toxic wastes, of contaminated groundwater, of radioactive wasteñis a dauntbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158beyond the molecular frontiering challenge. only by developing effective ways to clean up contaminated sitesñand by developing processes by which such contamination can be prevented inthe futureñwill it be possible to take full advantage of the technological opportunities that science has provided over the last century.there are serious questions about the effect of continued growth of the human population. we often focus on the matter of adequate food production, butlarge populations also affect the environment and our need for energy. chemistscan furnish the tools to help deal with the political and social questions. somepopulation growth occurs not because it is intentional, but because adequate methods for birth control are unavailable to people in poor countries. thus one challenge for chemists is to develop better methods that would be safe, effective, andinexpensive and would enable all people to pursue their own decisions regardingpopulation growth.small amounts of some contaminants can be serious. when we burn coal, notonly do we produce carbon dioxide, the major product, but we can liberate smallamounts of mercury and larger amounts of sulfur dioxide. the mercury can formtoxins that harm fish as well as humans, while sulfur dioxide can produce acidrain that destroys forests and water supplies. how can these contaminants bemost effectively removed or dealt with? and how can we generate the energy thatwe need without releasing such byproducts?environmentally responsible methods to manufacture useful products and togenerate energy still need the largest contributions from chemists and chemicalengineers. as we reexamine all human activities with a fresh eye, to see theirenvironmental impact, the continuing challenge will be to invent new ways toachieve what society needs. understanding the environmental effects of what wedo is the first step, a job for basic chemical science. inventing ways to improvewhat we do while still meeting human needs is a job for applied chemistry andchemical engineering. the opportunities for our science to improve the humancondition will continue to pose exciting and important challenges.important educational challenges also confront the chemical sciences. continuing emphasis on science education by government, foundations, industry, andeducational institutions at all levels is essential. it is also essential to engage theprofessional practitioners in the chemical sciencesñchemists and chemical engineers engaged in the broad spectrum of activities that characterize these fieldsñin education. public outreach programs of professional societies like acs andaiche are important components, but more effort is needed both at the grassroots community level and in the improvement of the visibility of the chemicalsciences through mass media. greater emphasis in science and engineering education on the human aspects of the scientific endeavor is needed. chemists andchemical engineers must also continue their own educations. this will improvetheir ability to contribute to a broader public understanding of science and technology, and it will enhance the contributions they can make to society.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.atmospheric and environmental chemistry159we have come a long way. but there is still a long way to go. if we are toprovide a favorable legacy for future generations, chemists and chemical engineers will need to develop effective ways to clean up existing waste and findways to prevent the generation of waste in the future. and most importantly, theywill need to develop a system that is fully sustainableñthat will safely providethe energy, chemicals, materials, and manufactured products needed by societywhile neither irreversibly depleting the earthõs scarce raw materials nor contaminating the earth with unhealthy byproducts.why all this is importanthuman activity, including manufacturing, can damage our environment ifwe are not thoughtful and careful. we do not want to live on a planet where the airand water are dangerous to health, or where life is not possible for various plantsand animals. in the past society did not worry enough about such questions, butnow we have learned to take them seriously. fortunately, it has turned out thatenvironmentally benign chemical manufacturing, using the principles of responsible care, is both environmentally useful and economically acceptable. in fact,many companies have discovered that good environmental practices are actuallycost effective. in any case, the challenge is to learn how to continue to develop amodern civilization without causing environmental damage.the consequences of human action on the environment are not always completely foreseeable, so there is also the challenge to recognize the likelihood andmagnitude of those consequences that we can foresee, and to recognize patternsof particular vulnerability. to meet this challenge it is essential that we continueto cultivate a strong base of fundamental knowledge in the chemical and biological sciencesñfor we will need those tools not only to create new technologies,but also to anticipate their consequences. we must approach the creation of science and technology for human advancement with intelligence, knowledge, andreason. that is, after all, what makes the human animal special.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16010energy: providing for the future1some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥develop more stable and less expensive materials and methods forthe capture of solar energy and its conversion to energy or to usefulproducts.¥design inexpensive, highenergydensity, and quickly rechargeablestorage batteries that make electric vehicles truly practical.¥develop practical, less expensive, more stable fuel cells with improvedmembranes, catalysts, electrodes, and electrolytes.¥develop materials, processes, and infrastructure for hydrogen generation, distribution, storage, and delivery of energy for vehicles.¥develop photocatalytic systems with efficiencies great enough to usefor chemical processing on a significant scale.¥learn how to concentrate and securely deal with the radioactive wasteproducts from nuclear energy plants.¥develop practical superconducting materials for energy distributionover long distances.continues1as part of the overall project on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century, aworkshop on energy and transportation will lead to a separate report. the reader is urged to consultthat report for further information.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.energy: providing for the future161chemistry and chemical engineering are intimately concerned with the generation and use of energy. we need energy for manufacturing, for transportation,for heating and cooling our homes, for lighting, and for cooking. currently about85% of the worldõs energy is obtained by burning fossil fuelsñpetroleum, natural gas, and coalñbut this must change soon. affordable supplies will becomescarcer, and burning fossil fuels produces carbon dioxide that contributes to thegreenhouse effect by which solar energy is trapped within the atmosphere andwarms the planet. burning fossil fuels, at least with current technology, also produces oxides of nitrogen and sulfur and other pollutants that affect plants andanimals.the problem of having enough clean energy is related to population, standard of living, and the efficiency with which energy is used to provide a unit ofeconomic output. humans will always need energy, and chemists and chemicalengineers will continue to play a central role in learning how to produce anduseit.goalschemists and chemical engineers will need to join with experts in other disciplines to invent new ways to generate and transport energy for human use andprovide for the needs and aspirations of a growing population in a sustainablemanner. new ways will also be needed to minimize the energy used for humanactivities, including manufacturing.¥develop technologies and catalysts for the cleaner use of coal as afuel and for the conversion of coal to other fuels.¥develop methods to use biomass as a renewable fuel source.¥develop technologies for the improved extraction of conventional fossilfuels, including unconventional sources such as oil shale, tar sands,and deepsea methane hydrates.¥develop practical and environmentally responsible methods of carbondioxide capture and sequestration.¥develop lower cost, lighter weight, more durable, more resilient, andrecyclable materials for the construction of safer lighterweight vehicles.¥develop improved materials, processes, and practices that will allowreduced energy use per unit of gross domestic product.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162beyond the molecular frontierprogress to dategenerating energyonce petroleum is removed from the earth it is refined. it is separated into itsvarious components by distillation, producing not only gasoline but also higherboiling materials such as diesel oil, kerosene, lubricating oil, and asphalt. thenpart of it is cracked, converting some of the larger less volatile molecules tosmaller ones more useful in gasoline, and it is reformed, transforming some of themolecules into others with smoother burning properties. some of the products arealso used as chemical raw materials, in addition to fuels.both cracking and reforming use special catalysts and processes. the overallprocess is highly efficient, so that essentially none of the components of petroleum are wasted. however, most agree that the supply of inexpensive petroleumwill run out sometime, although there is disagreement as to exactly when. atcurrent rates of consumption, we may still be using petroleum as a major sourceof energy 50 years from now. natural gas may last 100 years, while coal reservescould last for perhaps four centuries. if population growth and standard of livingimprovement lead to increased energy consumption rates despite conservationefforts, the currently economically recoverable reserves will be depleted in ashorter period of time. in any event, development of more expensive fossil fuelsourcesñsuch as oil shale, tar sands, methane hydrates that are found at the highpressure of the deep sea, and coal, oil, and gas that current extraction technologyleaves behindñwill also be required.chemists and chemical engineers have developed processes for the gasification of coal, converting it by chemical transformation into syngas, a cleaner, moreconvenient energy source. they have also devised ways to convert coal into aliquid that can be used in place of gasoline in combustion engines. however,whether coal is used as a solid or converted to a liquid or gas, when it is burnedthe result is still carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas.some chemical processes use energy directly to drive the transformation. forexample, the conversion of iron ore, iron oxide, to iron metal requires chemicalenergy to remove the oxygen atoms. in early times the iron ore was heated withcharcoal; in more recent times it is heated with refined coal (coke), but in bothcases the result is conversion of coal or wood into carbon monoxide, which istoxic but can be burned to carbon dioxide to generate needed heat. there is nowinterest in devising processes that do not use carbon in this way, but use electricalenergy to avoid the production of carbon oxides.there is also interest in finding feasible and harmless ways to capture andpermanently sequester carbon dioxide underground or in the oceans, thereby preventing its accumulation in the atmosphere.2 carbon dioxide concentration in the2carbon management: implications for r&d in the chemical sciences, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 2001.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.energy: providing for the future163atmosphere has increased by about onethird since the beginning of the industrialrevolution. unless combustion of fossil fuels is halted, or unless carbon dioxidefrom fossil fuel burning is completely and permanently sequestered, carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere will inevitably continue to rise with potentially significant consequences for global warming.alternatives to fossil fuelssolar energyalmost all of our energy has come from the sun. this is obvious when weburn wood, in which solar energy has been in a sense stored in a tree by photosynthesis. when whale oil was a significant fuel it was only a little more indirectñthe whales ate plant material that was also produced by sunlight, and then converted that food energy into the energy in their oil. petroleum, natural gas, andcoal are also just stored forms of solar energy, from plants and animals that livedand were buried long ago, while hydroelectric and wind power are derived frommore contemporary solardriven oceanic evaporation and atmospheric pressuregradients.in photosynthesis, plants convert carbon dioxide into oxygen of the air andcarbonaceous materials of the plant; burning the plants simply sends the carbonback to carbon dioxide again. thus the cycleñcarbon dioxide plus light to formplant material and oxygen, then burning the plant material to consume the oxygenand regenerate carbon dioxide and liberate energyñis one way to capture theenergy of the sun. the critical need is to avoid overloading the cycle, producingcarbon dioxide faster than it can be recycled into plant materialña significantconcern for current levels of fossil fuel combustion.although energy systems are currently dominated by fossil fuels, alternatives need to be developed. there is no obvious single solution, but a variety ofapproaches could make useful contributions. one plan would be to grow specialgrasses or other plants that are particularly efficient at converting sunlight intobiomass (plant matter), then convert the biomass to electricity either by burningor by some version of a fuel cell. genetic engineering may permit us to designnew green plants that are particularly efficient at converting sunlight into usefulfuels. water and arable land would be needed for this scheme, but it is argued thatwe do not yet need all the arable land for the production of food and fiber. another alternative would be to encourage the growth of phytoplankton in the oceanby intentional fertilization with limiting micronutrients such as iron. the processwould serve as a mechanism for sequestering some carbon dioxide from the atmosphere; the resulting organic material would not be harvested as fuel but someinstead would sink into the ocean depths before completing the cycle back intocarbon dioxide. as with other proposals for carbon sequestration, there is noscientific consensus on its efficacy and safety.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164beyond the molecular frontierscientists, including chemists and chemical engineers, have also been pursuing the direct capture of solar energy, either for heating or for directly generatingelectricity.3 one plan would cover significant amounts of arid desert and othersurfaces such as rooftops with photovoltaic cells that directly convert solar energy into electricity. at the present time, photovoltaics can convert as much as30% of the incident sunlight to electricity. the technical challenge, however, is todevise materials and manufacturing processes for photocells that are cheap, longlasting, and efficient in the conversion of light to electricity; ways are also neededto collect, store, and distribute the energy when and where it is needed. theseproblems have not yet been completely solved. a related advance is the inventionof electrically conductive polymers, which are not metals. alan j. heeger, alang. macdiarmid, and hideki shirakawa received a nobel prize in 2000 for opening up this important new area of science.in an alternative way to take advantage of the sunõs energy, photocells areunder development using sunlight to drive chemical transformations, perhaps evenproducing chemicals that in turn could be used to generate electricity. for example, the photochemical generation of hydrogen, by splitting water, could becombined with a hydrogen fuel cell in this way. this area strongly depends onbasic research in photochemistry.nuclear energyan alternative to solar energy is provided by nuclear energyñcurrently thesource of 7% of the worldõs total energy and 20% of u.s. electrical energy. chemists and chemical engineers have devised the processes for producing the nuclearfuels from crude uranium ores. in many countries nuclear power plants are majorsources of electricity (as much as 75% in france), but one of the problems isnuclear waste. a typical nuclear energy plant produces 20 metric tons of radioactive waste each year. chemists and chemical engineers are working to devisemethods to separate the radioactive material from the inert material in which it isproduced. if this is successful the volume of radioactive substances to be handledwill be much less, and some of the purified radioactive materials may be available for other uses (including medical diagnostics and treatment). as anotherapproach, converting the waste products to tough ceramics could make themstable for very long periods of time. the development of safe methods for dealingwith radioactive wasteñtogether with public acceptance of themñpose a challenge to which chemists and chemical engineers can respond.43for further discussion of this topic, see ref. 1 and ref. 2.4see for example: electrometallurgical techniques for doe spent fuel treatment: final report,national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 2000; alternatives for highlevel waste salt processing at the savannah river site, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 2000.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.energy: providing for the future165nuclear energy offers many advantages if the waste problem can be solved.the fuel is inexpensive, the energy can be generated near where it is to be used,and there are no greenhouse or acid rain effects. of course, a special problemwith nuclear energy is the hazard if the plant is run carelessly, and it is possiblethat the operation of a nuclear power plant could be diverted to develop materialfor nuclear weapons or the radioactive byproducts could be used in terroristattacks. however, it is important to solve these problems so that the currentlynegative public perception of nuclear energy undergoes a change, and permitsnuclear energy to make its full possible contribution to the world, particularlyafter we have stopped burning fossil fuels.whether nuclear power generation increases as a contributor to our energysupply or merely continues on its present course, the aging population of nuclearchemists and engineers poses a significant concern. there has been a steady reduction in the number of university programs in nuclear chemistry, radiochemistry, and nuclear engineeringñand in the number of graduates they produce.5unless a new pool of expertise is developed, it will become increasingly difficultto safely operate existing reactors, manage the radioactive waste that will be produced (along with that which already exists), and clean up radioactive contamination from earlier activities.water and windapproximately 10% of u.s. electrical energy is produced by hydroelectricdams.6 although there are few economic and environmentally acceptable damsites remaining, in some places it is possible to use wind power, or perhaps eventhe ocean tides, to generate electricity. here the opportunity for chemists andchemical engineers is the invention and production of modern materials that canmake such approaches possible.energy efficiency, conversion, storage, and distributionin recent years, much attention has been devoted to improving the efficiencywith which energy is produced and used by society in general and also in chemical manufacturing. higher fuel efficiency in automobiles, better insulation materials and construction practices for homes, and energy efficient lighting and ap5nuclear education and training: cause for concern? the nuclear energy agency, organisationfor economic cooperation and development (oecd), paris, 2000 [http://www.nea.fr/html/ndd/reports/2000/nea2428education.pdf]; training requirements for chemists in nuclear medicine,nuclear industry, and related areas, report of a workshop, national research council, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c., 1988.6renewable power pathways: a review of the u.s. department of energyõs renewable energyprograms, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 2000, p. 116.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166beyond the molecular frontierpliances are familiar examples. internal combustionelectric hybrid vehicles areanother area in which multidisciplinary science and engineering research is striving to produce extremely efficient, if perhaps not yet economically practical,transportation systems. for electrical power generation, complex systems such ascoalgasification combinedcycle and natural gas combinedcycle are being installed to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide produced per unit of electricitygenerated. a combinedcycle generator increases efficiency by capturing heatfrom the gasturbine exhaust stream and produces additional power with a steamturbine. as a consequence of electricity deregulation, various heat and powercogeneration and distributed power generation schemes with micro turbines orfuel cells are also being explored. again, contributions by chemists and chemicalengineers will be critical, especially in the development of hightemperature andother advanced materials.electrochemical cellsinstead of burning fuels such as petroleum or coal or natural gas to producesteam for electrical turbines, electrochemistry can be used to generate electricitydirectly from chemical reactionsñthus avoiding the waste of energy and the pollution that comes from combustion. this approach is particularly attractive foruse in portable energy sources and vehicles. a common example of such an electrochemical cell is an oldstyle flashlight battery that cannot be recharged. in sucha battery, a metal such as zinc gives up electrons as it is oxidized to a zinc ion,while another material such as manganese dioxide is reduced by those electronsto form manganese ions. the battery is constructed with separators or membranesin such a way that the electrons from the zinc must travel outside the batterythrough an external circuit before returning to the battery to reduce the manganese dioxide. in this way electricity is used directly. the zinc metal and the manganese dioxide were both originally made in a factory by oxidationreductionreactions of zinc salts and from manganese salts, so the battery represents a convenient way to store and deliver electricity.batteries have been developed from many pairs of chemicals capable of being oxidized and reduced. some systems are rechargeable; after the chemicals inthe battery have been exhausted, the reactions can be reversed by the applicationof an external source of electricity. the leadacid automobile battery is a familiarexample. in many applications, such as cell phones and laptop computers, theweight of a portable electricity supply is critical. this has led to the developmentof batteries based on lightweight lithium chemistry, for which challenges stillremain.electrochemists have also learned how to make electrochemical cells inwhich one of the reactants is continuously supplied from outside the cell ratherthan contained within. one example is the zincair cell in which particles of zincbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.energy: providing for the future167metal contained in the cell react with the oxygen of the air brought in from outside the cell to make zinc oxide, again with the generation of electricity. one canimagine a scenario in which such a cell could replace the petroleumfueled engine of an automobile. the vehicle would be driven by an electric motor with theelectricity supplied from a zincair cell. when all the zinc had been oxidized, aòservice stationó would remove the part of the cell with the zinc oxide and replaceit with a fresh supply of zinc metal. the station would return the zinc oxide to afactory where electricity would be used to convert it back to zinc metal.fuel cellselectrochemical cells in which both reactants are continuously supplied fromoutside the cell, particularly those in which the reactants are oxygen and an otherwise combustible fuel, are generally referred to as fuel cells. chemists and chemical engineers have devised a large number of fuel cells that differ in the reactantsused, as well as in the separators, electrolytes, catalysts, operating temperatures,and other construction details. one example uses hydrogen and air. the cell reaction converts hydrogen fuel and the oxygen from the air to water, just as if thehydrogen were being burned. but this process generates electricity directly with agreater energy efficiency than that obtained from a process such as burning thehydrogen in a combustion turbine generator. a hydrogen fuel cell also operates ina cycle. the reaction of hydrogen and oxygen in the fuel cell to produce water isone part of the cycle. elsewhere, a source of electricity could be used to electrolyze water and generate hydrogen and oxygen. the net result is to move energyfrom an electrical generating plant to a remote fuel cell.a fuel cell avoids the production of nitrogen oxide pollutants that are generally formed in combustion processes. nitrogen oxides formed during generationof the energy needed for production of hydrogen (or other fuel) can be removedby scrubbing the exhaust gases in the generating plant. hydrogen fuel cells werefirst used in the space program (with pure oxygen rather than air), but they arebeing developed for a variety of terrestrial applications that range from portableelectronics, to vehicles, to backup emergency power systems.there are still many unsolved problems for hydrogen fuel cells. one is therate of reaction of the oxygen at the electrodes, which is not yet as rapid as desired. related to this is the high cost of current membrane and catalyst systems.another unsolved problem is how to transport and store hydrogen safely for usewith the fuel cell. for space applications, hydrogen has been stored as a cryogenicliquid. for terrestrial applications, one approach is to store the hydrogen as a veryhighpressure gas in very strong lightweight cylinders made of advanced composite materials. chemists and engineers are working on other approaches, suchas adsorbing the hydrogen on carbon or spongy nickel, or as metal hydrides thatcan be stored safely at low pressure. but this and related problems have not yetbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168beyond the molecular frontierbeen solved. when they are, we could have what has been called the òhydrogeneconomy.óin another version of a fuel cell, a carbon compound such as methanol (fromnatural gas or from the reaction of coal with water) reacts directly in an electrochemical cell with the oxygen in air to form water and carbon dioxide. this approach has fewer problems with storage of the fuel, and it has higher efficiencythan power production from combustion of the same fuelñbut it still producescarbon dioxide with its contribution to global warming. the performance of current fuelcell catalysts may be degraded by carbon monoxide, an intermediate inthe reaction with carbonbased fuels. in yet another variant, a hydrocarbon iscaused to react with water in a separate device called a reformer to produce hydrogen along with a mixture of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide; after separation, the hydrogen can be fed to a conventional hydrogen fuel cell. this approach avoids carbon monoxide degradation of the fuel cell performance, but itstill produces carbon dioxide.although there is still much to do to make fuel cells widely practical, experimental automobiles have recently been exhibited that are powered by fuel cells.thus there is every reason to expect fuel cells to play a major role in electricityproduction in the future.storage batteriesin the above scenarios the energy to produce the reactants for a battery orfuel cell was supplied in a factory, but another possibility is a storage battery thatcan be easily and quickly recharged either at a service station or at home. thefamiliar lead/acid car battery is an example, but it is not good enough to replacecombustion of gasoline as the main power source in typical transportation vehicles. the batteries are too heavy and take too long to recharge.what is needed is a highcapacity storage battery that is lightweight, inexpensive, long lasting, and rechargeable. the batteries now used in golf carts andin some recent electric automobiles do not meet all these criteria, but there isactive research by chemists and chemical engineers to develop such batteries.when they exist, drivers will be able to stop at a service station and recharge theirbatteries in 10 to 15 minutes, then drive on for another 300 miles before a recharge is needed. in another scenario, the drivers might simply trade in theirdepleted batteries for others that have been recharged by a service station. whenthe problems are solved, we will be able to reduce our dependence on petroleumfueled automotive engines.we also use small rechargeable batteries to power cell phones and portablecomputers. they are reasonably light and have the capacity to go for some hoursbefore requiring recharging, but improvements are still needed. as chemists andchemical engineers develop better battery technology we can expect to be freedbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.energy: providing for the future169from the need to recharge the batteries in our computers or cell phones quite sooften.energy distributionportable energy is important for vehicles and small electronic objects such ascell phones, but we also need to distribute energy from the generating plant to theplace where it is to be used. whether it is generated using photocells in the desert,by growing biomass in agricultural areas, or by operating nuclear power plants, itmust go from there to the manufacturing plants and homes where it is needed.currently this is done with power lines made of ordinary conducting materialssuch as copper or aluminum, but the electrical resistance of those metals results inconsiderable loss of energy. thus there is great interest among chemical scientists in developing practical superconducting materials for power distribution.superconductors pass electricity with no resistive loss, but so far they operate only at extremely low temperatures, and are impractical for power distribution. however, as the basic science of materials progresses it is hoped that eventually superconductors will become practical for operation closer to normaltemperatures while carrying a large current flow. this is a particularly difficultchallenge, but if it can be met, the rewards will be enormous. there is alreadyprogressñsuperconducting power cables that can operate when cooled by liquidnitrogen are being made for shortdistance power distribution in some urban areas.the approach described above involves the idea that there is a central powerplant from which electricity is distributed, but there is another choice. it might bepossible to distribute the power generation itself, having small generators locallysited where the power is used. already many large buildings have their own powergenerators (as do some private homes), although these are primarily for emergency use. this distributed approach offers the advantage that power is generatedlocally and only when needed, so energy losses from transmission would notcause problems. for this approach, fuel cells may have an important role if theybecome practical and can operate using locally available fuels.challenges and opportunities for the futurea variety of opportunities and challenges have been described in the preceding section along with an indication of where current progress is inadequate. wemust eventually learn how to operate in a world that is not energized by burningfossil fuels, and the opportunities and challenges are clear. in the meantime, whilewe are still burning coal and hydrocarbons, we need to learn how to deal with thecarbon dioxide that is produced. this must be done to address the problem ofglobal climate change and to eliminate the environmentally harmful side products of combustion. we need to devise better ways to use solar energy, for exbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170beyond the molecular frontierample by creating practical cells for conversion of sunlight to electricity. weneed to replace combustion by fuel cell technology, and we need to solve theproblem of how to transport and store hydrogen. we need to invent rechargeablebatteries that are practical for vehicles that have electric motors instead of gasoline engines. advances in both basic and applied chemistry and chemical engineering are needed to achieve these goals.why all this is importantthe challenges and opportunities in the field of energy are critical for a worldin which inexpensive, readily available fossil fuels will eventually be exhausted.unless we learn how to generate and store energy, not just burn up the fuelsformed in earlier times, we will be unable to continue to advance the humancondition or even maintain it at its current level. the problems are of centralimportance, but they can be solvedñand the chemical sciences are a necessarypart of the solution.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.some challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥invent strong, lightweight, and multipurpose materials for military usein vehicles, armaments, and protective clothing.¥devise ways to detect mines, both on land and in the sea.¥develop robust and reliable sensors for detection of chemical agents,biological agents, radioactive materials, and explosives.¥develop portable miniaturized analytical devices for personal protection or remote deployment.¥develop effective ways for mitigation of chemical, radiological, andbiological terrorist attacks, and devise ways to decontaminate the sitesof such attacks.¥invent effective antivirals and antibiotics for response to attacks withbiological agents.¥invent ways to detect dangerous materials in our food or water, and todetoxify them.17111national and personal security11as part of the overall project on challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century, aworkshop on national security and homeland defense has led to a separate report: challenges for thechemical sciences in the 21st century: national security & homeland defense, national researchcouncil, national academies press, washington, d.c., 2002. the reader is urged to consult thatreport for further information.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172beyond the molecular frontierscience and technology have always played a major role in national security,particularly to arm and protect our military forces. the september 11, 2001, attackon our country has directed tremendous attention to science and technology andways that it might be mobilized for national security and homeland defense. thevery real threat of future acts of catastrophic terrorism has become a significantforce for shaping research directions in chemistry and chemical engineering. themost critical needs for national security are inherently chemical capabilities, suchas the means to analyze and detect threats by providing intelligence and warning,and the ability to respond to an attack by mitigating damage and decontaminatinga site. achieving these goals will require concerted basic and applied research inchemistry and chemical engineering.the personal security of our citizens also benefits directly from science andtechnology. our police forces are equipped with light, strong bulletproof vestsmade of modern synthetic materials, and fire rescue personnel wear protectiveclothing made from temperatureresistant polymers. the smoke detectors andcarbon monoxide detectors in our homes are based on chemical processes thatdetect dangerous substances. personal security is enhanced in the broadest senseby water purification and by the chemical testing procedures that assure us ofclean water and food.goalschemical science and technology must contribute to the enhancement of national and personal security by providing fundamental understanding and newdevelopmentsñto defend against military, terrorist, or criminal attack and to givewarning of accidental or natural disasters. chemists and chemical engineers willneed to make new discoveries in basic science and apply them to the creation ofuseful materials and devices. these activities will need to address the threats toboth military personnel and the civilian population. the range of threats in turnwill include military or terrorist attacks on a massive scale, other assaults againstjust a few individuals, natural disasters, industrial accidents, transportationrelated mishaps, and accidents in the home. the goals, to which chemical scientistscan contribute, begin with early detection and prevention of an attack or eventñbut if prevention is not possible, they extend to mitigation of the effects andsubsequent remediation of damage.progress to datemilitaryever since world war ii spurred the development of technological advancessuch as radar, synthetic antimalarials, and synthetic rubber, our nationõs strengthsbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national and personal security173in science and technology have enabled us to prevail in the battlefield and marketplace. the united states currently has a military equipped with materials, communication devices, and supplies that result from fundamental research in materials synthesis and processing, electronics development, and biomedical advances.nuclear weapons, frightening and dangerous as they may be, are nevertheless a significant component of our overall national defense. a major nationaleffort at this point is to make sure that they are not used in a war, or allowed tospread into less responsible hands. chemistry played a large role in the development of nuclear weapons, enabling the chemical and isotopic separations procedures by which weaponsgrade fissile materials could be isolated from highlycomplex mixtures. it was a remarkable achievement, solving a very difficult problem. now analytical chemistry is heavily involved in detecting evidence fornuclear test explosions, to try to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.the production of weaponsgrade uranium or plutonium is both technicallychallenging and expensive. consequently, the source of this threat has been limited primarily to industrialized countries. in contrast, both industrialized and lessdeveloped countries might turn to the production of chemical weapons or biological weapons using dangerous viruses or bacteria. these are forbidden by international agreement,2 but agreements do not necessarily provide a strong defense.consequently, the u.s. military has put considerable effort into developing protective clothing and procedures to protect troops against chemical and biologicalweapons. the protective materials, and detoxifying procedures and substances,are the products of modern chemistry and chemical engineering.a major contribution from chemistry and chemical engineering has been thedevelopment of materials with important military applications. chemists andchemical engineers, working with experts from areas such as electronics, materials science, and physics, have contributed to such developments as new explosives and propellants, reactive armor (a complex material with an explosive layerthat can reduce the penetration of an incoming projectile), and stealth materialsthat reduce the detectability of aircraft by radar.personal securityour personal civilian security is greatly enhanced by many contributionsfrom chemistry and chemical engineering, often through integrated r&d effortswith teams of scientists from many disciplines. law enforcement employs forensic tools that rely heavily on chemical analysis, and emergency response teamsuse a variety of protective clothing and equipment that rely on modern materialschemistry and engineering. as mentioned above, individual security extends tochemical detection methods in the home.2the biological and toxin weapons convention, http://projects.sipri.se/cbw/docs/bwbtwcmainpage.html; the chemical weapons convention, http://www.opcw.nl/.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174beyond the molecular frontierchallenges and opportunities for the futuremilitarynew research is needed to equip our military for new types of combat indiverse environments, and against wellequipped opponents. increasingly, combat may occur in difficult areas, such as jungles or cities. these new situationsrequire that soldiers be independent agents who are able to carry their weapons,communications, and supplies. chemical scientists need to develop lightweightstrong materials that could replace the heavy metal armor in fighting vehicles;new ultratough composites are a likely choice. other lightweight materials willbe needed for surveillance vehicles and to equip rapid response forces. militaryvehicles will need better batteries and fuel cells to provide portable energy sources(chapter 10).the materials for uniforms and equipment will need to provide protectionfrom chemical and biological agents (and perhaps detect them as well), be lightweight, and provide climate control to maintain performance in extreme environments. new medicinesñantivirals, antibiotics, and antifungalsñwill be neededto maintain the health of troops deployed in such locations. in urban areas, advanced materials are needed for robots that can enter buildings before soldiers.combat medicine poses special problems. chemical science and technologycan aid in the rapid detection and treatment of injuries from chemical and biological weapons and other new weapons such as lasers. we need to develop bloodsubstitutes with a long shelf life, and improved biocompatible materials for dealing with wounds. for the navy, there are special needs such as analytical systemsthat can sample the seawater to detect and identify other vessels. we need goodways to detect mines, both at sea and on land. land mines present a continuedthreat to civilians after hostilities have ended, and chemical techniques are neededto detect these explosive devices.of course our national security also depends on deterring problems beforethey arise. we need to develop new analytical chemistry techniques that are capable of detecting the production of materials in violation of the chemical andbiological weapons treaties. related detection technologies are needed to detectchemical agents and warn personnel accordingly. the new instrumentation willneed to be versatile, robust, and portableñwith miniaturization using approachessuch as microfluidics as a likely goal.biologicalbiological warfare agents present a greatly increased threat because the original viruses or bacteria can multiply and infect additional people. considerableconcern has been expressed over the possibility that a terrorist group might obtaina sample of the smallpox virus. until recently, it was believed that smallpox hadbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national and personal security175been eradicated, with the exception of samples at two specialized facilities (in theunited states and russia). other biological agents also create concern. for example, bacillus anthracis (anthrax) has long been viewed as a potential weaponbecause it can be converted to hardy spores for delivery as a dry powder. theevents of 2001 showed anthrax to be a dangerous organism, but it is not transmitted from one human to another. consequently, the death toll from anthraxcontaining letters was relatively low, although the societal and psychological impactwas huge.how can chemists and chemical engineers respond? to guard against biological attacks, it will be necessary to develop rapid and reliable methods of detection. as the events of 2001 demonstrated, it is not acceptable to culture asample and wait days to learn if a particular biological agent is present; it must beidentified prior to the onset of symptoms. and if the agent is found, we will neednew therapies (antivirals, antibiotics) and reliable methods for decontaminatingthe site of attack. protection of personnel will also require new vaccines and newapproaches for delivering drugs and vaccines. the development of new drugs andvaccines will need to be carried out in full recognition that genetically modifiedpathogens could be used in an enemy attack. all of this will require concertedresearch by chemists and chemical engineers in collaboration with other scientists; these studies necessarily will be interdisciplinary.chemicalchemical warfare agents are extremely toxic and very fast acting. chemicalscientists must develop better understanding of their mechanisms of action, anduse this information to devise possible remedies. at present, the logical responseto the chemical threat is prevention of exposure. consequently, sensors and otherfast analytical techniques must be developed. rapid and reliable methods of decontamination are needed in the event that a chemical agent is detected. oneconcept, the òlab on a chip,ó involves producing complete analytical systems in acompact electronic form; such small devices could then be deployed by airdropand allow remote inspection. such miniaturized analytical systems also could becarried by individual soldiersñproviding them with individualized realtime detection capability for chemical and biological agents.the chemical industry is an important part of the u.s. economy. the manufacturing sites, and the chemicals they make, store, and transport, represent targets for terrorist attackñeither by causing a release of toxic chemicals or bydiversion of chemicals for other purposes. the industry needs to be sure that ithas broad uptodate information from analyses and risk assessments of chemicalplant safety, of site security, and of chemical transport security. these analysesneed to be coupled with detection capabilities for response, verification and tracking. even with good plans in place, appropriate procedures are also essential fordealing with any attacks. chemists and chemical engineers will be challenged tobeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176beyond the molecular frontierdevelop new products and processes that make the chemical industry inherentlymore secure. once again, mitigation and decontamination procedures require theattention of chemists and engineers.nuclear and radiologicalcountries and groups that lack access to nuclear weapons may still haveopportunities to obtain radioactive materials such as spent nuclear fuel. a bombin which a conventional explosive charge causes dispersal of radioactive materialis known as a òdirty bomb.ó such a device could result in psychological effectsexceeding the physical damage it caused. once again, new techniques are neededfor detection (of both the explosive and radioactive material), and decontamination procedures would be essential if such a device were used.research by chemists and chemical engineers will be needed for the development of new analytical techniques to detect nuclear proliferation threats andtreaty violations. this will require establishing the characteristic signatures ofboth production and testing of weapons. detection of these signatures will depend on chemical spectroscopy techniques, and advances in remote sensing.within the context of the u.s. weapons programs, the ban on testing nuclearweapons requires that other methods be developed to ensure the safety and reliability of existing weapons. as part of the stockpile stewardship program, it willbe necessary to understandñthrough laboratory experiments and via computersimulation and modelingñthe longterm changes that could affect the performance of the weapons in the stockpile. these include chemical effects such ascorrosion as well as the results of selfirradiation on both nuclear and nonnuclearcomponents of the weapons. what are the aging processes and their consequenceson various componentsñincluding high explosives, electronics, and mechanicalñand how will this affect performance? successful modeling will require fundamental understanding of materials over all length scales and of their chemicalbehavior under extremes of temperature and pressure.explosivesbombings have long been a central threat from terrorism, and several majorbombing attacks have been carried out in the united states over the last decade.two earlier reports from the national research council outlined a number ofopportunities for technical contributions by chemical scientists.3 the recommen3containing the threat of illegal bombings: an integrated national strategy for marking, tagging, rendering inert, and licensing explosives and their precursors, national research council,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1998; black and smokeless powders: technologies forfinding bombs and the bomb makers, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 1998.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national and personal security177dations in those reports emphasized further research to develop new and improveddetection techniques, but new voluntary and regulatory approaches to controllingexplosives and their precursor chemicals were suggested if the level of threatincreases.root causesone of many underlying problems leading to conflict is the difference instandard of living between industrialized and developing countries.4 much of thisdifference could be mitigated by technology to improve energy, information infrastructure, medicine and public health infrastructure, food, water, shelter, clothing, and other absolute necessities for poorer nations. a task for chemistry andchemical engineering is to improve the means to feed and shelter the world, toextend to lesswealthy nations some fraction of the benefits we enjoy.personal securityin most respects, the terrorist threats to civilian populations are parallel to themilitary threats from chemical and biological agents, radiological materials, andexplosives. detectionñwith all its challenges to the chemical sciencesñremainsthe key. but the response must be quite different if an attack takes place on acivilian target. in such a case, we would not be looking at a specific concentrationof troops under management of senior military officersñwhose goal must be asufficient survival level that will enable the battle to be continued and won. in acivilian situation, reduction of casualties must take first priority.important opportunities in the area of response are found in the early stagesof emergency response. emergency personnel need improved materialsñincluding clothing, gas masks, and glovesñfor personal protection. these will need tobe lightweight and longlasting, with significant improvements over the currentgeneration of protection suits that are too heavy, too hot, and too cumbersome.the time scale for chemical and biological attacks is quite different. explosives and chemical warfare agents such as nerve gases kill in seconds or minutes,but even the existence of a biological attack might not be recognized for days orweeks. the first responders in a chemical or explosive attack will be alerted bydamage and casualties, and they will need to enter the disaster zone. they willneed the appropriate protective gear along with the detection equipment to tellthem what threat or agent(s) they are facing. moreover, they will need equipmentand chemicals that will allow them to decontaminate the site by destroying orremoving whatever harmful agents may be present. finally, their analytical equip4discouraging terrorism: some implications of 9/11, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 2002, p. 29.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178beyond the molecular frontierment will need the sensitivity and accuracy to tell them when decontaminationhas progressed adequately so that the disaster zone can again be declared safe. allof the new equipment and instrumentation will require the work of chemists andchemical engineers.biological attacks will likely be recognized not from a summons to the siteof attack but by the steady accumulation of unusual data collected by medicalpersonnel at hospital emergency rooms. only when the collated data are properlyinterpreted will the biological attack be recognized as such. but then it will benecessary to engage our medical and public health systems quickly. to be readyfor such an event, chemists and chemical engineers will need to carry out extensive work in collaboration with others in the biomedical field. it will be necessaryto develop new and better vaccines, antivirals, and antibiotics. better, faster waysof making and delivering these materials will have to be developed so that theyare available in time to save lives. if a biological attack should take place, improved detection methods for biological agents will be needed immediately. arapid, accurate, and reliable method is needed for detecting and identifying infected individuals before clinical symptoms appear. many biological warfareagents produce conditions that are curable only if treated prior to the appearanceof clinical symptoms. waiting for the symptoms of a lethal disease to appear willnot be an acceptable alternative. chemists and chemical engineers will need todevelop sensors, instruments, and analytical procedures to identify pathogens rapidly and reliablyñthereby enabling medical personnel to respond accordingly.protection of our food and water supplies against terrorist attack presents amajor challenge, because the supply chain is so extensive and open. but it is achallenge that chemists and chemical engineers should accept. moreover, thethreats to food and water are not limited to terrorismña variety of natural disasters could wreak havoc as well.why all this is importanta compelling sense of urgency was felt throughout the united states afterthe terrorist attacks of september 2001. for chemists and chemical engineers, thishas emerged as motivation to align their research directions in ways that can helpdeter terrorism and protect our country from attack. chemistry and chemical engineering have major roles to play in furthering our defensive capabilities againstboth military opponents and terrorists.all of the areas of research discussed in this chapter will require interdisciplinary collaborations among chemists, engineers, biologists, physicists, and materials scientists. this critical area of national need should be the catalyst forbreaking down disciplinary barriers and promoting interaction among scientificand engineering communities.among the many areas of research that can contribute to our national security, several stand out from the rest as central to the chemical sciencesñmateribeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national and personal security179als, medicines, and sensors. advanced materials will play a crucial role in military and civilian protection, and advanced research in structured and functionalmaterials on a nanoscopic scale will be an important focus for chemists and chemical engineers. the very real threat of virulent biological agents will drive chemists, biochemists, and chemical engineers to seek new prophylactic treatments,therapies, and protective vaccines. the need to protect millions of civilians in ourown communities against acts of catastrophic terrorism must be a central priorityfor those working with analytical sensors and detectors, and for those workingwith genomics and analysis of pathogenesis. there cannot be many more important goals.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18012how to achieve these goalsu.s. prosperity depends on high technology, and much of that depends onchemical expertise. for most of the past decade, the chemical industry has beenone of the few u.s. manufacturing industries to have a positive balance of trade.indeed, the chemical process industries, which perform chemical transformationsin the course of manufacturing their products, are as much as onethird of theentire u.s. manufacturing sector in terms of value added. the scope of the chemical sciences endeavor is vast, contributing far beyond the traditional aspects ofchemistry and chemical engineering. as a consequence, opportunities for fundamental and creative scienceñand major contributions to technology and societyñwill remain in the hands of chemical scientists for a long time. new fundamental chemical insights will increase our scientific understanding, and thepractical importance of future discoveries will have enormous potential. thesenew discoveriesñmedicines to cure and prevent diseases, solutions to meet ourenergy needs, paradigm shifts in electronic materials, increased industrial sustainability, and protection from terrorist attacksñall require the efforts of chemistsand chemical engineers. the health and wellbeing of the chemical enterprisewill directly affect the health and wellbeing of our nation and its economy.1if these achievements are to occur, however, it will not be by the work ofchemists and chemical engineers acting alone. many parts of society and expertsin other areas of science and technology will be partners with chemists and chemi1chemical & engineering news, 78 (41), 6061, 2000; chemical & engineering news, 79 (46), 3839, 2001; chemistry today and tomorrow: the central, useful, and creative science, ronaldbreslow, american chemical society, washington, d.c., 1997.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how to achieve these goals181cal engineers if the chemical sciences are to achieve solutions to all these challenges. the following section suggests opportunities for the path forward.chemists and chemical engineersthe practice of chemistry and chemical engineeringfuture research for chemical scientists will increasingly involve working inmultidisciplinary teams. this means not just analytical chemists with inorganicchemists or chemists with chemical engineers, but chemical scientists workingwith physicists and electrical engineers to develop electronic materials and devices, chemical scientists working with biologists and physicians in the development of medicines and the understanding of life processes, chemical engineersworking with physicians to develop artificial materials and organs for the body,and chemical scientists working with business leaders and resource managers todevelop sustainable and profitable processes for our world.the need for multidisciplinary teams to understand the fundamental scienceof the future as well as to address the technical challenges ahead will require ashift in the way we train graduate students, award tenure, and fund research. it isdesirable that graduate students be involved in projects that include other disciplines, and their classwork should involve a broader array of subjects than justtheir primary specialty. tenure has traditionally been built upon individual research. perhaps a demonstrated ability to collaborate with those in other disciplines should be considered a strong asset for tenure. to truly foster collaborativeresearch, funding agencies need to provide awards that are larger than the presentawards that are expected to fund only one principal investigator.besides doing multidisciplinary research, chemical scientists in the comingyears will need to team with those from other sectors. government and academeneed to work together in order to most effectively solve the problems facing thenation in homeland defense and security. industry and academia need to worktogether to enhance the transfer of technology to the marketplace and to keepacademe in touch with the needs of industry. government and industry need toteam to better address the problems they face together.2the training of chemists and chemical engineersas in any reexamination of the field, chemists and chemical engineers shouldask serious questions about current practices. does the divisional structure inacademic chemistry departments discourage multiinvestigator research, or encourage artificial distinctions? are the traditional divisions still the best structure2research teams and partnerships: trends in the chemical sciences, national research council,national academy press, washington, d.c., 1999.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182beyond the molecular frontierfor educating students or do these divisions encourage narrowness? is it reasonable that the traditional education of chemists involves no contact with the fieldof chemical engineering? since most chemical engineers are no longer doingresearch in areas related to the undergraduate classes that they teach, what doesthat imply about the need for changing the chemical engineering curriculum?these are all areas that will be debated and acted on in the near future.3regarding undergraduate education, most students are exposed to chemistrycourses because they are considering careers in the health sciences. these introductory courses are an opportunity and responsibility to convey the excitement ofthe chemical sciences. there are three basic types of students who might takechemistry in an undergraduate setting: one is the chemistry major, one is a science major, and one is a nonscience student. only about 10 percent or fewerstudents in the firstyear chemistry class will go on to become professional chemists or chemical engineers.4 clearly introductory courses must include certainmaterial to build the foundation for advanced work, but this does not mean thatthe wonder and excitement of chemistry cannot be emphasized. basic sciencecurricula needs to be developed for nonscience undergraduate students. chemists and chemical engineers should take the lead in collaborating with their scientific colleagues to develop a comprehensive science and technology course toenhance the understanding by nonscientists of the scientific method and thewonder and value of science. it is necessary for scientists and engineers to definethe minimum amount of science an educated person with a bachelorõs degree inany field should have.in both chemistry and chemical engineering, greater opportunity and encouragement needs to be given for undergraduates to have a research experience. thisneeds to be offered through the universities, through programs such as researchexperiences for undergraduates, through cooperative education programs andsummer opportunities at government laboratories.chemical scientists must communicate more effectively with other sectors ofsociety, technical and nontechnical alike, beyond the chemical science community. they must put their discoveries and their goals into words that make senseto nonchemists. it cannot be assumed that everyone will recognize that òaromaticó might not refer to odor or that a òreactionó might be something other thanthe response to a surprise. chemists and chemical engineers must describe to themedia what is important in chemistry. we should recognize the journalistõs needfor news that the public can understand and the opportunity that this represents totransmit important contributions of the chemical sciences. perhaps most important, chemical scientists must communicate more effectively with their electedrepresentatives and other government officials. the unified field of chemistry3graduate education in the chemical sciences: issues for the 21st century, national researchcouncil, national academy press, washington, d.c., 2000.4chemical & engineering news, 79 (31), 5, 2001beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how to achieve these goals183and chemical engineering has an exciting story to tell, with intellectual excitement and practical applications that are critical to modern civilization. the storymust be told to those whose decisions affect the resources needed to solve thechallenges that are outlined in this report. these goals in the realm of communication constitute a serious challenge to chemical scientists and engineersñto accept an enhanced commitment to professional responsibility and involvement thatwould provide enormous benefit to their field.chemists and chemical engineers can broaden their perceptions and interactions; one goal of this joint report is to facilitate movement in this direction.name changes in both chemistry and chemical engineering departments havereflected this progression in recent years. chemical scientists can work to mutualbenefit with experts from many other areasñelectrical engineers, pharmacologists, materials scientists, and solidstate physicists to name just a few.the pool of chemists and engineers must be expanded by attracting morewomen and minorities5 to the fields that chemical scientists find so rewarding andexciting, as we discuss further in the next section. we must examine our currentpractices and beliefs to see how to fully tap the talents of all members of oursociety. u.s. chemistry and chemical engineering benefit from the immigrationof individuals with the needed skills who have been trained both here and in othercountries. however, the challenges are so great, and the demand for talent solarge, that it is important to attract more of the brightest american students intothese fields. despite the needs of our technological society for chemists andchemical engineers (see below), graduate school enrollments in the united stateshave declined a bit over the last decade (table 121).chemists and chemical engineers will need to be active ambassadors fortheir fields by recruiting new students and describing the satisfaction and rewardsof a life on the frontierñin this case the molecular frontier. this will requirevisits to schools to talk about the careers and opportunities. it is critical that such5for background information on these chemical workforce issues see: women in the chemicalworkforce, national research council, national academy press, washington, d.c., 2000; minorities in the chemical workforce: diversity models that work, national research council, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2003.table 121fulltime graduate students in chemistry and chemicalengineering.afield19932000chemistry17,20415,707chemical engineering6,0795,865adata from federal investment in r&d, e. eiseman, k. koizumi, and d. fossum, rand scienceand technology policy institute, arlington, va, 2002 (table 17), p. 99.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184beyond the molecular frontiervisits include students in the entire range from kindergarten through high school.students need to learn early that there are exciting things to do in creative science, including in particular the chemical sciences, and that they could play a rolein inventing solutions to the challenges that humanity faces. many students havenever met a chemist or chemical engineer, and it may be essential to see that theydo.finally, chemists and chemical engineers must accept the important challenges that they alone can meet. some of the challenges are described in thisreport, but the chemical sciences community must continuously expand the listñand always stand ready to accept new ideas and meet new goals. some of themost exciting advances in science have come from basic scientific exploration, sowe must continue to encourage those who simply want to expand the frontiers offundamental understanding.educatorsas mentioned above, it is important to convey the excitement of the chemical sciences to students. science is about discovery, but chemistry and chemicalengineering also extend to invention. showing students how data can be used tomake a scientific deduction gives more of a flavor of the science than does simplylearning a set of facts about the science. for example, students can gain realcontact with primary scientific data and its interpretation if they are asked to lookat an nmr spectrum of a compound and deduce its structure. asking them toinvent an experiment that will answer a chemical question can also be stimulating. asking them how they could synthesize a given compound makes them usetheir knowledge in a creative way. some of this can be done in standard lectureand laboratory courses, but it is also important to encourage creativity by promoting science fairs in which high school students can compete by entering their ownresearch projects.educators should take advantage of the availability of professional chemistsand chemical engineers, who can speak to the students either in class or in somespecial forum. contact with practicing scientists can help students put a humanface on a possible future career. it is especially important that women and minority scientists also play a role in such outreach to students, to show that indeed theprofession welcomes all with the talent to contribute. some of this effort shouldbe directed toward the early parts of k12 education. the future of the chemicalsciences may depend on the ability of educators to convince young students thatòitõs cool to be excited by chemistry.óthe mediachemistry is to a large extent invisible in newspapers, news magazines, television, and radio. if the message from chemists and chemical engineers is sobeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how to achieve these goals185exciting, why is it not a focus of media attention? part of the reason is the tendency of chemical scientists to present their work in such a complex and technicalway that it does not translate readily to a general format. some argue that chemical results are too complicated to present to the publicñbut that does not seem toinhibit those working in physics, biology, and astronomy, where news coverageof new discoveries seems much more common. consequently, the challenge isclear. chemists and chemical engineers must become more proficient in theircommunication skillsñparticularly in their interactions with the journalists whowill write the final stories. the goals and achievements of chemistry and chemical engineeringñin basic science and in meeting human needsñprovide amplejustification for efforts to work with the media.as described in this report, the role of chemistry and chemical engineering inmodern society is both important and central. it is therefore essential that thismessage be made clear to the public, to decision makers, and to opinion leaders.as an example, when a new medicine or electronics breakthrough is announced,credit is usually given to those who carried out the last stepsñthe physicians whotested the drug that was invented by chemists, or the electronics experts whoassembled the chemical science and engineering advances into the final versionof a chip. as a result, the chemical scientists with responsibility for the originalinvention may not receive any credit whatsoever, and the public may not recognize that chemists and chemical engineers made essential contributions. chemical scientists and their professional organizations will need to work with mediaexperts if such patterns are to be changed.the general publicif chemical scientists are to be successful in their efforts to improve the educational experience of their students, they will need help from the public. onestep is to assure that there is a general understanding of the ways that chemistry iscentral to understanding life itself, and to providing the medicines, products,modern materials, and processes that support human needs. but the necessarysecond step is to enlist the publicõs supportñto have them approve of studentsõdesires to enter the chemical sciences and contribute to its goals and challenges.if parents encourage their sons and daughters to take up such careers, and if thepublic encourages financial support for research and education in chemistry andchemical engineering, then progress can be expected.in a recent poll of the general public conducted by the american chemicalsociety,6 chemistry as a career option was ranked third in a list of eight scientificprofessions, and chemists scored high as visionary, innovative, and resultsoriented. also, 59% said that chemicals made their lives better. these results sug6chemical & engineering news, 78, 41, 6061, 2000.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186beyond the molecular frontiergest that the public would indeed endorse the goals suggested here for enhancingthe infrastructure for education and research in the chemical sciences.government and private foundationsresearch and education go hand in hand in chemistry and chemical engineering. while it is possible to teach students about the chemistry of the past bylectures alone, participation in research gives them a chance to learn what sciencereally is, and to engage their creative and critical imaginations. in this way, thesupport of research directly contributes to the education of chemical scientists. itcan also provide those students who want to go into other fieldsñlaw, business,governmentñwith a real understanding of the basic and applied work in chemistry and chemical engineering.the unemployment rate for chemists has remained low during the past fewyears,7 reaching only the normal rate (2%) for people who are moving from onejob to another. of course, this low unemployment rate can and does rise to someextent in periods when the economy is weak, but chemistry and chemical engineering have a huge advantage over many other disciplines. there is a very largeindustry that uses chemistry to produce its products, so the opportunities for thosewho are chemically trained include industrial jobsñnot just the academic jobsthat some other disciplines have as their only option. indeed, about twothirds ofthe members of the american chemical society work in chemically related industries. the bureau of labor statistics reports that in 2000, employment in theunited states included more than 92,000 chemists and materials scientists, 73,000chemical technicians, and 33,000 chemical engineers.8 table 122 shows that7chemical & engineering news, 79, 46, 3839, 2001.8u.s. department of labor, bureau of labor statistics: occupational outlook handbook, 200203edition, http://www.bls.gov/oco/home.htm.table 122doctoral scientists and engineers employed in the united statesin 1999.afieldsubfieldnumber employedphysical sciences110,300chemistry55,810engineering95,890chemical engineering12,520total68,330206,190adata from federal investment in r&d, e. eiseman, k. koizumi, and d. fossum, rand scienceand technology policy institute, arlington, va, 2002 (table 23), p. 107.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how to achieve these goals187chemists comprised just over fifty percent of the doctoral level physical scientistsin the u.s. workforce in 1999, while chemists and chemical engineers togethermade up approximately onethird of all the doctorallevel physical scientists andengineers.the basic research in our fields is now done largely in universities. it canhave incredibly important practical results, but those results cannot normally bepredicted in advance. who would have thought that the basic study of inducedenergy emission from excited states of atoms and molecules that led to the laserwould wind up giving us a better way to record music, or read supermarket prices?would a music company have funded that research? who would have thoughtthat our increased understanding of the chemistry of life would have led to thecreation of biotechnology as an entirely new industry? the industry that benefited from the basic research could not have funded it, since it did not yet exist.u.s. companies swiftly use the new leads from basic research in u.s. universities, in part because they have good contacts, and in part because they hirestudents or even faculty who have played a role in creating that basic knowledge.however, support of the research itself is mainly the function of the federal government, and to a lesser extent of private foundations. a recent study carried outby the council for chemical research finds that on average, every $1 invested inchemical r&d today produces $2 in corporate operating income over six yearsñan average annual return of 17% after taxes.9 the study also reports a stronglinkage of industrial patents to publicly funded academic research.federal agencies have been the major supporters of research and education inthe chemical sciences. for example, the national institutes of health (nih) provide very important support to healthrelated science in universities, includinghealthrelated chemistry and chemical engineering. this support has been directedto basic science as well as to more applied studies. thus nih has supported thebasic work to understand the chemistry of proteins and of nucleic acids, fundamental building blocks of living systems. to assure continued support by thenih, it is important that the health relevance of chemistry and chemical engineering be clearly and explicitly recognized. after all, chemistry underlies the understanding of the basic processes of life, as was described in chapter 7. also, thepharmaceutical industry, agriculture, and sanitation are the three principal contributors to human health, and all three are heavily based on chemistry. chemistsand chemical engineers constitute a large fraction of the scientists doing researchin pharmaceutical companies, inventing the medicines and the processes formanufacturing them. their education and training in u.s. universities is possibleonly with adequate support by the nih, support with both research grants andtraining grants.9measuring up: research & development counts in the chemical industry, council for chemicalresearch, washington, d.c., 2000; http://www.ccrhq.org/news/studyindex.html.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188beyond the molecular frontierthe national science foundation (nsf) provides support to all the basicsciences and engineering in universities. nsf support of chemistry is very important, both the support directed to fundamental research initiated by individualinvestigators and the research done in research centers such as those aimed atdeveloping new materials or at understanding and improving the environment.the support is critical, but more is needed for the chemistry division of nsf toachieve its objectives.10 considering the importance of basic and applied chemistry and chemical engineering to the economic future of the united states, it seemsthat an increase in the ability of nsf to support fundamental and applied chemical science is warranted.the department of energy (doe), the department of defense (dod), theenvironmental protection agency (epa), all help support fundamental and applied chemistry and chemical engineering. their support is fully justified, as previous sections of this report make clear. the department of agriculture (doa)also has a program of external support for chemistry and chemical engineering inuniversities, in line with the role that chemistry and chemical engineering play inagriculture.table 123 summarizes federal funding for research in the physical sciencesand engineering over the last several decades. the numbers are reported in constant dollars to facilitate comparisons across different years while minimizing theeffects of inflation. while there has been an overall steady increase in federalsupport since 1970, the support for chemistry has lagged considerably behind theoverall trend, and the support for chemical engineering has actually decreased.strong support for chemistry and chemical engineering in the future will be essential for scientific and technical progressñboth to facilitate new discoveriesand to provide the technical workforce that will be needed to sustain the u.s.economy.table 123federal funding for research in science and engineering(millions of 2000 dollars)afield1970197519801985199019952000total, all s&e18,10418,60622,14123,46726,86031,00538,471physical sciences, total3,4963,0323,8194,4314,7314,6654,788chemistry8417908689469469421,226engineering, total5,6874,7495,4035,2625,2506,2246,346chemical engineering404232184370301268197adata from federal investment in r&d, e. eiseman, k. koizumi, and d. fossum, rand scienceand technology policy institute, arlington, va, 2002 (table 13), p. 89.10chemical & engineering news, 80, 42, 3739, 2002.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how to achieve these goals189there is another way that federal government officials could provide supportfor the conclusions of this reportñendorse the importance of the challenges andgoals that it describes. the federal government has a clear stake in supportingenhanced education and training of chemical scientists and in encouraging recruitment of more u.s. students to these fields. the major role of the chemicalindustry emphasizes how the economic future of the united states depends oncontinued scientific excellence in chemistry and chemical engineering.many private foundations have agendas that are somewhat narrowly focusedñfor example, on a disease such as cancer. they often recognize the rolethat chemical scientists play in understanding the basic biology of the disease andin inventing medicines for treatment or procedures for delivering such medicines.although their funding cannot replace federal support, the special programs theycreate are valuable as support for research and education. other foundations provide extremely valuable support for young chemical scientists at the early stagesof their careersñwhen their records of accomplishment may not yet be adequateto let them compete successfully for federal funding.industrythe chemical industry is involved with all parts of the chemical sciences.u.s. companies hire university graduates, carry out r&d programs, engage injoint efforts with universities and national laboratories, and generate ideas thatstimulate further research in the academic arena. consequently, it is of centralimportance to the chemical industry that the health of chemistry and chemicalengineering be maintained. there are many ways that u.s. companies can help.one is to continue the demonstrated progress in environmentally benign manufacturing as exemplified by the responsible care program. past practices that ledto wellpublicized problems are now recognized, changes have been implemented,and improvements continue to be made. the more chemistrybased industry canimprove its public reputation, the better the consequences for chemists and chemical engineers.when a new medicine is announced, it is important that companies publiclyrecognize the chemistry that went into its creation and the chemical engineeringthat went into the manufacturing process. when other valuable new products areintroduced, companies should not be afraid to describe the contribution of chemical scientists. the negative public reactions from past problems with chemicalmanufacturing have led some companies to nearly hide the fact that they do chemistry. but if chemical companies can discuss behavior of which they are proud,they may be willing to assert that they indeed do chemistry, and do it well. pretending otherwise demeans the entire profession and the incredible contributionsthat it makes.there is a serious problem with public perception that the chemical industryneeds to correct. in a survey of 1,012 u.s. adults commissioned by the americanbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190beyond the molecular frontierchemical society (see above) only 43% had a favorable opinion of the chemicalindustry. it was ranked lowest among a list of 10 industries, and only 1 in 10respondents felt very well informed about the role of chemicals in improvinghuman health. the situation is not appreciably better elsewhere. in canada only40% of adults in a 1999 survey had a favorable view of the chemical industry, andonly 18% felt that the industry was excellent or good at being honest. a survey of9,000 western european citizens by the european chemical industry councilshowed that only 45% had a favorable view of the chemical industry. there isstill a lot of work to do to change these opinions and perceptions.chemistry departments and chemical engineering departments in universities need more help from industry. after all, companies need both the researchadvances and the trained people that universities produce. at one time these companies provided significant support, for example in the form of fellowships forph.d. students. as research support shifted to the federal government in the second half of the 20th century, many of these industrial programs disappeared.they are now needed again, especially in the form of graduate fellowships, assome of the federal fellowship programs have been terminated.as industrial r&d moves forward in an increasingly interdisciplinary fashion, it will be important for the chemical industry to recognize this trend in itshiring procedures. if interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary work is to be encouraged, industry will need to seek and hire people who have worked at the intersections of chemistry and chemical engineering with biology, physics, and othersciences.grand challengesthis report has summarized the contributions that chemical science and engineering have already made to human welfare and to economic strength. it hasfocused to some extent on these contributions to the united states, but in truth allof humanity benefits from advances in medicines, in a better environment, inenergy production and distribution, in materials production, information science,and national security. on the one hand, this report draws attention to the richintellectual challenge of understanding our world through the chemical sciences.on the other hand, it points out the very close connection between basic researchand useful applications in the chemical sciences. basic science creates opportunities for exciting practical advances, but work to solve practical problems oftenstimulates enquiry into new areas of basic science. thus, the connections amongall aspects of chemistry and chemical engineering are strong and important.there is still much to be done. in every chapter of this report some of theremaining challenges for the field are described, together with the importance ofmeeting those challenges. in addition, some especially exciting challenges starteach chapter. chemistry and chemical engineering are very diverse fields, whichdo not focus on only one or two central problems. this is in part their strength,beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how to achieve these goals191since it means that they can make contributions to wide areas of human understanding and human welfare. at the same time, it is a problem because greatadvances can be made in one area without necessarily revolutionizing the entirefield. some of the challenges are specific, but others are quite broad, with potential impact well beyond the chemical sciences. these are listed here as someoverriding themes, described as grand challengesñthey are broad opportunitiesthat if met could have huge benefits to society. while they are goals not yetreached, we propose that they can be realistically addressed with the new anddeveloping strengths in theories and procedures in the chemical sciences. as wecontinue to push forward the frontiers of science, we will increasingly do so byworking with our colleagues in other disciplines. in this way, the chemical sciences will be able to contribute in remarkable ways to an improved future for ourcountry, for humanity, and for our planet.we caution the reader that these grand challenges should not be taken as theonly areas for worthwhile research. the history of science shows again and againthat large revolutions in thought can arise from discoveries that were made byindividuals or teams who were not constrained by someone elseõs list. chemistryand chemical engineering enter the 21st century with exciting science ahead andmajor contributions to make. the committee hopes this report will stimulateyoung people to join them in meeting these challenges, and that society will support continued efforts of chemists and chemical engineers in their work on andbeyond the molecular frontier.some grand challenges for chemists and chemical engineers¥learn how to synthesize and manufacture any new substancethat can have scientific or practical interest, using compactsynthetic schemes and processes with high selectivity for thedesired product, and with low energy consumption and benignenvironmental effects in the process. this goal will require continuing progress in the development of new methods for synthesis andmanufacturing. human welfare will continue to benefit from new substances, including medicines and specialized materials.¥develop new materials and measurement devices that will protect citizens against terrorism, accident, crime, and disease, inpart by detecting and identifying dangerous substances andorganisms using methods with high sensitivity and selectivity.rapid and reliable detection of dangerous disease organisms, highlytoxic chemicals, and concealed explosives (including those in landcontinuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192beyond the molecular frontiermines), is the first important step in responding to threats. the nextimportant step for chemists and chemical engineers will be to devisemethods to deal with such threats, including those involved in terroristor military attacks.¥understand and control how molecules reactñover all time scalesand the full range of molecular size. this fundamental understanding will let us design new reactions and manufacturing processes andwill provide fundamental insights into the science of chemistry. majoradvances that will contribute to this goal over the next decades include: the predictive computational modeling of molecular motionsusing largescale parallel processing arrays; the ability to investigateand manipulate individual molecules, not just collections of molecules;and the generation of ultrafast electron pulses and optical pulses downto xray wavelengths, to observe molecular structures during chemical reactions. this is but one area in which increased understandingwill lead to a greater ability to improve the practical applications of thechemical sciences.¥learn how to design and produce new substances, materials,and molecular devices with properties that can be predicted,tailored, and tuned before production. this ability would greatlystreamline the search for new useful substances, avoiding considerable trial and error. recent and projected advances in chemical theoryand computation should make this possible.¥understand the chemistry of living systems in detail. understandhow various different proteins and nucleic acids and small biologicalmolecules assemble into chemically defined functional complexes,and indeed understand all the complex chemical interactions amongthe various components of living cells. explaining the processes of lifein chemical terms is one of the great challenges continuing into thefuture, and the chemistry behind thought and memory is an especiallyexciting challenge. this is an area in which great progress has beenmade, as biology increasingly becomes a chemical science (andchemistry increasingly becomes a life science).¥develop medicines and therapies that can cure currentlyuntreatable diseases. in spite of the great progress that has beenmade in the invention of new medicines by chemists, and new materials and delivery vehicles by engineers, the challenges in these directions are vast. new medicines to deal with cancer, viral diseases, andmany other maladies will enormously improve human welfare.¥develop selfassembly as a useful approach to the synthesis andmanufacturing of complex systems and materials. mixtures ofbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.how to achieve these goals193properly designed chemical components can organize themselves intocomplex assemblies with structures from the nanoscale to themacroscale, in a fashion similar to biological assembly. taking thismethodology from the laboratory experimentation to the practicalmanufacturing arena could revolutionize chemical processing.¥understand the complex chemistry of the earth, including land,sea, atmosphere, and biosphere, so we can maintain its livability. this is a fundamental challenge to the natural science of our field,and it is key to helping design policies that will prevent environmentaldegradation. in addition, chemical scientists will use this understanding to create new methods to deal with pollution and other threats toour earth.¥develop unlimited and inexpensive energy (with new ways ofenergy generation, storage, and transportation) to pave the wayto a truly sustainable future. our current ways of generating andusing energy consume limited resources and produce environmentalproblems. there are very exciting prospects for fuel cells to permit aneconomy based on hydrogen (generated in various ways) rather thanfossil fuels, ways to harness the energy of sunlight for our use, andsuperconductors that will permit efficient energy distribution.¥design and develop selfoptimizing chemical systems. buildingon the approach that allows optimization of biological systems throughevolution, this would let a system produce the optimal new substance,and produce it as a single product rather than as a mixture from whichthe desired component must be isolated and identified. selfoptimizingsystems would allow visionary chemical scientists to use this approachto make new medicines, catalysts, and other important chemical productsñin part by combining new approaches to informatics with rapidexperimental screening methods.¥revolutionize the design of chemical processes to make themsafe, compact, flexible, energy efficient, environmentally benign,and conducive to the rapid commercialization of new products.this points to the major goal of modern chemical engineering, in whichmany new factors are important for an optimal manufacturing process. great progress has been made in developing green chemistry,but more is needed as we continue to meet human needs with theproduction of important chemical products using processes that arecompletely harmless to the earth and its inhabitants.¥communicate effectively to the general public the contributionsthat chemistry and chemical engineering make to society. chemcontinuesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194beyond the molecular frontierists and chemical engineers need to learn how to communicate effectively to the general public ñ both through the media and directly ñ toexplain what chemists and chemical engineers do and to convey thegoals and achievements of the chemical sciences in pursuit of a betterworld.¥attract the best and the brightest young students into the chemical sciences, to help meet these challenges. they can contributeto critical human needs while following exciting careers, working onand beyond the molecular frontier.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.197abiographical sketches of steeringcommittee membersronald breslow (cochair) is university professor of chemistry, columbiauniversity, and a founder of a new pharmaceutical company. he received hisb.a. (1952), m.a. (1954), and ph.d. (1955) from harvard university. his research area is organic chemistry with specialization in biochemical model systems, biomimetic synthetic methods, reaction mechanisms, and aromaticity andantiaromaticity. he served as president of the american chemical society in 1996and has authored a book for the general public, chemistry today and tomorrow:the central, useful, and creative science. he is a member of the national academy of sciences, the american academy of arts and sciences, and the americanphilosophical society. he received the u.s. national medal of science in 1991.matthew v. tirrell (cochair) is dean of the college of engineering at theuniversity of california at santa barbara. he was previously professor and headof the department of chemical engineering and materials science at the university of minnesota, where he served as director of its biomedical engineeringinstitute. he received a b.s. from northwestern university and a ph.d. fromuniversity of massachusetts. his interests are in transport and interfacial properties of polymers, with particular emphasis on molecularscale mechanical measurements, bioadhesion, and new materials development. he is a member of thenational academy of engineering.jacqueline k. barton is arthur and marian hanisch memorial professor ofchemistry at the california institute of technology. she received her a.b. frombarnard college in 1974 and her ph.d. from columbia university in 1979. shedid subsequent postdoctoral work at both at&t bell laboratories and yale unibeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198appendix aversity. her research areas are biophysical chemistry and inorganic chemistry.she has focused on studies of recognition and reaction of nucleic acids by transition metal complexes, and particularly dnamediated charge transport chemistry. she is a member of the board of directors of the dow chemical companyand a member of the national academy of sciences.mark a. barteau is robert l. pigford professor and chair of the department ofchemical engineering at the university of delaware. he received his b.s. degreefrom washington university in 1976 and his m.s. (1977) and ph.d. (1981) fromstanford university. his research area is chemical engineering with specializedinterests in application of surface techniques to reactions on nonmetals, hydrocarbon and oxygenate chemistry on metals and metal oxides, scanning probe microscopies, and catalysis by metal oxides.carolyn r. bertozzi is professor of chemistry and molecular and cell biologyat the university of california, berkeley, a junior investigator of the howardhughes medical institute, and faculty associate of the materials sciences andphysical biosciences divisions of the lawrence berkeley national laboratory.she received her a.b. from harvard university in 1988 and her ph.d. from theuniversity of california, berkeley, in 1993. her research focuses on organicchemistry and the combination of molecular and cell biology to investigate thebiological functions of glycoconjugates and to develop new therapeutic strategies.robert a. brown is warren k. lewis professor of chemical engineering andprovost at the massachusetts institute of technology. he received his b.s. (1973)and m.s. (1975) from the university of texas, austin, and his ph.d. from theuniversity of minnesota in 1979. his research area is chemical engineering withspecialization in fluid mechanics and transport phenomena, crystal growth fromthe melt, microdefect formation in semiconductors and viscoelastic fluids, bifurcation theory applied to transitions in flow problems, and finite element methodsfor nonlinear transport problems. he is a member of the national academy ofengineering, the national academy of sciences, and the american academy ofarts and sciences.alice p. gast (bcst liaison) is vice president for research and associateprovost at the massachusetts institute of technology, where she coordinatespolicy regarding research and graduate education and oversees the instituteõslarge interschool laboratories. in addition to her administrative positions, she isthe robert t. haslam professor of chemical engineering. prior to her appointment at mit, dr. gast was associate chair and professor of the department ofchemical engineering at stanford university, having joined the stanford facultyin 1985. she received her b.sc. in chemical engineering (1980) from the univerbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a199sity of southern california and her m.a. (1981) and ph.d. (1984) fromprinceton. her research expertise is in the area of complex fluids and colloids,with a focus on frontiers of the chemical physics of colloidal and polymer solutions, polymer adsorption, and, most recently, proteins, using experimental scattering methods and statistical mechanics. she is a member of the national academy of engineering.ignacio e. grossmann is rudolph h. and florence dean professor and head ofthe chemical engineering department at carnegie mellon university. he receivedhis b.sc. (1974) from universidad iberoamericana, mexico, and his m.sc. (1975)and ph.d. (1977) degrees from imperial college, london. he joined carnegiemellon in 1979 and has focused his research on the synthesis of integrated flowsheets, batch processes, and mixedinteger optimization. the goals of his workare to develop novel mathematical programming models and techniques in process systems engineering. he was elected to the mexican academy of engineering in 1999, and he is a member of the national academy of engineering.james m. meyer retired in 2001 as vice president of dupont central researchand development. he joined dupont in 1969 and held a variety of research andmanagement positions related to elastomers and polymers. he moved to centralresearch and development in 1992 as director of materials science and engineering, and he assumed his current position in 1996. dr. meyer received his b.s.degree in chemistry from indiana university and his ph.d. degree in inorganicchemistry from northwestern university.royce w. murray is kenan professor of chemistry at the university of northcarolina at chapel hill. he received his b.s. from birmingham southern collegein 1957 and his ph.d. from northwestern university in 1960. his research areasare analytical chemistry and materials science with specialized interests in electrochemical techniques and reactions, chemically derivatized surfaces in electrochemistry and analytical chemistry, electrocatalysis, polymer films and membranes, solid state electrochemistry and transport phenomena, and molecularelectronics. he is a member of the national academy of sciences.paul j. reider is vice president of chemistry research at amgen, inc. beforemoving to amgen in 2002, he was vice president of process research at merckresearch laboratories. his research has focused on synthetic organic and naturalproduct chemistry for the development of pharmaceuticals, and he has workedextensively on drugs for aids, asthma, arthritis, and bacterial infections. hereceived his a.b. from washington square college in 1972 and his ph.d. fromthe university of vermont in organic chemistry in 1978. as a national researchawardee (nih) he did his postdoctoral work at colorado state university.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200appendix awilliam r. roush is warner lambert/parke davis professor of chemistry at theuniversity of michigan. he received his b.s. from the university of california,los angeles, in 1974 and his ph.d. from harvard university in 1977. his research area is organic chemistry, with specialized interests in organic synthesisand natural products chemistry, stereochemistry of organic reactions, development of new methods and regents, asymmetric synthesis, and oligosaccharidesynthesis.michael l. shuler is director and professor of the school of chemical engineering and director of bioengineering at cornell university. he received hisb.s. from the university of notre dame in 1969 and his ph.d. from the university of minnesota in 1973. his research area is chemical engineering with specialized interests in mathematical models of cellular growth, plant cell suspensioncultures, utilization of genetically modified cells, insect cell cultures, novelbioreactors, environmental biotechnology, and pharmacokinetic models and cellculture analog systems. he is a member of the national academy of engineering.jeffrey j. siirola is a research fellow in the chemical process research laboratory at eastman chemical company in kingsport, tn. he received his b.s.degree in chemical engineering from the university of utah in 1967 and his ph.d.in chemical engineering from the university of wisconsinmadison in 1970. hisresearch centers on chemical processing, including chemical process synthesis,computeraided conceptual process engineering, engineering design theory andmethodology, chemical technology, assessment, resource conservation and recovery, artificial intelligence, nonnumeric (symbolic) computer programming,and chemical engineering education. he is a member of the national academy ofengineering.george m. whitesides is mallinckrodt professor of chemistry at harvard university. he received his a.b. from harvard college in 1960 and his ph.d. fromthe california institute of technology in 1964. his research areas are materialsscience and organic chemistry, with specific focus in surface chemistry, materials science, selfassembly, capillary electrophoresis, organic solid state, molecular virology, directed ligand discovery, and protein chemistry. he is a member ofthe national academy of sciences, and he received the u.s. national medal ofscience in 1998.peter g. wolynes is professor of chemistry and biochemistry at the universityof california, san diego. he was previously professor of chemistry at the university of illinois at urbanachampaign. he received his a.b. from indiana university in 1971 and his ph.d. from harvard university in 1976. his research areais physical chemistry with specialized interests in chemical physics of condensedmatter, quantum dynamics and reaction kinetics in liquids, dynamics of complexbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a201fluids, phase transitions and the glassy state, and biophysical applications of statistical mechanics, especially protein folding. he is a member of the nationalacademy of sciences.richard n. zare is marguerite blake wilbur professor in natural science in thedepartment of chemistry at stanford university. he received his b.a. in 1961and his ph.d. in 1964 from harvard university. his research areas are physicaland analytical chemistry with specialized interests in application of lasers tochemical problems, molecular structure, molecular reaction dynamics, and chemical analysis. zare has been a member of various nrc committees and served ascochair of the commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applications and chair of the national science board. he is a member of the nationalacademy of sciences, and he received the u.s. national medal of science in1983.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202bstatement of taskthe overview report will identify recent advances and current challenges infundamental understanding of the basic science, and it will explore the impactbeyond the chemical sciences that these advances have had in the past. it will alsoexplore the possibilities for such impact in the future, recognizing that such developments are frequently serendipitous. issues to be addressed include:¥discovery: identify major discoveries or advances in the chemical sciences during the last several decades, and evaluate their impactñincluding thelength of time for impact beyond basic chemical sciences to be realized.¥interfaces: identify the major discoveries and challenges at the interfacesbetween chemistry/chemical engineering and such areas as biology, environmental science, materials science, medicine, and physics.¥challenges: identify the grand challenges that exist in the chemical sciences today. explore how advances at the interfaces create new challenges in thecore disciplines.¥infrastructure: identify infrastructure that will be required to allow thepotential of future advances in the chemical sciences to be realized. identify opportunities that exist to integrate research and teaching, broaden the participationof underrepresented groups, improve the infrastructure for research and education, and demonstrate the value of these activities to society.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.203ccontributorswhen the challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century projectwas initiated in 2000, the committee solicited input from the chemical sciencescommunity. a specific request for input was sent via email to a large number ofscientists and engineers, and a general request for information appeared in chemical & engineering news.1 in addition to the responses to these requests, inputfrom the broader community was obtained as the committee wrote this report,when individual members of the committee consulted with their colleagues toobtain specific and detailed technical input. the committee is pleased to acknowledge the assistance of all these contributors:harold m. agnew, san diego supercomputer centermikael akke, lund universityrobert j. angelici, iowa state universitygary c. april, university of alabamamick j. apted, monitor scientificfrances h. arnold, california institute of technologydavid awschalom, university of california, santa barbararobert e. babcock, university of arkansaschristina a. bailey, california polytechnic state universityjames k. bashkin, monsanto companypatricia a. baisden, lawrence livermore national laboratoryr. stephen berry, university of chicago1òyour ideas, please!ó madeleine jacobs, editorinchief, chemical & engineering news, 78(14),april 3, 2000.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204appendix cbruce j. berne, columbia universitylorenz t. biegler, carnegie mellon universitymary p. boyle, george mason universityjohn f. brady, california institute of technologyjeanclaude bradley, drexel universitythomas b. brill, university of delawarejoseph f. bunnett, university of california, santa cruzlaurie j. butler, university of chicagorichard a. caldwell, university of texas, dallasarthur cammersgoodwin, university of kentuckyjames a. carroll, university of nebraskaa. welford castleman, jr., the pennsylvania state universityarup k. chakraborty, university of california, berkeleymichael j. clarke, boston collegeedward l. clennan, university of wyominggeoff w. coates, cornell universityrobert graham cooks, purdue universitypeter t. cummings, vanderbilt universitychristopher c. cummins, massachusetts institute of technologydady b. dadyburjor, west virginia universitymark e. davis, california institute of technologyrobert h. davis, university of coloradoken a. dill, university of california, san franciscofrank j. disalvo, cornell universityjerry r. ebner, monsanto companywarren eister, gaithersburg, md.arthur b. ellis, university of wisconsinmadisonj. eric enholm, university of floridathomas p. fehlner, university of notre damedan feldheim, north carolina state universityl. frank flora, united states department of agriculturehenry c. foley, the pennsylvania state universityfelice frankel, massachusetts institute of technologyglenn h. fredrickson, university of california, santa barbararichard friesner, columbia universitysujata gamage, ohio state universitybruce c. gates, university of california, davisrobert e. gawley, university of miamiandrew j. gellman, carnegie mellon universitythomas f. george, university of wisconsinstevens pointjudith c. giordan, aileron partnerswayne l. gladfelter, university of minnesotadavid s. glueck, dartmouth collegebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c205david b. graves, university of california, berkeleystephen e. griffin, innovaquartz, inc.michael l. gross, washington universitygeorges a. guiochon, the university of tennesseejane halverson, yale universitybryce e. hathoorn, deere & companysteinar hauan, carnegie mellon universityjames f. haw, university of southern california, university parkfred m. hawkridge, virginia commonwealth universityheinz heinemann, lawrence berkeley national laboratoryjoseph j. helble, university of connecticutgeorge r. helz, university of maryland, college parkcraig l. hill, emory universitygeorge m. homsy, university of california, santa barbarapaul a. jennings, florida institute of technologymichael p. harold, duponthoward e. katz, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesjames r. katzer, exxonmobilc. judson king, university of california, office of the presidentdouglas a. klumpp, california state polytechnic universitygustavo larsen, university of nebraskalincolnronald g. larson, university of michiganrobert l. letsinger, northwest universitynathan s. lewis, california institute of technologyjames w. libby, dupont (retired)stephen j. lippard, massachusetts institute of technologyraul f. lobo, university of delawarenichalos t. loux, environmental protection agencyandrew j. lovinger, national science foundationpeter lykos, illinois institute of technologypatricia ann mabrouk, northeastern universitypreston j. macdougall, middle tennessee state universityalexander maclachlan, dupont (retired)vladimir mahalec, aspen technology, inc.wolfgang marquardt, rheinischwestf−lische technische hochschule aachenalan g. marshall, florida state universitystephen l. matson, sepracor, inc.james m. mayer, university of washingtondavid mccollum, merck & company, inc.henry a. mcgee, jr., virginia commonwealth universitythomas j. meyer, los alamos national laboratorylarry l. miller, university of minnesotascott j. miller, boston collegebeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206appendix ckaren w. morse, western washington universityheather s. mortell, neenah, wis.james s. murday, national research laboratorycatherine j. murphy, university of south carolinajames y. oldshue, oldshue technologies international, inc.thomas l. netzel, georgia state universitymark nicholas, astrazeneca internationaltucker norton, dupontjames s. nowick, university of california, irvineralph g. nuzzo, university of illinois, urbanachampaignbabatunde a. ogunnaike, dupontjulio m. ottino, northwestern universitycostas c. pantelides, imperial college, londonleo a. paquette, the ohio state universitydavid h. petering, university of wisconsinmilwaukeegene petersen, national renewable energy laboratorysteve picataggio, dupontthomas j. pinnavaia, michigan state universityelizabeth j. podlaha, louisiana state universitytomas d. pollard, the salk institute of biological studiesstephen w. ragsdale, university of nebraskathomas b. rauchfuss, university of illinois, urbanachampaignmichael reagan, van dyke, pace, and westlakeelsa reichmanis, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesr. russel rhinehart, north oklahoma state universitywilliam rosen, university of rhode islandjohn ross, stanford universityjames f. roth, air products and chemicals, inc. (retired)william b. russel, princeton universitylynn m. russell, princeton universitysarah c. rutan, virginia commonwealth universitydalibor sames, columbia universityedward t. samulski, university of north carolinastanley i. sandler, university of delawarealfred p. sattelberger, los alamos national laboratorymartin saunders, yale universityjacqueline savani, university of california, santa barbararichard h. schlosberg, bridgewater, n.j.fred g. schreiber, livingston, n.j.james scinta, phillips petroleumedmund g. seebauer, university of illinois, urbanachampaignraymond seltzer, ciba specialty chemicals companyfred r. sheldon, yale universitybeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c207david a. shirley, lawrence berkeley laboratoryjames p. shoffner, columbia collegepanagiotis g. smirniotis, university of cincinnatipaul h. smith, united states department of energyedward i. solomon, stanford universityjack solomon, praxairgabor a. somorjai, university of california, berkeleydavid m. stanbury, auburn universityarnold f. stancell, georgia institute of technologywayne e. steinmetz, pomona collegej. fraser stoddart, university of california, los angelescarlyle b. storm, gordon research conferencesrex c. stratton, pacific northwest national laboratoryeric m. stuve, university of washingtonwilliam c. stwalley, university of connecticutkimberly thomas, los alamos national laboratoryrandolph p. thummel, university of houstonpaul f. torrence, northern arizona universityjoan s. valentine, university of california, los angelesdavid e.w. vaughan, pennsylvania state universitydavid l. venezky, naval research laboratoryjohn g. verkade, iowa state universitydionisios g. vlachos, university of massachusettsdavid l. van vranken, university of california, irvinerobert s. weber, arthur d. little, inc.john c. wright, university of wisconsinmadisonjohn t. yates, university of pittsburghahmed h. zewail, california institute of technologysteven c. zimmerman, university of illinois, urbanachampaignraymond r. zolandz, dupontcharles f. zukoski, university of illinois, urbanachampaignbeyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.209indexaab initio methods, 58, 79, 82, 90absorption techniques, 57. see also individualtechniquesactivation barriers, 42adaptive materials, 144145addressable molecules, 140adhesivessynthetic, 127adsorptive microfiltration membranes, 3940advanced discretecontinuous optimization, 91affinity membranes, 40age of the molecule, the, 14agingchemistry of, 121airport securityat checkpoints, 65detecting explosives in baggage, 56algorithmscomputational, 61nonlinear optimization, 87allara, 135alternatives to fossil fuels, 163165nuclear energy, 164165solar energy, 163164water and wind, 165altman, sidney, 112alzheimerõs disease, 115american chemical society (acs), 15, 158,186, 189190american institute of chemical engineers(aiche), 158ammoniamanufacturing, 3031amphiphilic molecules, 130amundson, neal r., 12amundson report. see frontiers in chemicalengineering: research needs andopportunitiesanalysisclinical, 56highthroughput, 31, 70process, 68of solutions, 58analytical characterizationcritical in pharmaceutical products, 56analytical chemistry, 17, 6368, 173macromolecules and biomacromolecules,6566process analysis, 68sample complexity, 6465sensitivity, 6364small dimensions, 6667throughput of analytical information, 67analytical informationthroughput of, 67†ngstrım scale processes, 79beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210indexanthrax, 174175antiinflammatory drugs, 101selectivity and, 108110antibioticsbacterial resistance to, 115polyketide, 103applicationsinteracting with fundamental research, 12applied chemistry, 17, 42arachidonic acid, 108architecturecomputer, 72microchannel, 3738of molecules, threedimensional, 57aromatic compounds, 23artificial enzymes, 53artificial kidneys, 102artificial noses, 57, 65assessing the value of research in thechemical sciences, 14asymmetric centers, 43atmospheric and environmental chemistry, 5,148159atom economy, 25atomic force microscope (afm), 136atpmultistep synthesis of, 48auger photoelectron spectroscopy (aes), 66azeotropic separations, 84bball, philip, 15base pairing, 112basfcorporate network optimization by, 8889bayhdole act of 1980, 20bednorz, johannes g., 28bell laboratories, 135benzene, 23beyond the molecular frontier: challenges forthe chemical sciences, 13binding energies, 59biocatalytic systemsdeveloping more selective, 34biochemical chemistry, 17biochemical engineering, 101105largescale production of proteins fromrecombinant dna using suspensions ofanimal cells, 103105biocompatible surface layersadding to materials, 135bioengineering and biotechnologychemical science integral to, 18bioinformatics, 98biological aspects of military security, 174175biological metabolic networks, 53biological terrorism, 5, 174175biologychemistry underlying, 4interface with, 4, 95122biomacromolecules, 6566biomimetic catalysts, 52biomimetic chemistry, 27, 118, 135biomimetic synthesis, 3132biopolymers, 65time scales within, 81bioreactorshumandesign, 105bioremediation, 154155, 157biosensorsimplanted, 122birth control, 158block copolymers, 5051, 126bloodbrain barrier, 117, 122board on chemical sciences and technology(bcst), 1, 6, 13, 14bohr, neils, 1213boyer, paul, 48boyle, robert, 49brain tumorstreating, 117branching (macromolecules), 139breslow, ronald, 15brown, herbert, 28brownian dynamics, 77bureau of labor statistics, 186business considerations, 73. see also capitalefficiency; commercialization;commodity products; profitability ofthe chemical industryccalmodlin structures, 46capacitive chargingquantized, 138capillary electrophoresis (ce), 65capital efficiency, 36carbohydrate òcodeócracking, 101beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index211carbon dioxide emissions, 34, 150151, 156157,162163, 169carbon fibers, 125carbon monoxide detectors, 65carbon sequestration, 163carbon sheetsaromaticity of, 134carbon structures, 133135carbonylation, 34carboxylation, 34carnot, sadi, 49catalysissynthesis by, 3031catalystsbiomimetic, 52efficient, 42libraries of, 33metalbased, 29, 125platinum, 49research opportunities in, 14, 27solid, 52synthetic, 53catalytic activitypredicting, 76catalytic antibodies, 32catalytic converters, 151catalytic reagents, 153catalytic systemsdeveloping more selective, 34cech, thomas, 112celanese fibersòcapability to promiseó at, 89celecoxib, 109central dogma, 97ceramics, 133135overcoming fragility of, 134challenges for the chemical sciences in the21st century, 67. see also frontiers inchemical engineering: research needsand opportunitieschallenges for the future of chemistry andchemical engineering. see also goals;grand challengesprioritizing, 7chargecoupled devices (ccds), 146chemical aspectsof military security, 175176chemical compoundsrate of creation of, 18chemical engineeringevolution as a distinct discipline, 19formal origin of, 17nfulltime graduate students in, 183the practice of, 181chemical engineersinvolvement in product design, 29chemical industrypublic opinion of, 190chemical kinetic studies, 4344chemical plants, 19chemical processesredesigning for safety and easiercommercialization, 10, 193chemical reactor modeling, 29chemical sciencescurrent status of, 1defined, 2involving creation as well as discovery, 17subdisciplines of, 1617unlocking the worldõs mysteries, 21chemical supply chain, 74chemical terrorism, 5chemical theory and computer modeling, 4, 7194in integration of the chemical supply chain,91in process control, 91process systems engineering, 9092process systems engineering in process andproduct design, 91in r&d and process operations, 91chemical transformations of matter, 23, 4154chemical vapor deposition (cvd), 136chemically functional membranes, 3839chemistry. see also analytical chemistry;applied chemistry; atmospheric andenvironmental chemistry; biochemicalchemistry; combinatorial chemistry;computational chemistry; greenchemistry; inorganic chemistry;medicinal chemistry; organicchemistry; physical chemistry; syntheticchemistry; theoretical chemistryof aging, 121fulltime graduate students in, 183interface with biology and medicine, 4, 95122of memory, 121in motion, 4447the practice of, 181promoting awareness of its contributions tosociety, 10, 193194beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212indexchemistry: opportunities and needs, 1, 11chemistry today and tomorrow: the central,useful, and creative science, 15chemists and chemical engineersin atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 148in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 41in chemical theory and computer modeling,71in energy, 160161interfacing with biology and medicine, 9596isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures, 55in materials by design, 123in national and personal security, 171synthesis and manufacturing, 2223training, 181184chess analogy, 24chinese hamster ovary (cho) celltransformations, 104105chirality, 32, 43, 99chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs), 150, 152, 154,157cholesterolreducing drugs, 53chromatography, 64. see also gaschromatography; highperformanceliquid chromatographychromium oxidantseliminating, 26clausius, r.j., 49clinical analysis, 56coal gasification, 162colloids, 50, 135quantum box behavior of, 137combinatorial chemistry, 31commercializationredesigning chemical processes for easier,10, 193commodity productsproducing largevolumes of, 19complementary metal oxide semiconductor(cmos) transistorsnonleaking, 72composite materials, 141computational algorithms, 61computational chemistryefficiency in, 40, 61research opportunities in, 14, 98computational steering, 93conducting molecules, 140controlled deliveryof therapeutics, 117118corey, elias j., 28council for chemical research, 187cox2 selectivity, 110cpucycles, 145speed, 72cram, donald j., 32creativity, 28critical pathwaysturning off and on, 116critical pointsphenomena near, 49critical technologies: the role of chemistryand chemical engineering, 6, 1214crutzen, paul, 152crystal engineering, 133135crystallographyneutron, 61xray, 60crystalsliquid, 127ribosome, 112curl, robert f., jr., 134current state of progressin atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 149155in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 4252in chemical theory and computer modeling,8189in creating materials by design, 126138in interfacing with biology and medicine,105111in isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures, 5768in national and personal security, 172173in providing energy for the future, 162169in synthesizing, manufacturing andexploiting new substances and newtransformations, 2529cyclooxygenase (cox) enzymes, 108ddangerous substances and organismsdetecting and identifying, 8, 56, 174178,191192ddt, 152, 154beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index213dendrimers, 139densityfunctional theory (dft) calculations, 82improving, 89department of agriculture (doa), 188department of defense (dod), 188department of energy (doe), 188design of new materials, 45, 123147designing the molecular world: chemistry atthe frontier, 15detection technologies, 174deuteriumreplacing hydrogen atoms by, 43diesenhofer, johann, 119differential algebraic equations (daes), 87diffraction techniques, 6062dill, ken, 8081disjunctive programminggeneralized, 85displacement reactions, 25dnamolecular structure of, 4docking status, 45doppler shift, 60draper prize, 48, 118dynamic simulation, 86dynamics. see brownian dynamics; moleculardynamics; stokesian dynamics;thermodynamicseearthunderstanding its complex chemistry tomaintain its livability, 9, 193earth systems engineering, 149eastman chemical, 35ebola virus, 115ecotechnologygreen materials and, 142143ecosystemsimportance of maintaining, 97edison, thomas, 1213educatorsõ role, 184electric fieldsexternal, 51electro and magnetorheological (er/mr)fluids, 144electrochemical cells, 166167electrodeschemically modified, 67electrolytespolymer, 125electron beam writing, 137electron diffraction, 61electron microscopy, 118electron spin resonance (esr) spectroscopy, 57electron tunneling, 136electronic commerce, 33electronic materials, 130133electronic spectroscopies, 5960electrophoresis, 64. see also capillaryelectrophoresis (ce)electrorheology, 78electrospray ionization (esi), 62, 66elimination reactions, 25emission techniques, 57. see also individualtechniquesempirical invention, 12energy for the future, 5, 160170developing unlimited and inexpensive, 910,193distributing, 169electrochemical cells, 166167fuel cells, 167168generating, 162163reducing need for, 84storage batteries, 168169energy transferunderstanding and predicting, 90environment. see atmospheric andenvironmental chemistryenvironmental protection agency (epa), 188enzyme membrane reactor, 39enzymesubstrate complex, 3132enzymesartificial, 53properties of, 53equationsmultiparameter, 49of state, 49ernst, richard, 58erythropoietin, 102european chemical industry council, 190evans aldol reaction, 99excited states, 76energy of particles used for, 57laser energy used for, 48, 64transformations of, 53execution speedsinglethreaded, 92beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214indexexplosives. see also nuclear weaponsdetecting in airplane baggage, 56in military security, 176177extent of reaction, 68ffacecenteredcubic crystals, 51fast fouriertransform techniques, 61federal fundingfor research in science and engineering, 2021, 187188femtosecond time scale, 3, 77spectroscopy in, 52fenn, john b., 62field flow fractionation, 64fischer, emil, 3fisher, ernest o., 28floppy molecules, 57flow processes, 50synthesizing, 84fluid mechanics, 7778fluids. see also microfluidicselectro and magnetorheological, 144structured, 51fluorescencelaserinduced, 64fluorescence resonance energy transfer(fret), 44, 146foldingpolypeptide, 76protein, 90, 94food and drug administration (fda), 104fossil fuelsalternatives to, 163165combustion of, 34, 151fractionationfield flow, 64free electron lasersresearch opportunities in, 14frontiers in chemical engineering: researchneeds and opportunities, 1, 1112fuel cells, 167168fuel efficiency, 151fukui, kenichi, 48fullerenes, 134future challenges and opportunitiesin atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 155159in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 5254in chemical theory and computer modeling,8994in creating materials by design, 138146in interfacing with biology and medicine,111121in isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures,6870in national and personal security, 174178in providing energy for the future, 169170in synthesizing, manufacturing andexploiting new substances and newtransformations, 2940ggamma emissions, 60gas chromatography (gc), 65gas chromatography/mass spectrometry(gc/ms), 65gasification, 34of coal, 162gasolinemobil process for converting methanol to, 52production of, 4849gastropathynsaid, 108gene manipulation, 53gene therapy, 96genentech, inc., 104genetic engineering, 163genetic predispositions to disease, 120genetic screening, 115genomic sequence, 9799genomics, 115geometric requirementsof enzymes, 43giant magnetoresistance (gmr) effect, 72materials demonstrating, 144gibbs, j. willard, 49gilbert, w., 119glassy polymers, 126global optimization, 85globalizationof the chemical enterprise, 33òglycomics,ó 101glycosylation, 122goalsachieving, 56, 180194in atmospheric and environmentalchemistry, 149beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index215in chemical and physical transformations ofmatter, 4142in chemical theory and computer modeling,7581in creating materials by design, 124126in interfacing with biology and medicine,96105in isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring substances and structures,5557in national and personal security, 172in providing energy for the future, 161in synthesizing, manufacturing andexploiting new substances and newtransformations, 2325government role, 186189grand challenges, 810, 190194attracting the brightest students into thechemical sciences, 10, 194designing and developing selfoptimizingchemical systems, 10, 193designing and producing new materials anddevices with predictable properties, 89,192detecting and identifying dangeroussubstances and organisms, 8, 191192developing medicines and therapies that cancure untreatable diseases, 9, 192developing new materials and measurementdevices, 8, 191192developing selfassembly to synthesize andmanufacture complex systems andmaterials, 9, 192193developing unlimited and inexpensiveenergy, 910, 193learning to synthesize and manufacture newsubstances, 8, 191promoting awareness of chemistryõscontributions to society, 10, 193194protecting citizens against terrorism, 8, 191192redesigning chemical processes for safetyand easier commercialization, 10, 193understanding and controlling howmolecules react, 8, 192understanding the chemistry of livingsystems in detail, 9, 192understanding the earthõs complexchemistry to maintain its livability, 9,193granular media, 78green chemistry, 34, 152153green materialsand ecotechnology, 142143hhadju, j., 6162haensel, vladimir, 48handedness, 4344hauptmann, herbert, 62hazard reduction, 34heavy metalssoil contamination from, 154heeger, alan j., 164herbicides, 152herschbach, dudley, 48hierarchical computationsfor conceptual design, 92highfield nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr)spectroscopy, 66highperformance liquid chromatography(hplc), 65highthroughput analysis, 31, 70highvolumetric productivity, 37higher order structures, 139highly complex moleculessynthesis of, 25hoffmann, roald, 48huber, robert, 119humandesign bioreactors, 105human genomesequencing, 4, 48, 119120human genome project, 65, 67, 69, 113114,119human immunodeficiency virus (hiv1), 98100, 115protease inhibitors, 100replication cycle, 99hybrid materials, 141hydroelectric dams, 165hydrogenas a fuel, 166167, 170hypothesisdriven science and technology, 68iimage analysis, 144imaging substances and structures, 34, 5570beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216indeximpact of advances in computing andcommunications technologies onchemical science and technology, the,14inflammatory conditions, 101influenza, 115informationdriven science and technology, 68informationmodeling tools, 92information technologyadvances in, 87infrared spectroscopy, 59inorganic chemistry, 17of metallic elements, 31insecticides, 157instrumentationchemical, 3miniaturized, 67òsmart,ó 68integrated process/product design/optimization(ippdo) applications, 9394integrationof the chemical supply chain, 91of scientific fields, 20intellectual property rights, 20interfaces between phases, 125intermolecular interactionsharnessing, 127internetadvances in, 8788, 92interparticle forces, 51interstellar gas clouds, 59inventionspredictability of, 15ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry(icrms), 62ion mobility spectrometry (ims), 65iron age, 126iron oresmelting, 162isolating substances and structures, 34, 5570isotope effects, 43jjacobsen epoxidation, 99kkarle, jerome, 62ketone groupsincorporating into polyethylene, 143kidneysartificial, 102kinetics. see also chemical kinetic studies;pharmacokinetic models; reaction ratesand reaction engineering, 17knowles, william s., 32kohn, walter, 8182kroto, harold w., 134llaboratory reactionsv. manufacturing, 2627land minesdetecting, 56, 174langer, robert, 117118langmuir, irving, 12largescale differentialalgebraic models, 91largescale production of proteinsfrom recombinant dna using suspensionsof animal cells, 103105lasers. see also xray laser sourcesused for excitation, 48, 64law enforcement, 173layered materialsand surface modification, 135136lee, yuan, 48lehn, jeanmarie, 32length scalesspanning, 7881leukotriene modifiers, 106107librariesof catalysts, 33screening rapidly, 31light scattering, 50liquid crystals, 127, 135living polymerizations, 139living systemsunderstanding their chemistry in detail, 9,9698, 192mmacdiarmid, alan g., 164macromolecular assemblies, 119macromolecular therapeutics, 117macromolecules, 6566mad cow disease, 114made to measure: new materials for the 21stcentury, 15beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index217magnetic fieldsexternal, 51magnetic levitation, 131magnetic materials, 130133magnetic nanostructuresdispersed, 130magnetooptical spin control, 132magnetorheology, 78manmachine hybrids, 138manufacturing, 3336biomimetic synthesis, 3132catalysis, 3031combinatorial chemistry, 31creating and exploiting new substances andnew transformations, 2, 8, 2240development of new synthetic methodology,30emerging platforms for processintensification and miniaturization,3640new substances, criteria required of, 24selfassembly, 3233manufacturing reactionsv. laboratory, 2627marcus, rudolf, 48mass spectrometry (ms), 62, 66materials by design, 45, 123147adaptive and responsive materials, 144145adding biocompatible surface layers to, 135analysis and simulation, 143144anisotropic strength of, 127ceramics, carbon structures, and crystalengineering, 133135composite and hybrid materials, 141electronic, optoelectronic, photonic,magnetic, and superconductingmaterials, 130133green materials and ecotechnology, 142143higher order structures, 139layered materials and surface modification,135136molecular electronic materials, 140nanomaterials, 136138semiconductor processing, 140surface modification and interfaces withbiology and electronics, 141142synthetic polymers and selfassembly, 126130templating, 139tools, resources, and infrastructures, 145146mathematical modeling and analysis, 19matrix assisted laser ionizationdesorption(maldi), 62, 66measurement devices for substances andstructures, 34, 5570developing, 8, 191192with predictable properties, 89, 192measurement science, 6368macromolecules and biomacromolecules,6566process analysis, 68sample complexity, 6465sensitivity, 6364small dimensions, 6667throughput of analytical information, 67media. see also news mediagranular, 78medicinal chemistry, 4, 95122developing cures for untreatable diseases, 9,192synergy with biology, 30memorychemistry of, 121mercury pollution, 158merrifield, robert bruce, 29metabolic engineering, 103, 122metabolic processesneed to balance, 121metal armorreplacing, 174metalbased catalysts, 29, 125metal hydrides, 167metallocenes, 28metalloprotein catalysis, 118metastable states, 142methane, 150151converting to methanol, 31methanolconverting methane to, 31as a fuel, 168mobil process for converting to gasoline, 52methyl acetate columns, 35, 37methyl tertiarybutyl ether (mtbe), 152micelles, 139michel, hartmut, 119micro heat exchangers, 38microchannel architecture, 3738microcontact printing, 129microelectromechanical systems (mems), 128analytical instrumentation using, 146microelectronics, 136beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218indexmicrofabricationon silicon, 122microfluidics, 51microphase separation, 51military security, 172177biological, 174175chemical, 175176explosives, 176177nuclear and radiological, 176miniaturized instrumentation, 67. see alsoprocess intensification andminiaturizationminoritiesattracting to chemistry, 5, 183mobil processfor converting methanol to gasoline, 52model predictive control (mpc), 87modeling, 8589of molecules, 83of selfassembly, 144and simulation, 77molecular calculations, 144molecular complexes, 32molecular dynamics, 77multidimensional techniques in, 58molecular electronic materials, 140molecular frontier, 7, 21, 183molecularlevel constructionof structures, 124molecular mechanics, 7677molecular medicine, 116molecular recognition, 116molecular signalingòtuning,ó 111molecules. see also biomacromolecules;intermolecular interactions;macromolecules; singlemoleculespectroscopy; supramolecularassembliesaddressable, 140amphiphilic, 130conducting, 140floppy, 57interesting topography of, 25modeling, 83observing individual, 3switchable, 140synthesis of highly complex, 25threedimensional architecture of, 57understanding and controlling reactions of,8, 192volatilizing, 62molina, mario, 152monte carlo methods, 7778mooreõs law, 72mıssbauer spectroscopy, 60muller, karl a., 28mller, paul, 152multidimensional techniquesin molecular dynamics, 58multimolecular photosynthetic reaction center,119multiple instruction, multiple data (mimd)computer architecture, 72coordination of, 92multistep synthesis, 24of atp, 48mutantsselection of, 33nnanoparticles, 51nanocomposite materialsorganized, 141nanoimprint lithography, 137nanolithography, 51nanomaterials, 136138nanoporesmembranes containing, 138nanoscience and nanotechnology, 32synthetic v. natural, 125nanotubes, 136137, 139national academy of engineering, 147draper prize, 48, 118national institutes of health (nih), 187national research council (nrc), 176board on chemical sciences andtechnology (bcst), 1, 6, 13, 14chemical sciences roundtable, 14national science foundation (nsf), 188national security, 5, 63, 171179natta, giulio, 28nature as a chemistextending synthetically, 23highly innovative, 97nearcritical transition phenomenon, 50negative ionsphotodetachment of, 59nematodes, 100neurodegenerative diseases, 115neurotransmitterssinglevesicle release of, 67beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index219neutron crystallography, 61new materials, 8, 2240designing, 45, 123147developing, 8, 191192learning to synthesize and manufacture, 8,191with predictable properties, 89, 192new transformations, 8, 2240news media, 184185nitrogenase, 118nobel prizes in chemistry, 3, 25, 2829, 32, 42,4849, 58, 62, 81, 112, 119, 134, 152,164nonbiological polymerstime scales within, 81nonprotein enzyme mimics, 32nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs(nsaids), 108noyori, ryoji, 32nuclear energy, 164165nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr)instruments, 46, 5758, 98, 118, 184pulsed, 59nuclear structure spectroscopies, 60nuclear weaponsand military security, 165, 173, 176nucleotide sequences, 112nuzzo, ralph g., 135oodor detection, 57, 65olah, george a., 42oligomeric materialstailoring, 140oligonucleotide synthesis, 119opportunities in chemistry, 1, 11optical fibers, 130optical propertiesswitchable, 127optimization, 8589advanced discretecontinuous, 91global, 85nonlinear algorithms for, 87optoelectronic materials, 130133organelles, 65organic chemistry, 17organismsdetecting and identifying dangerous, 8, 191192organometallic reagents, 52organsdeveloping semisynthetic, 96, 121oxidationpartial, 34performing safely, 26oxidationreduction reactions, 166ozone layerdepletion of, 150ppaclitaxel, 102synthesizing, 26paintswaterbased, 127palladiumcatalysis by, 27parallelizable tasks, 9293particlesused for excitation, 57pasteur, louis, 1213pedersen, charles j., 32penicillinlargescale production of, 102synthesizing, 24personal security, 173, 177178pharmaceutical productsanalytical characterization critical in, 56controlled release of, 102pharmaciaupjohn, 89pharmacokinetic models, 102phase transition phenomenon, 4950phasesinterfaces between, 125photodetachmentof negative ions, 59photodissociation, 46photoexcitation, 52photoionization, 59photolithography, 128129, 136using uv wavelengths, 138photonic materials, 130133photosynthetic reaction centermultimolecular, 119photosynthetic systems, 27, 150, 163photovoltaics, 164physical chemistry, 17, 29physical transformations of matter, 23, 4154pimentel, george, 11pimentel report. see opportunities in chemistrypioglitazone, 120beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220indexplasticsmanufacturing, 49platforms for process intensification andminiaturization, 3640enzyme membrane reactor, 39methyl acetate columns, 35, 37micro heat exchangers, 38silicon chip, 38platinumcatalysis by, 27reforming, 49plutoniumweaponsgrade, 173polanyi, john, 48poly(dimethyl siloxane) (pdms), 128129polydispersity, 146polyethyleneincorporating ketone groups into, 143polyketide antibiotics, 103polymer blends, 50molecule alignment within, 50polymer electrolytes, 125polymerase chain reaction (pcr) techniques,114, 119polymeric materials, 19. see also biopolymers;block copolymerselectrically conductive, 164glassy, 126research opportunities in, 14rubbery, 126synthesizing, 29, 49, 65polymerizationsliving, 139polypeptidescalculating folding of, 76synthesizing, 29polysaccharideschemistry of, 100101pople, john, 8182postgenomic therapies, 120121pioglitazone, 120rosiglitazone, 120potential energy curves, 47powder diffraction, 60precessioninducing, 131predictabilityof catalytic activity, 76designing and producing new materials anddevices with, 89, 76, 192of energy transfers, 90of inventions, 15prion diseases, 114private foundations, 186189process analysis, 68. see also chemicalprocesses; flow processes; transportprocessesprocess control, 91process engineering technologiesfor manufacturing, 35process intensification and miniaturizationemerging platforms for, 3640enzyme membrane reactor, 39methyl acetate columns, 35, 37micro heat exchangers, 38silicon chip, 38process simulationrevolution in, 8687process synthesis, 8485process systems engineering, 17, 8392increasing profitability of, 8889modeling and optimization, 8589in process and product design, 91processing plantszeroeffluent, 143productivity. see highvolumetric productivityprofitability of the chemical industrysupplychain management increasing, 8889promises to customerscapability to make, 89prosperity, 180prostaglandin synthesis, 109prostate screening antigen (psa) test, 114protectionof citizens against terrorism, 8, 191192of health and the environment, 34protein structurepredicting, 76proteinscrystallizing, 61folding of, 90, 94synthesizing, 29, 112proteomics, 114115pulsed nmr spectroscopy, 59pure science, 12qquadrant model of scientific research, 1213, 20quantized capacitive charging, 138quantum bits, 131quantum box behaviorof colloids, 137beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index221quantum computation, 75, 131133magnetooptical spin control, 132quantum corrals, 66quantum dotscdse, 51quantum mechanics, 7576quantum wells, 133rradiological aspectsof military security, 176rain forestsimportance of maintaining, 97raman spectroscopy, 59, 66rate. see reaction ratesr&dand process operations, 91reaction cascades, 53reaction engineeringkinetics and, 17reaction pathways, 42reaction productsrelative proportions of, 56reaction rateseffects of, 43increasing, 142predicting, 76reactionsdisplacement, 25elimination, 25excited state, 76extent of, 68manufacturing v. laboratory, 2627oxidationreduction, 166putting laser energy into, 48in a vacuum, 48reactive distillation, 36reagentsorganometallic, 52redesign of chemical processesfor safety and easier commercialization, 10,193research. see also r&d; scientific researchsynthetic, 56research teams and partnerships: trends inthe chemical sciences, 14responsible care, 151, 159, 189responsive materials, 144145rheology, 50ribonucleasecleavage of rna by, 48ribosomes, 112113ribozyme molecules, 45tetrahymena group i, 44rnacleavage by ribonuclease, 48robotsmilitary, 174rofecoxib, 109rosiglitazone, 120rotational spectroscopies, 59rowland, f. sherwood, 152royal society of chemistry (great britain), 14rubbery polymers, 126ssafetyredesigning chemical processes for, 10, 193sample complexity, 6465samuelsson, bengt, 106107sandwich compounds, 28sanger, f., 119scalebridging, 7881scanning probe microscopy (spm), 137, 146scanning tunneling microscopy (stm), 6667,130, 136school childrenattracting to chemistry, 6schrıdinger wave equation, 75, 81sciencepure, 12scientific computing, 9294scientific researchfundamental, interactions with applications, 12need for more interactions among chemists,engineers, biologists, and physicists, 126quadrant model of, 1213secondorder phase transition phenomenon, 50secondary ion mass spectrometry (sims), 66selectionvital in chemical selfassembly, 33selective asthma therapy, 105107leukotriene formation, 106selectivity and antiinflammatory drugs, 108110celecoxib, 109cox2 selectivity, 110nsaid gastropathy, 108prostaglandin synthesis, 109rofecoxib, 109beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222indexselfassembled monolayers (sams), 127, 129interrogating, 146thiol, 135selfassembly, 51chemical, 33modeling, 144synthesis by, 9, 3233, 137, 192193synthetic polymers and, 126130selfoptimizing chemical systemsdesigning and developing, 10, 193semiconductor processing, 140semiconductors, 130gaas, 132sandwiches of compound heterostructures,133sensitivity, 6364separation technologieshybrid, 65novel, 35separationsazeotropic, 84september 11 attacks, 172serotonin, 110sharpless, k. barry, 32sharpless epoxidation, 99shaw, george bernard, 28shirakawa, hideki, 164silicon chip, 38singlemolecule spectroscopy, 64singlethreaded execution speed, 92slow reacting substance of anaphylaxis (srsa), 105106small dimensions, 6667smallscale reactors, 51smalley, richard e., 134smallpox, 174175òsmartó devicesfor diabetics, 117for instrumentation, 68soft lithography, 127129, 137, 140, 145solar energy, 163164solid catalysts, 29solutionsanalysis of, 58solventseliminating or replacing, 2425solvophilic and solvophobic regions, 130specificity and therapy for the human brain,110111paxil, 111prozac, 111spectroscopyauger photoelectron, 66electron spin resonance, 57femtosecond, 52highfield nuclear magnetic resonance, 66infrared, 59mıssbauer, 60pulsed nmr, 59raman, 66singlemolecule, 64surface enhanced raman, 66ultraviolet photoelectron, 59xray photoelectron, 58spin, 131spintronics, 133standard of living differentialroot cause of conflict, 177states of matter. see also excited states;metastable statestransformations between, 49statistical mechanicsand fluid mechanics, 7778stereochemical control, 107stereoregularity, 139stoichiometric reagents, 153stokesian dynamics, 77storage batteries, 168169stories of the invisible: a guided tour ofmolecules, 15structure determination, 5762. see also proteinstructurediffraction techniques, 6062electronic spectroscopies, 5960isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring, 34, 5570mass spectrometry, 62nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopies,58nuclear structure spectroscopies, 60rotational spectroscopies, 59vibrational spectroscopies, 59structured fluids, 51structuresmolecularlevel construction of, 124strychninesynthesizing, 2526studentsattracting into the chemical sciences, 10,183184, 194submicronparticles, 51beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.index223substancesdetecting and identifying dangerous, 8, 191192isolating, identifying, imaging, andmeasuring, 34, 5570physical properties of, 18transformations of, 18, 23sulfur dioxide pollution, 152, 158superconducting materials, 4, 28, 130133, 169hightemperature, 131supercritical co2 (sco2), 156supercritical processing, 156157supplychain managementincreasing profitability of the chemicalindustry through computer tools, 8889supramolecular assemblies, 119, 145surface enhanced raman spectroscopy (sers),66surface modificationand interfaces with biology and electronics,141142layered materials and, 135136surfaces, 29reactions on, 52surfactant solutions, 50sustainability, 34switchable molecules, 140synchrotron radiation, 61synthesisof atp, 48biomimetic, 3132by catalysis, 3031, 53combinatorial chemistry of, 31creating and exploiting new substances andnew transformations, 2, 8, 2240development of new methodologies for, 30and emerging platforms for processintensification and miniaturization, 3640of highly complex molecules, 25in manufacturing, 3336multistep, 24, 48oligonucleotide, 119of proteins, 29, 112by selfassembly, 3233synthetic chemistry, 18, 29, 33synthetic polymersand selfassembly, 126130ttanaka, koichi, 62taube, henry, 48taxol, 102technology vision 2020, 14templating, 139terrorismprotecting citizens against, 8, 165, 179, 191192theoretical chemistry, 17theoryguiding experimental work, 48, 75therapeuticscontrolled delivery of, 117118that can cure untreatable diseases, 9, 192thermal cracking of petroleum, 4849thermodynamicsand chemical property estimation, 17thiol selfassembled monolayers, 135threedimensional architectureof molecules, 57throughput, 37. see also highthroughputanalysisof analytical information, 67timeaveraged structural information, 61time scaleswithin biopolymers and nonbiologicalpolymers, 81in molecular simulation, 8081spanning, 7881tissue engineering, 138tissue plasminogen activator (tpa), 102, 104tissuesdeveloping semisynthetic, 96topographyof molecules, 25trace componentsdetecting, 57tracemetal analysis, 6364transformations. see also synthesisby catalysis, 27defined, 42of excited states, 53interaction between experiment and theory,48inventing new types of, 23, 28visualizing, 47transport processes, 51and separations, 17tricyclic drugs, 111beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineeringcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224indextunneling. see also scanning tunnelingmicroscopy (stm)electron, 136uultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (ups),59unit operationsparadigm of, 19united statesdoctoral scientists and engineers employedin, 186prosperity of, 180universal oil products co. (uop), 48uraniumweaponsgrade, 173uv wavelengthsphotolithography using, 138vvalue preservation and value growth, 85vanõt hoff, jacobus, 3vibrational spectroscopies, 59virus phage packaging, 141visionproduction of, 48volatilization, 63wwald, george, 48walker, john e., 48waste productsminimizing production of, 34water power, 165westheimer, frank, 11westheimer report. see chemistry:opportunities and needswilkinson, geoffrey, 28wilson, kenneth, 49wind energy, 165wireless computing, 93wittig, georg, 28womenattracting to chemistry, 5, 183woodward, robert burns, 25woundhealing, 142xxray absorption fine structure (exafs) data,60xray absorption near edge structure (xanes)data, 60xray crystallography, 6062, 118xray diffraction, 112xray laser sources, 61xray photoelectron spectroscopy (xps), 58zzeolitic materials, 52, 142uses for, 2527zeroeffluent processing plants, 143zewail, ahmed, 42ziegler, karl, 28zincair cells, 166167