detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10640information technology for counterterrorism: immediateactions and future possibilities144 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309087360 | doi 10.17226/10640john l. hennessy, david a. patterson, and herbert s. lin, editors; committee onthe role of information technology in responding to terrorism; computer scienceand telecommunications board; division on engineering and physical sciences;national research councilinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on the role of information technologyin responding to terrorismcomputer science and telecommunications boardjohn l. hennessy, david a. patterson, and herbert s. lin, editorsthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.eduinformation technologyforcounterterrorismimmediate actions andfuture possibilitiesinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press ¥ 500 fifth street, n.w. ¥ washington, dc 20001notice: this project was approved by the governing board of the nationalresearch council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the nationalacademy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute ofmedicine. the members of the committee responsible for this final report werechosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.the study from which this report is largely derived was supported by privatefunds from the national academies. the additional work required to producethis report was supported by core funding from the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb). core support for cstb in this period was provided by the air force office of scientific research, department of energy, national institute of standards and technology, national library of medicine,national science foundation, office of naval research, and the cisco, intel, andmicrosoft corporations. sponsors enable but do not influence cstbõs work. anyopinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provide support for cstb.international standard book number 0309087368library of congress control number: 2003101593copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifthstreet, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 in the washington metropolitan area. internet, http://www.nap.edu.additional copies of this report are available in limited quantity from the computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 500fifth street, n.w., washington, dc 20001. call (202) 3342605 or email the cstbat cstb@nas.edu.copyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americasuggested citation: computer science and telecommunications board, information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilities, thenational academies press, washington, d.c., 2003.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a.wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and,upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair andvice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orginformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcommittee on the role of information technologyin responding to terrorismjohn hennessy, stanford university, chairdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeley, vice chairsteven m. bellovin, at&t laboratoriesw. earl boebert, sandia national laboratoriesdavid borth, motorola labswilliam f. brinkman, lucent technologies (retired)john m. cioffi, stanford universityw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstwilliam p. crowell, cylink inc.jeffrey m. jaffe, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska, university of washingtondavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitydonald norman, northwestern universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitystaffherbert s. lin, senior scientist and study directorsteven woo, program officerdavid drake, senior project assistantinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcomputer science and telecommunications board20022003david d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chaireric benhamou, 3com corporationdavid borth, motorola labsjohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstthomas e. darcie, at&t labs researchjoseph farrell, university of california at berkeleyjoan feigenbaum, yale universityhector garciamolina, stanford universitywendy kellogg, ibm thomas j. watson research centerbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationdavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitydavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt, chicagokent college of lawdaniel pike, classic communicationseric schmidt, google inc.fred schneider, cornell universityburton smith, cray inc.lee sproull, new york universitywilliam stead, vanderbilt universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitystaffmarjory s. blumenthal, executive directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistalan s. inouye, senior program officerjon eisenberg, senior program officerlynette i. millett, program officercynthia a. patterson, program officersteven woo, dissemination officerjanet briscoe, administrative officerrenee hawkins, financial associatedavid padgham, research associatekristen batch, research associatephil hilliard, research associatemargaret huynh, senior project assistantinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vidavid drake, senior project assistantjanice sabuda, senior project assistantjennifer bishop, senior project assistantbrandye williams, staff assistantfor more information on cstb, see its web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, write to cstb, national research council, 500 fifth street,n.w., washington, dc 20001, call at (202) 3342605, or email atcstb@nas.edu.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefaceimmediately following the events of september 11, 2001, the nationalacademies (including the national academy of sciences, the nationalacademy of engineering, the institute of medicine, and the national research council) offered its services to the nation to formulate a scientificand technological response to the challenges posed by emerging terroristthreats that would seek to inflict catastrophic damage on the nationõspeople, its infrastructure, or its economy. specifically, it supported aproject that culminated in a report entitled making the nation safer: therole of science and technology in countering terrorism (the national academies press, washington, d.c.) that was released on june 25, 2002. thatproject, chaired by lewis m. branscomb and richard d. klausner, soughtto identify current threats of catastrophic terrorism, understand the mostlikely vulnerabilities in the face of these threats, and identify highly leveraged opportunities for contributions from science and technology to counterterrorism in both the near term and the long term.taking the material on information technology contained in makingthe nation safer as a point of departure, the committee on the role ofinformation technology in responding to terrorism, identical to thepanel on information technology that advised the branscombklausnercommittee, drew on sources, resources, and analysis unavailable to thatcommittee during the preparation of its report. in addition, the presentreport contains material and elaborations that the branscombklausnercommittee did not have time to develop fully for the parent report. bothreports are aimed at spurring research in the science and technology cominformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacemunities to counter and respond to terrorist acts such as those experienced on september 11.in addition to presenting material on information technology (it),making the nation safer includes chapters on nuclear and radiologicalthreats, human and agricultural health systems, toxic chemicals and explosive materials, energy systems, transportation systems, cities and fixedinfrastructure, and the response of people to terrorism. the presentreport focuses on itñits role as part of the national infrastructure, suggested areas of research (information and network security, it for emergency response, and information fusion), and the people and organizational aspects that are critical to the acceptance and use of the proposedsolutions. note that policy is not a primary focus of this report, althoughpolicy issues are addressed as needed to provide context for the researchprograms outlined here.information technology for counterterrorism draws on many past reports and studies of the computer science and telecommunications board(cstb). these cstb reports include cybersecurity today and tomorrow:pay now or pay later; computers at risk: safe computing in the informationage; embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems ofembedded computers; realizing the potential of c4i: fundamental challenges;information technology research for crisis management; and computing andcommunications in the extreme, among others. furthermore, the reportleverages current cstb studies on geospatial information, authenticationtechnologies, critical infrastructure protection and the law, and privacy.the committee on the role of information technology in responding to terrorism included current and past cstb members as well asother external experts. the 16 committee members (see the appendix forcommittee and staff biographies) are experts in computer, information,internet, and network security; computer and systems architecture; computer systems innovation, including interactive systems; national securityand intelligence; telecommunications, including wireline and wireless;data mining and information fusion and management; machine learningand artificial intelligence; automated reasoning tools; informationprocessing technologies; information retrieval; networked, distributed, andhighperformance systems; software; and human factors. to meet itscharge, the committee met several times over a 2month period and conducted extensive email dialogue to discuss the report text.as was the parent report, this focused report was developed quickly,with the intent of informing key decision makers with respect to the roleof information technology in the homeland security effort. the treatmentof any of the subjects in this report is far from comprehensive or exhaustiveñinstead, the report highlights those subject aspects that the committee deems critical at this time. accordingly, the report builds on, and citesinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixprefaceheavily, prior cstb reports that more substantially address the relevantissues.the committee wishes to thank the cstb staff (herbert lin as studydirector, steven woo for research support, and d.c. drake for administrative support) for developing coherent drafts from scraps of email andbrief notes from committee meetings.john l. hennessy, chairdavid a. patterson, vice chaircommittee on the role of information technologyin responding to terrorisminformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs (nrcõs) reportreview committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the reportmeets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscriptremain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in thereview of this report:edward balkovich, the rand corporation,richard baseil, the mitre corporation,jules a. bellisio, telcordia,tom berson, anagram laboratories,james gray, microsoft,daniel huttenlocher, cornell university,richard kemmerer, university of california at santa barbara,keith marill, new york university bellevue hospital center,william press, los alamos national laboratory,fred schneider, cornell university, andedward wenk, university of washington.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiacknowledgment of reviewersalthough the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the reportbefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by r. stephenberry of the university of chicago. appointed by the nrcõs reportreview committee, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance withinstitutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirelywith the computer science and telecommunications board and the national research council.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontentsexecutive summary11background and introduction101.1what is terrorism?, 101.2the role of information technology in national lifeand in counterterrorism, 111.3the information technology infrastructure andassociated risks, 122types of threats associated withinformation technology infrastructure152.1attack on it as an amplifier of a physical attack, 152.2other possibilities for attack involving it, 162.2.1attacks on the internet, 162.2.2attacks on the public switched network, 182.2.3the financial system, 202.2.4embedded/realtime computing, 202.2.5control systems in the national criticalinfrastructure, 212.2.6dedicated computing facilities, 232.3disproportionate impacts, 232.4threats in perspective: possibility, likelihood,and impact, 24information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontents3investing in information technology research283.1information and network security, 313.1.1authentication, 333.1.2detection, 353.1.3containment, 373.1.4recovery, 403.1.5crosscutting issues in information and networksecurity research, 413.2systems for emergency response, 463.2.1intra and interoperability, 473.2.2emergency deployment of communicationscapacity, 553.2.3security of rapidly deployed ad hoc networks, 573.2.4informationmanagement and decisionsupporttools, 583.2.5communications with the public during anemergency, 593.2.6emergency sensor deployment, 603.2.7precise location identification, 613.2.8mapping the physical aspects of thetelecommunications infrastructure, 623.2.9characterizing the functionality of regional networksfor emergency responders, 623.3information fusion, 633.3.1data mining, 683.3.2data interoperability, 693.3.3natural language technologies, 693.3.4image and video processing, 703.3.5evidence combination, 703.3.6interaction and visualization, 713.4privacy and confidentiality, 713.5other important technology areas, 753.5.1robotics, 753.5.2sensors, 763.5.3simulation and modeling, 783.6people and organizations, 803.6.1principles of humancentered design, 813.6.2organizational practices in itenabledcompanies and agencies, 893.6.3dealing with organizational resistance to interagencycooperation, 91information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvcontents3.6.4principles into practice, 933.6.5implications for research, 954what can be done now?975rationalizing the future research agenda106appendix: biographies of committee andstaff members115what is cstb?127information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarymaking the nation safer: the role of science and technology in counteringterrorism, a report released by the national academies in june 2002,1articulated the role of science and technology in countering terrorism.that report included material on the specific role of information technology (it). building on that report as a point of departure, the panel ofexperts responsible for the it material in making the nation safer wasreconvened as the committee on the role of information technology inresponding to terrorism in order to develop the present report.defining terrorism for the purposes of this reportterrorism can occur on many different scales and with a wide rangeof impacts. while a terrorist act can involve a lone suicide bomber or arental truck loaded with explosives, americansõ perception of catastrophicterrorist acts will forever be measured against the events of september 11,2001. in one single day, thousands of lives and tens of billions of dollarswere lost to terrorism. this report focuses primarily on the highimpactcatastrophic dimensions of terrorism as framed by the events of september 11. thus, in an it context, the òlone hacker,ó or even the cybercriminalñwhile bothersome and capable of doing damageñis not thefocus of this report. instead, the report considers the larger threat posed1national research council. 2002. making the nation safer: the role of science and technology in countering terrorism. the national academies press, washington, d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2information technology for counterterrorismby smart, disciplined adversaries with ample resources. (of course,measures taken to defend against catastrophic terrorism will likely haveapplication in defending against less sophisticated attackers.)the role of information technology insociety and in counterterrorisminformation technology is essential to virtually all of the nationõs critical infrastructures, from the airtrafficcontrol system to the aircraft themselves, from the electricpower grid to the financial and banking systems,and, obviously, from the internet to communications systems. in sum,this reliance of all of the nationõs critical infrastructures on it makes anyof them vulnerable to a terrorist attack on their computer or telecommunications systems.an attack involving it can take different forms. the it itself can bethe target. or, a terrorist can either launch or exacerbate an attack byexploiting the it infrastructure, or use it to interfere with attempts toachieve a timely response. thus, it is both a target and a weapon. likewise, it also has a major role in counterterrorismñit can prevent, detect,and mitigate terrorist attacks. for example, advances in information fusionand data mining may facilitate the identification of important patterns ofbehavior that help to uncover terrorists or their plans in time to preventattacks.while there are many possible scenarios for an attack on someelement(s) of the it infrastructure (which includes the internet, the telecommunications infrastructure, embedded/realtime computing such asscada [supervisory control and data acquisition] systems, and dedicated computing devices such as desktop computers), the committeebelieves that the most devastating consequences would occur if an attackon or using it were part of a multipronged attack with other, more physical components. in this context, compromised it could expand terroristopportunities to widen the damage of a physical attack, diminish timelyresponses to the attack, and heighten terror in the population by providing false information about the nature of the threat.the likelihood of a terrorist attack against or through the use of the itinfrastructure must be understood in the context of terrorists. like otherorganizations, terrorist groups are likely to utilize their limited resourcesin activities that maximize impact and visibility. a decision by terroriststo use it, or any other means, in an attack depends on factors such as thekinds of expertise and resources available, the publicity they wish to gain,and the symbolic value of an attack. how terrorists weigh such factors isnot known in advance. those wanting to create immediate public fearinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3executive summaryand terror are more likely to use a physical attack than an attack thattargets it exclusively.what can be done now:shortterm recommendationsthe committee makes two shortterm recommendations with respectto the nationõs communications and information systems.shortterm recommendation 1: the nation should develop a program that focuses on the communications and computing needs of emergency responders. such a program would have two essential components:¥ensuring that authoritative, currentknowledge expertise and support regarding it are available to emergencyresponse agenciesprior to and during emergencies, including terrorist attacks.¥upgrading the capabilities of the command, control, communications, and intelligence (c3i) systems of emergencyresponse agencies through the use of existing technologies. such upgrades mightinclude transitioning from analog to digital systems and deployinga separate emergencyresponse communications network in theaftermath of a disaster.shortterm recommendation 2: the nation should promote the useof best practices in information and network security in all relevant publicagencies and private organizations.¥for it users on the operational level: ensure that adequate informationsecurity tools are available. conduct frequent, unannouncedredteam penetration testing of deployed systems. promptly fixproblems and vulnerabilities that are known. mandate the use ofstrong authentication mechanisms. use defenseindepth in addition to perimeter defense.¥for it vendors: develop tools to monitor systems automatically forconsistency with defined secure configurations. provide wellengineered schemes for user authentication based on hardwaretokens. conduct more rigorous testing of software and systems forsecurity flaws.¥for the federal government: position critical federal information systems as models for good security practices. remedy the failure ofthe market to account adequately for information security so thatappropriate market prosecurity mechanisms develop.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4information technology for counterterrorismwhat can be done in the futurebecause the possible attacks on the nationõs it infrastructure vary sowidely, it is difficult to argue that any one type is more likely than others.this fact suggests the value of a longterm commitment to a strategicresearch and development program that will increase the overall robustness of the computer and telecommunications networks. such a programcould improve the nationõs ability to prevent, detect, respond to, andrecover from terrorist attacks. this agenda would also have general applications, such as reducing cybercrime and responding to natural disasters.three critical areas of research are information and network security, c3isystems for emergency response, and information fusion. although technology is central to these three areas, it is not the sole element of concern.research in these areas must be multidisciplinary, involving technologists, social scientists, and domain experts. since technology deployedfor operational purposes is subject to the reality of implementation anduse by humans, technology cannot be studied in isolation from how it isdeployed and used.information and network securityresearch in information and network security is relevant to the nationõscounterterrorism efforts for several reasons. it attacks can amplify theimpact of physical attacks and lessen the effectiveness of emergencyresponses. it attacks on scada systems could be devastating. theincreasing levels of social and economic damage caused by cybercrimesuggest a corresponding increase in the likelihood of severe damagethrough cyberattacks. the technology discussed here is relevant to fighting cybercrime and to conducting efforts in defensive information warfare.research in information and network security can be grouped in fourareas: authentication, detection, containment, and recovery; a fifth set oftopics such as dealing with buggy code is broadly applicable.¥authentication is relevant to better ways of preventing unauthorized parties from gaining access to a computer system to cause harm.¥detection of intruders with harmful intentions is critical for thwarting their actions. however, because intruders take great care to hide theirentry and/or make their behavior look innocuous, such detection is avery challenging problem (especially when the intruder is an insider gonebad).¥containment is necessary if the success of an attacker is to be limitedin scope. although the principle of graceful degradation under attack iswell accepted, system and network design for graceful degradation is notwell understood.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5executive summary¥recovery involves backup and decontamination. in a security context, backup methods for use under adversarial conditions and applicableto large systems are needed. decontaminationñthe process of distinguishing the clean system state from the infected portions and eliminating the causes of those differencesñis especially challenging when a system cannot be shut down.¥other areas. buggy code (i.e., flawed computer programs) is probably the oldest unsolved problem in computer science, and there is noparticular reason to think that research can solve the problem once andfor all. one approach to the problem is to provide incentives to installfixes, even though the fixes themselves may carry risks such as exposingother software flaws. many system vulnerabilities result from improperadministration, and better system administration tools for specifying security policies and checking system configurations are necessary. researchin tools for auditing functionality to ensure that hardware and softwarehave the prescribedñand no additionalñfunctionality would be helpful.security that is more transparent would have higher adoption rates. understanding the failure in the marketplace of previous attempts to build incomputer security would help guide future research efforts.it and c3i for emergency responsec3i systems are critical to emergency responders for coordinatingtheir efforts and increasing the promptness and effectiveness of theirresponse. c3i for emergency response to terrorist attacks poses challenges that differ from natural disasters: the number of responding agenciesñfrom local, state, and federal governmentsñincreases the degree ofcomplexity, while the additional security or lawenforcement presencethat is required may interfere with rescue and recovery operations.c3i systems for emergency responders face many challenges:¥regarding ad hoc interoperability, different emergency respondersmust be able to communicate with each other and other agencies, andpoor interoperability among responding agencies is a wellknown problem. thus, for example, there is a technical need for protocols and technology that can facilitate interconnection and interoperation.¥emergency situations result in extraordinary demands on communications capacity. research is needed on using residual capacity moreeffectively and deploying additional (òsurgeó) capacity.¥in responding to disasters, emergencyresponse managers needdecisionsupport tools that can assist them in sorting, evaluating, filtering,and integrating information from a vast array of voice and data traffic.¥during an emergency, providing geographically sensitive publicinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6information technology for counterterrorisminformation that is relevant to where people are (e.g., for evacuation purposes) is a challenging technical problem.¥sensors deployed in an emergency could track the spread of nuclear orbiological contaminants, locate survivors (e.g., through heat emanationsor sounds), and find pathways through debris.¥location identification of people and structures is a major problemwhen there is physical damage to a structure or an area.information fusioninformation fusion promises to play a central role in the prevention,detection, and response to terrorism. for example, the effectiveness ofcheckpoints such as airline boarding gates could be improved significantly by creating informationfusion tools to support checkpoint operators in real time (a prevention task). also, advances in the automaticinterpretation of image, video, and other kinds of unstructured data couldaid in detection. finally, early response to biological attacks could besupported by collecting and analyzing realtime data such as admissionsto hospital emergency rooms and purchases of nonprescription drugs ingrocery stores. the ability to acquire, integrate, and interpret a range andvolume of data will support decision makers such as emergencyresponseunits and intelligence organizations.data mining is a technology for analyzing historical and current onlinedata to support informed decision making by learning general patternsfrom a large volume of specific examples. but to be useful for counterterrorist purposes, such efforts must be possible over data in a variety ofdifferent and nonstructured formats, such as text, image, and video inmultiple languages. in addition, new research is needed to normalize andcombine data collected from multiple sources to improve data interoperability. and, new techniques for data visualization will be useful inexploiting human capabilities for pattern recognition.privacy and confidentialityconcerns over privacy and confidentiality are magnified in a counterterrorism intelligence context. the perspective of intelligence gatherers,òcollect everything in case something might be useful,ó conflicts with theproprivacy tenet of òdonõt collect anything unless you know you needit.ó to resolve this conflict, research is needed to provide policy makerswith accurate information about the impact on privacy and confidentialityof different kinds of data disclosure. furthermore, the development ofnew privacysensitive techniques may make it possible to provide usefulinformation to analysts without compromising individual privacy. a vainformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7executive summaryriety of policy actions could also help to reduce the consequences of privacy violations.other important technology areasthis report also briefly addresses three other technology areas: robotics,sensors, and modeling and simulation:¥robots, which can be used in environments too dangerous for humanbeings, combine complex mechanical, perceptual, and computer and telecommunications systems, and pose significant research challenges suchas the management of a team of robots and their integration.¥sensors, used to detect danger in the environment, are most effective when they are linked in a distributed sensor network, a problem thatcontinues to pose interesting research problems.¥modeling and simulation can play important roles throughout crisismanagement activities by making predictions about how events mightunfold and by testing alternative operational choices. a key challenge isunderstanding the utility and limitations of models hastily created inresponse to an immediate crisis.people and organizationstechnology is always used in some social and organizational context,and human culpability is central in understanding how the system mightsucceed or fail. the technology cannot be examined in isolation from howit is deployed. technology aimed at assisting people is essential to moderneveryday life. at the same time, if improperly deployed, the technologycan actually make the problem worse; human error can be extremelycostly in time, money, and lives. good design can dramatically reducethe incidence of error.principles of humancentered designsystems must be designed from a holistic, systemsoriented perspective. principles that should guide such design include the following:¥put human beings òin the loopó on a regular basis. systems that usehuman beings only when automation is incapable of handling a situationare invariably prone to òhuman error.ó¥avoid commonmode failures, and recognize that common modes are notalways easy to detect.¥observe the distinction between work as prescribed and work as practiced.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8information technology for counterterrorismprocedures that address work as prescribed (e.g., tightening proceduresand requiring redundant checking) often interfere with getting work done(i.e., work as practiced).¥probe security measures independently using tiger teams. tigerteamefforts, undertaken to test an organizationõs operational security postureusing teams that simulate what a determined attacker might do, do whatis necessary in order to penetrate security.organizational resistance to interagency cooperationan effective response to a serious terrorist incident will inevitablyrequire interagency cooperation. however, because different agenciesdevelopñand could reasonably be expected to developñdifferent internal cultures for handling the routine situations that they mostly address,interagency cooperation in a largescale disaster is likely to be difficultunder the best of circumstances.there are no easy answers for bridging the cultural gulfs betweenagencies that are seldom called upon to interact. effective interagencycooperation in times of crisis requires strong, sustained leadership thatplaces a high priority on such cooperation and is willing to expend budgetand personnel resources in support of it. exercises and activities thatpromote interagency cooperation help to identify and solve some social,organizational, and technical problems, and also help to reveal the rivalries between agencies.research implications associated with human andorganizational factorsto better integrate the insights of social science into operational itsystems, research is relevant in at least four different areas:¥formulating of system development methods that are more amenable to the incorporation of domain knowledge and social science expertise;¥translating social science research findings into guidelines andmethods that are readily applied by the technical community;¥developing reliable security measures that do not interfere withwork processes of legitimate employees; and¥understanding the it issues related to the disparate organizationalcultures of agencies that will be fused under the department of homeland security.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9executive summaryrationalizing the longterm research agendathe committee is silent on which government agency would bestsupport the proposed research agenda. however, the research agendashould be characterized by the following:¥support of multidisciplinary problemoriented research that is useful both to civilian and to military users;¥a deep understanding and assessment of vulnerabilities;¥a substantial effort in research areas with a long time horizon forpayoff, and tolerance of research directions that may not promise immediate applicability;¥oversight by a board or other entity with sufficient stature to attract top talent to work in the field and to provide useful feedback; and¥attention to the human resources needed to sustain the counterterrorism it research agenda.one additional attribute of this r&d infrastructure would be desirable: the ability of researchers to learn from each other in a relatively freeand open intellectual environment. constraining the openness of thatenvironment such as with classified research would have negative consequences for the research itself. yet the free and open dissemination ofinformation has potential costs, as terrorists may obtain information thatthey can use against us. the committee believes (or at least hopes) thatthere are other ways of reconciling the undeniable tension, and calls forsome thought to be given to a solution to this dilemma.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.101background and introduction1.1what is terrorism?terrorism is usually defined in terms of nonstatesponsored attackson civilians, perpetrated with the intent of spreading fear and intimidation. terrorism can occur on many different scales and can cause a widerange of impacts. for many americans, the events of september 11, 2001,changed dramatically their perceptions of what terrorism could entail. inthe space of a few hours, thousands of american lives were lost, andproperty damage in the tens of billions of dollars occurredñan obviouslyhighimpact event. however, as illustrated by the subsequent anthraxattacks, widespread disruption of key societal functions, loss of publicconfidence in the ability of governmental institutions to keep society safe,widespread loss of peace of mind, and/or pervasive injury to a societyõsway of life also count as manifestations of òhigh impact.ó it is on suchhighimpact, catastrophic dimensions of terrorism that the committee onthe role of information technology in responding to terrorism decidedto concentrate in order to keep the analytical focus of this report manageable.the committee does not mean to suggest that only events of the magnitude of those on september 11 are worth considering. but the committee is primarily addressing events that would result in longlasting and/or major financial or lifesafety impacts and that would generally requirea coordinated response among multiple agencies, or are in many otherrespects very complicated to manage. damaging and destructive thoughindividual attacks are, the digital equivalent of a single car bomb withinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11background and introductionconventional explosives (e.g., a single hacker breaking into a nominallyunsecured system that does not tunnel into other critical systems) is notthe primary focus of this report.in the context considered here, the adversary must be conceptualizedas a very patient, smart, and disciplined opponent with many resources(money, personnel, time) at its disposal. thus, in an information technology context, the òlone hackeró threatñoften described in terms ofmaladjusted teenage males with too much time on their handsñis not theappropriate model. protection against òankle bitersó and òscript kiddiesówho have the technical skills and understanding as well as the timeneeded to discover and exploit vulnerabilities is of course worth someeffort, but it is important as well to consider seriously the larger threatthat potentially more destructive adversaries pose.1.2the role of information technology innational life and in counterterrorisminformation technology (it) is essential to virtually all of the nationõscritical infrastructures, which makes any of them vulnerable to a terroristattack on the computer or telecommunications networks of those infrastructures. it plays a critical role in managing and operating nuclearpower plants, dams, the electricpower grid, the airtrafficcontrol system,and financial institutions. large and small companies rely on computersto manage payroll, track inventory and sales, and perform research anddevelopment. every stage in the distribution of food and energy fromproducer to retail consumer relies on computers and networks. a morerecent trend is the embedding of computing capability in all kinds ofdevices and environments, as well as the networking of embedded systems into larger systems.1 and, most obviously, it is the technologicalunderpinning of the nationõs communications systems, from the localloop of òplain old telephone serviceó to the highspeed backbone connections that support data traffic. these realities make the computer andcommunications systems of the nation a critical infrastructure in and ofthemselves, as well as major components of other kinds of critical infrastructure, such as energy or transportation systems.in addition, while it per se refers to computing and communicationstechnologies, the hardware and software (i.e., the technological artifacts1computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2001.embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers.national academy press, washington, d.c. (note that most computer science and telecommunications board reports contain many references to relevant literature and additional citations.)information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12information technology for counterterrorismof computers, routers, operating systems, browsers, fiberoptic lines, andso on) are part of a larger construct that involves people and organizations. the display on a computer system presents information for a personwho has his or her own psychological and emotional attributes and whois usually part of an organization with its own culture and standard operating procedures. thus, to understand how it might fail or how the useof it might not achieve the objectives desired, it is always necessary toconsider the larger entity in which the it is embedded.it also has a major role in the prevention, detection, and mitigation ofterrorist attacks.2 this report focuses on two critical applications. first,emergency response involves the agencies, often state and local, that arecalled upon to respond to terrorist incidentsñfirefighters, police, ambulance, and other emergency health care workers, and so on. these agencies are critically reliant on information technology to communicate, tocoordinate, and to share information in a prompt, reliable, and intelligiblefashion. second, information awareness involves promoting a broadknowledge of critical information in the intelligence community to identify important patterns of behavior. advances in information fusion,which is the aggregation of data from multiple sources for the purpose ofdiscovering some insight, may be able to uncover terrorists or their plansin time to prevent attacks. in addition to prevention and detection, itmay also help rapidly and accurately identify the nature of an attack andaid in responding to it more effectively.1.3the information technology infrastructureand associated risksthe it infrastructure can be conceptualized as having four majorelements: the internet, the conventional telecommunications infrastructure, embedded/realtime computing (e.g., avionics systems for aircraftcontrol, supervisory control and data acquisition [scada] systems con2computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1996,computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis management and otherapplications, national academy press, washington, d.c.; computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999, information technology research forcrisis management, national academy press, washington, d.c. for purposes of the presentreport, prevention is relevant to the period of time significantly prior to an attack; duringthat period, a pending attack can be identified and the terrorist planning process for thatattack disrupted or preempted. detection is relevant in the period of time immediatelybefore or during an attack (since an attack must first be detected before a response occurs).mitigation is relevant during the time immediately after an attack, and it generally involvesactions related to damage and loss minimization, recovery, and reconstitution.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.13background and introductiontrolling electrical energy distribution), and dedicated computing devices(e.g., desktop computers).each of these elements plays a different role in national life, and eachhas different specific vulnerabilities. nevertheless, the ways in which itcan be damaged fall into three categories.3 a system or network canbecome:¥unavailable. that is, using the system or network at all becomesvery difficult or impossible. the email does not go through, or the computer simply freezes, or response time becomes intolerably long.¥corrupted. that is, the system or network continues to operate, butunder some circumstances of operation, it does not provide accurate resultsor information when one would normally expect. alteration of data, forexample, could have this effect.¥compromised. that is, someone with bad intentions gains access tosome or all of the capabilities of the system or network or the informationavailable through it. the threat is that such a person could use privilegedinformation or system control to further his or her malign purposes.these types of damage are not independentñfor example, an attackercould compromise a system in order to render it unavailable.different attackers might have different intentions with respect to it.in some cases, an element of the it infrastructure itself might be a targetto be destroyed (e.g., the means for people to communicate or to engagein financial transactions). alternatively, the target of the terrorist mightbe another kind of critical infrastructure (e.g., the electricpower grid),and the terrorist could either launch or exacerbate the attack by exploitingthe it infrastructure, or use it to interfere with attempts to achieve atimely and effective response.in short, it is both a target and a weapon that can be deployed againstother targets. counterterrorist activities thus seek to reduce the likelihood that it functionality will be diminished as a result of an attack or asa result of the damage that might come from the use of it as a weaponagainst valued targets.a terrorist attack that involves the it infrastructure can operate inone of several modes. first, an attack can come in òthrough the wiresó asa hostile program (e.g., a virus or a trojan horse program) or as a denial3computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2002.cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14information technology for counterterrorismofservice attack.4 second, some it element may be physically destroyed(e.g., a critical data center or communications link blown up) or compromised (e.g., it hardware surreptitiously modified in the distributionchain). third, a trusted insider may be compromised (such a person, forinstance, may provide passwords that permit outsiders to gain entry);5such insiders may also be conduits for hostile software or hardware modifications. all of these modes are possible and, because of the highlypublic and accessible nature of our it infrastructure and of our society ingeneral, it is impossible to fully secure this infrastructure against them.nor are they mutually exclusive, and in practice they can be combined toproduce even more destructive effects.4a òthroughthewiresó attack is conducted entirely at a distance and requires no physicalproximity to the target.5computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999.trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152types of threatsassociated with informationtechnology infrastructuremost of the nationõs civil communications and data network infrastructure is not hardened against attack, but this infrastructure tends to belocalized either in geography or in mode of communication. thus, if nophysical damage is done to them, the computing and communicationscapabilities disrupted in an attack are likely to be recoverable in a relatively short time. although their scope or scale is limited, they are nonetheless potentially attractive targets for what might be called òincrementaló terrorism. that is, terrorists could use it as the weapon in a series ofrelatively local attacks that are repeated against different targetsñsuch asbanks, hospitals, or local government servicesñso often that public confidence is shaken and significant economic disruption results.however, this report focuses primarily on catastrophic terrorism, andthe committeeõs analysis is aimed at identifying threats of that magnitudein particular and at proposing science and technology (s&t) strategies forcombating them. of course, serious efforts are needed to develop anddeploy security technologies to harden all elements of the it infrastructure to reduce the potential for damage from repeated attacks.2.1attack on it as an amplifierof a physical attackgiven itõs critical role in many other elements of the national infrastructure and in responding to crises, the committee believes that thetargeting of it as part of a multipronged attack scenario could have themost catastrophic consequences. compromised it can have several disastrous effects: expansion of terroristsõ opportunities to widen the damageinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16information technology for counterterrorismof a physical attack (e.g., by providing false information that drives peopletoward, rather than away from, the point of attack); diminution of timelyresponses to an attack (e.g., by interfering with communications systemsof first responders); and heightened terror in the population through misinformation (e.g., by providing false information about the nature of athreat). the techniques to compromise key it systemsñfor example,launching distributed denialofservice (ddos) attacks against web sitesand servers of key government agencies at the federal, state, and locallevels; using ddos attacks to disrupt agenciesõ telephone services andthe emergencyresponse 911 system; or sending emails containing falseinformation with forged return addresses so that they appear to be fromtrusted sourcesñare fairly straightforward and widely known.2.2other possibilities for attack involving itwhen an element of the it infrastructure is directly targeted, the goalis to destroy a sufficient amount of itbased capability to have a significant impact, and the longer that impact persists, the more successful it isfrom the terroristõs point of view. for example, one might imagine attacks on the computers and data storage devices associated with important facilities. irrecoverable loss of critical operating data and essentialrecords on a large scale would likely result in catastrophic and irreversible damage to the u.s. economy. however, most major businesses already have disasterrecovery plans in place that include the backup oftheir data in a variety of distributed and wellprotected locations (and inmany cases, they augment backups of data with backup computing andcommunications facilities).1 while no law of physics prevents the simultaneous destruction of all data backups and backup facilities in all locations, such an attack would be highly complex and difficult to executeand is thus highly unlikely.2.2.1attacks on the internetthe infrastructure of the internet is another possible terrorist target,and given the internetõs public prominence, it may appeal to terrorists asan attractive target. the internet could be seriously degraded for a relatively short period of time by a denialofservice attack,2 but such impact1on the other hand, backup sites are often sharedñone site may protect the data ofmultiple firms.2a denialofservice attack floods a target with a huge number of requests for service,thus keeping it busy servicing these (bogus) requests and unable to service legitimate ones.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.17types of threats associated with it infrastructureis unlikely to be long lasting. the internet itself is a densely connectednetwork of networks that automatically routes around links that becomeunavailable,3 which means that a large number of important nodes wouldhave to be destroyed simultaneously to bring it down for an extendedperiod of time. destruction of some key internet nodes could result inreduced network capacity and slow traffic across the internet, but theease with which internet communications can be rerouted would minimize the longterm damage.4 (in this regard, the fact that substantialdatanetworking services survived the september 11 disaster despite thedestruction of large amounts of equipmentñconcentrated in the worldtrade center complexñreflected redundancies in the infrastructure anda measure of good fortune as well.)the terrorist might obtain higher leverage with a òthroughthewiresóattack that would require the physical replacement of components ininternet relay points on a large scale,5 though such attacks would bemuch harder to plan and execute. another attack that would providehigher leverage is on the internetõs domain name system (dns), whichtranslates domain names (e.g., example.com) to specific internet protocol(ip) addresses (e.g., 192.0.34.72) denoting specific internet nodes. a relatively small number of òroot name serversó underpins the dns. although the dns is designed to provide redundancy in case of accidentalfailure, it has some vulnerability to an intentional physical attack thatmight target all name servers simultaneously. although internet operations would not halt instantly, an increasing number of sites would, overa period of time measured in hours to days, become inaccessible withoutroot name servers to provide authoritative translation information. however, recovery from such an attack would be unlikely to take more thanseveral daysñdamaged servers can be replaced, since they are generalpurpose computers that are in common use.in addition, most companies today do not rely on the internet to carryout their core business functions. even if a longterm disruption to theinternet were a major disruption to an ecommerce company such asamazon.com or dell, most other companies could resort to using phones3computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2001.the internetõs coming of age. national academy press, washington, d.c. note, however,that the amount of redundancy is primarily limited by economic factors.4this comment largely applies to u.s. use of the internet. it is entirely possible that othernationsñwhose traffic is often physically routed through one or two locations in the unitedstatesñwould fare much worse in this scenario.5for example, many modern computers allow certain hardware components to be reprogrammed under software control. improper use of this capability can damage hardwarepermanently.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18information technology for counterterrorismand faxes again to replace the internet for many important functions. (forexample, the department of the interior has been largely off the internetsince december 5, 2001,6 but it has continued to operate more or less asusual.)because the internet is not yet central to most of american society, theimpact of even severe damage to the internet is less than what might bepossible through other modes of terrorist attack. however, current trendssuggest that the reliance on the internet for key functions is likely to growin the future, despite the existence of real security threats, and so thisassessment about lower levels of impact from attacks on the internet maybecome less valid in the future.box 2.1 provides some historical examples of attacks on the internet.2.2.2attacks on the public switched networkthe telecommunications infrastructure of the public switched network is likely to be less robust than the internet. although the longhaultelecommunications infrastructure is capable of dealing with singlepointfailures (and perhaps even doublepoint failures) in major switching centers, the physical redundancy in that infrastructure is finite, and damaging a relatively small number of major switching centers for longdistancetelecommunications could result in a fracturing of the united states intodisconnected regions.7 particular localities may be disrupted for a considerable length of timeñin the aftermath of the september 11 attacks innew york city, telephone service in the downtown area took months torestore fully. note also that many supposedly independent circuits aretrenched together in the physical trenches along certain highway and railrightsofway, and thus these conduits constitute not just òchoke pointsóbut rather òchoke routesó that are hundreds of miles long and that couldbe attacked anywhere.an additional vulnerability in the telecommunications infrastructureis the local loop connecting central switching offices to end users; fullrecovery from the destruction of a central office entails the tedious rewiring of tens or hundreds of thousands of individual connections. destruction of central offices on a large scale is difficult, simply because even anindividual city has many of them, but destruction of a few central offices6for additional information, see <http://www.computerworld.com/storyba/0,4125,nav47sto66665,00.html>.7an exacerbating factor is that many organizations rely on leased lines to providehigh(er)assurance connectivity. however, these lines are typically leased from providersof telecommunications infrastructure and hence suffer from many of the same kinds ofvulnerabilities as those that affect ordinary lines.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.19types of threats associated with it infrastructurebox 2.1historical examples of attacks on the internet¥in march 1999, the melissa virus infected email systems worldwide. according to estimates from federal officials, the virus caused $80 million in disruption, lostcommerce, and computer downtime, and infected 1.2 million computers. the viruslaunched when a user opened an infected microsoft word 8 or word 9 documentcontained in either office 97 or office 2000.1 the virus, programmed as a macro inthe word document, prompted the outlook email program to send the infecteddocument to the first 50 addresses in the victimõs outlook address book. when arecipient opened the attachment in the email, which appeared to be from a friend,coworker, boss or family member, the virus spread to the first 50 email addresses inthat personõs address book, and thus continued to propagate. six months after thefirst appearance of melissa, variant strains continued to make their way into usersõinboxes despite warnings and widespread publicity about opening attachments whilethe macro function is enabled.¥over a fourday period beginning february 7, 2000, distributed denialofservice attacks temporarily shut down yahoo, amazon, e*trade, ebay, cnn.com,and other web sites. yahoo shut down its site for several hours during peak viewinghours at an estimated cost of $116,000.2 while the companies behind the targetedweb sites said that the attacks themselves would have minor financial impact, theattacks were of such importance that the white house convened a group of computersecurity experts and technology executives to discuss the internetõs vulnerabilities.federal officials spent millions in investigations of the ddos attacks that garneredsignificant public attention.¥on july 19, 2001, the code red program òwormó infected more than 359,000computers in less than 14 hours and 2,000 new infections per minute occurred during the height of its attack. nimda, a similar hostile program first appearing onseptember 18, 2001, was potentially more damaging because it combined successful features of previous viruses such as melissa and iloveyou. during the first 24hours, nimda spread through email, corporate networks, and web browsers, infecting as many as 150,000 web server and personal computers (pcs) in the unitedstates. the virusñòadminó spelled backwardsñwas designed to affect pcs andservers running the windows operating system and to resend itself every 10 daysunless it was deleted. nimda reproduced itself both via email and over the webña user could be victimized by merely browsing a web site that was infected. furthermore, the infected machines sent out a steady stream of probes looking for newsystems to attack. the additional traffic could effectively shut down company networks and web sites; nimdagenerated traffic did not slow down the internet overall, but infected companies reported serious internal slowdowns.3 code red andnimda are examples of these new blended threats. both are estimated to havecaused $3 billion worldwide in lost productivity and for testing, cleaning, and deploying patches to computer systems.41ann harrison. 1999. òfaq: the melissa virus,ó computerworld, march 31. available online at <http://www.computerworld.com/news/1999/story/0,11280,27617,00.html>.2ross kerber. 2000. òvandal arrests would only be the beginning penalties, damagesseen hard to determine,ó the boston globe, february 11.3henry norr. 2001. ònew worm plagues systems worldwide,ó the san francisco chronicle, september 19.4gregory hulme. 2002. òone step aheadñsecurity managers are trying to be preparedfor the next blended threat attack,ó informationweek, may 20.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20information technology for counterterrorismassociated with key facilities or agencies (e.g., those of emergencyresponse agencies or of the financial district) would certainly have a significant immediate though localized impact. however, the widespread availability of cellular communications, and mobile basestations deployablein emergency conditions, may mitigate the effect of central office losses.2.2.3the financial systemthe it systems and networks supporting the nationõs financial system are undeniably critical. the financial system is based on the federalreserve banking system, a system for handling largevalue financial transactions (including fedwire operated by the federal reserve, chips, andswift), and a second system for handling smallvalue retail transactions(including the automated clearing house, the creditcard system, andpaper checks).8 by its nature, the system for retail transactions is highlydecentralized, while the system for largevalue transactions is more centralized. both the federal reserve system and the system for largevaluetransactions operate on networks that are logically distinct from the public telecommunications system or the internet, and successful informationattacks on these systems likely necessitate significant insider access.92.2.4embedded/realtime computingembedded/realtime computing in specific systems could be attacked. for example, many embedded computing systems could be corrupted over time.10 of particular concern could be avionics in airplanes,8for an extended (though dated) discussion of the infrastructure underlying the financialsystem, see john c. knight et al., 1997, summaries of three critical infrastructure applications,computer science report no. cs9727, department of computer science, university ofvirginia, charlottesville, november 14.9the fact that these networks are logically separate from those of the internet and thepublic switched telecommunications network reduces the risk of penetration considerably.in addition, security consciousness is much higher in financial networks than it is on theinternet. on the other hand, the fact that these networks are much smaller than the internetsuggests that there is less redundancy in them and that the computing platforms are likelyto be less diverse compared with those on the internet, a factor that tends to reduce securitycharacteristics as compared with those of the internet. also, the physical infrastructureover which these financial networks communicate is largely shared, which means that theyare vulnerable to largescale physical disruptions or attacks on the telecommunicationsinfrastructure.10an inadvertent demonstration of this possibility was illustrated with the y2k problemthat was overlooked in many embedded/realtime systems designed in the 1980s and earlier.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.21types of threats associated with it infrastructurecollisionavoidance systems in automobiles, and other transportation systems. such attacks would require a significant insider presence in technically responsible positions in key sectors of the economy over long periods of time. another example is that sensors, which can be importantelements of counterterrorism precautions, could be the target of an attackor, more likely, precursor targets of a terrorist attack.2.2.5control systems in the national critical infrastructureanother possible attack on embedded/realtime computing wouldbe an attack on the systems controlling elements of the nationõs criticalinfrastructure, for example, the electricpower grid, the airtrafficcontrolsystem, the financial network, and water purification and delivery. anattack on these systems could trigger an event, and conceivably stimulatean inappropriate response that would drive large parts of the the overallsystem into a catastrophic state. still another possibility is the compromise or destruction of systems and networks that control and manageelements of the nationõs transportation infrastructure; such an attack couldintroduce chaos and disruption on a large scale that could drasticallyreduce the capability of transporting people and/or freight (includingfood and fuel).to illustrate, consider the electricpower grid, which is one of the few,if not the only, truly national infrastructures in which it is theoreticallypossible that a failure in a region could cascade to catastrophic proportions before it could be dealt with. the electricpower grid is controlledby a variety of itbased scada systems. (box 2.2 describes some of thesecurity issues associated with these systems.) attacks on scada systems could obviously result in disruption of the network (òsoftó damage),but because scada is used to control physical elements, such attackscould also result in irreversible physical damage. in cases in which backups for damaged components were not readily available (and might haveto be remanufactured from scratch), such damage could have longlastingimpact. (similar considerations apply to other parts of the nationõs infrastructure.)an electronic attack on a portion of the electricpower grid couldresult in significant damage, easily comparable to that associated with alocal blackout. however, if terrorists took advantage of the chaos causedby a local blackout, they could likely inflict greater physical damage thanwould be possible in the absence of a blackout.another plausible disaster scenario that could rise to the level of catastrophic damage would be an attack on a local or regional power systemthat cascaded to shut down electrical power over a much wider area andpossibly caused physical damage that could take weeks to repair.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22information technology for counterterrorismbox 2.2security vulnerabilities and problems of scada systemstodayõs supervisory control and data acquisition (scada) systems have beendesigned with little or no attention to security. for example, data in scada systemsare often sent òin the clear.ó protocols for accepting commands are open, with noauthentication required. control channels are often wireless or leased lines that passthrough commercial telecommunications facilities. unencrypted radiofrequencycommand pathways to scada systems are common and, for economic reasons, theinternet itself is increasingly used as a primary command pathway. in general, thereis minimal protection against the forgery of control messages or of data and statusmessages. such control paths present obvious vulnerabilities.in addition, todayõs scada systems are built from commercial offtheshelf components and are based on operating systems that are known to be insecure. deregulation has meant placing a premium on the efficient use of existing capacity, andhence interconnections to shift supply from one location to another have increased.problems of such distributed realtime dynamic control, in combination with thecomplex, highly interactive nature of the system being controlled, have becomemajor issues in operating the power grid reliably.a final problem arises because of the realtime nature of scada systems, inwhich timing may be critical to performance and optimal efficiency (timing is important because interrupts and other operations can demand millisecond accuracy):security addons in such an environment can complicate timing estimates and causesevere degradation to scada performance.compounding the difficulty of securing scada systems is the fact that information about their vulnerability is so readily available. such information was firstbrought into general view in 19981999, when numerous details on potential y2kproblems were put up on the world wide web. additional information of greaterdetailñdealing with potential attacks that were directly or indirectly connected tothe presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protectionñwas subsequentlyposted on web pages as well. product data and educational videotapes from engineering associations can be used to familiarize potential attackers with the basics ofthe grid and with specific elements. information obtained through semiautomatedreconnaissance to probe and scan the networks of a variety of power suppliers couldprovide terrorists with detailed information about the internal workings of thescada network, down to the level of specific makes and models of equipment usedand version releases of corresponding software. and more inside information couldbe obtained from sympathetic engineers and operators.by comparison with the possibility of an attack on only a portion ofthe power grid, the actual feasibility of an attack that would result in acascading failure with a high degree of confidence is not clear; a detailedstudy both of scada systems and the electricpower system would probably be required in order to assess this possibility. however, because ofthe inordinate complexity of the nationõs electricpower grid, it would bedifficult for either grid operators or terrorists to predict with any confiinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.23types of threats associated with it infrastructuredence the effects on the overall grid from a major disruptive event in onepart of the system. thus, any nonlocalized impact on the power gridwould be as much a matter of chance as a foreseeable consequence.2.2.6dedicated computing facilitiesin many of the same ways that embedded computing could be attacked, dedicated computers such as desktop computers could also becorrupted in ways that are hard to detect. one possible channel comesfrom the extensive use of untrustworthy it talent among software vendors.11 once working on the inside, perhaps after a period of years inwhich they act to gain responsibility and trust, it could happen that theseindividuals would be able to introduce additional but unauthorized functionality into systems that are widely used. under such circumstances,the target might not be the generalpurpose computer used in the majority of offices around the country, but rather the installation of hiddenrogue code in particular sensitive offices. another possible channel forattacking dedicated computing facilities results from the connection ofcomputers through the internet; such connections provide a potentialroute through which terrorists might attack computer systems that doprovide important functionality for many sectors of the economy. examples of widely used internetbased vectors that, if compromised wouldhave a largescale effect in a short time, include the operating systemsupgrades and certain shareware programs, such as those for sharing music files. (it is likely that internetconnected computer systems that provide critical functionality to companies and organizations are better protected through firewalls and other security measures than is the averagesystem on the internet, but as press reports in recent years make clear,such measures do not guarantee that outsiders cannot penetrate them.)2.3disproportionate impactssome disaster scenarios could result in significant loss or damage thatis out of proportion to the actual functionality or capability destroyed. in11untrustworthy talent may be foreign or domestic in origin. because foreign it workersñwhether working in the united states (e.g., under an h1b visa or a green card) oroffshore on outsourced workñare generally not subject to thorough background investigations, an obvious route is available through which foreign terrorist organizations can gaininsider access. on the other hand, reports of american citizens having been successfullyrecruited by foreign terrorist organizations add a degree of believability to the scenario ofdomestic it talentõs being used to compromise systems for terrorist purposes.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24information technology for counterterrorismparticular, localized damage that resulted in a massive loss of confidencein some critical part of the infrastructure could have such a disproportionate impact. for example, if terrorists were able to make a credibleclaim that the control software of a popular òflybywireó airliner wascorrupted and could be induced to cause crashes on demand, perhapsdemonstrating it once, public confidence in the airline industry mightwell be undermined. a more extreme scenario might be that the airlinesthemselves would ground airplanes until they could be inspected and thesoftware validated.to the extent that critical industries or sectors rely upon any elementof the it infrastructure, such disproportionateimpact disaster scenariosare a possibility. for this reason, certain types of attack that do not causeextensive actual damage must be considered to have some catastrophicpotential. accordingly, response plans must take into account how tocommunicate with the public for purposes of reassurance. (this point isbeyond the scope of this report but is addressed in making the nationsafer.12)2.4threats in perspective:possibility, likelihood, and impactwhile the scenarios described above are necessarily speculative, it ispossible to make some judgments that relate to their likelihood:¥for a variety of reasons, state support of terrorism poses threats ofa different and higher order of magnitude than does cybercrime or terrorism without state sponsorship. these reasons include access to largeamounts of financial backing and the ability to maintain an activelyadversarial stance at a high level for extended periods of time. for example, terrorists with the support of a state might be able to use the stateõsintelligence services to gain access to bribable or politically sympatheticindividuals in key decisionmaking places or to systematically corruptproduction or distribution of hardware or software.¥the most plausible threats are simple attacks launched againstcomplex targets. the successful execution of complex attacks requiresthat many things go right, so simplicity in attack planning is an importantconsideration. complex rather than simple targets are desirable becauseof the likelihood that the failure modes of a complex target are usually not12national research council. 2002. making the nation safer: the role of science and technology in countering terrorism. national academies press, washington, d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.25types of threats associated with it infrastructurewell understood by its designers, and thus there are many more ways inwhich failure can occur in such systems.¥attacks that require insider access are more difficult to carry outand thus less likely to occur than attacks that do not. insiders must beplaced or recruited and are not necessarily entirely trustworthy even fromthe standpoint of the attacker. individuals with specialized expertisechosen to be placed as infiltrators may not survive the screening process,and because there is a limited number of such individuals, it can be difficult to insert an infiltrator into a target organization. in addition, compared to approaches not relying on insiders, insiders may leave behindmore tracks that can call attention to their activities. this judgment depends, of course, on the presumed diligence of employers in ensuring thattheir key personnel are trustworthy, and it is worth remembering that themost devastating espionage episodes in recent u.s. history have involvedinsiders (i.e., aldrich ames and robert hanssen).¥attacks that require execution over long periods of time are harderand thus less likely to mount than attacks that do not. planning oftentakes place over a long period of time, but the actual execution of a plancan be long as well as short. when a plan requires extended activity that,if detected, would be regarded as abnormal, it is more likely to be discovered and/or thwarted.¥terrorist attacks can be sustained over time as well as occurring inindividual instances. if the effects of an attack sustained over time (perhaps over months or years) are cumulative, and if the attack goes undetected, the cumulative effects could reach very dangerous proportions.because such an attack proceeds a little bit at a time, the resources neededto carry it out may well be less than those needed in more concentratedattacks, thus making it more feasible.¥plans that call for repeated attacks are less likely to succeed thanthose calling for a single attack. for example, it is true that repeatedattacks against the internet could have effects that would defeat efforts torepair or secure it after one initial attack. such an onslaught would bedifficult to sustain, however, because it is highly likely to be detected, andefforts would be made to counter it. instead, an adversary with the wherewithal to conduct such repeated attacks would more likely make the initial strike and then use the recovery period not to stage and launch another strike against the internet but to attack the physical infrastructure;this strategy could leverage the inoperative internet to cause additionaldamage and chaos. (of course, the fact that physical attacks may be moredifficult to conduct must also be taken into account.)¥the it infrastructure (or some element of it) can be a weapon usedin an attack on something else as well as being the target of an attack. anattack using the it infrastructure as a weapon has advantages and disadinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26information technology for counterterrorismvantages from the point of view of a terrorist planner. it can be conductedat a distance in relative physical safety, in a relatively anonymous fashion,and in potentially undetectable ways. however, the impact of such anattack (by assumption, on some other critical national asset) would beindirect, harder to predict, and less certain.¥some of the scenarios described above are potentially relevant toinformation warfare attacks against the united statesñthat is, attackslaunched or abetted by hostile nationstates and/or directed against u.s.military forces or assets. a hostile nation conducting an informationattack on the united states is likely to conceal its identity to minimize thelikelihood of retaliation, and thus it may resort to sponsoring terroristswho can attack without leaving clear national signatures.the committee wishes to underscore a very important point regarding terrorist threats to the it infrastructureñthey are serious enough towarrant considerable national attention, but they are, in the end, only oneof a number of ways through which terrorists could act against the unitedstates. thus, the likelihood of some kind of terrorist attack against orusing the it infrastructure must be understood in the context of a terroristorganization that may have many other types of attack at its disposal,including (possibly) chemical, biological, nuclear, radiological, suicide,and explosive attacks. this point is important because terrorists, likeother parties, have limited resources. thus, they are likely to concentratetheir efforts where the impact is largest for the smallest expenditure ofresources.many factors would play into a terrorist decision to use one kind ofattack or another. the particular kinds of expertise and level of resourcesavailable, the effect that the terrorists wished to produce, the publicitythey wished to gain, the complexity of any attack contemplated, the symbolic value of an attack, the risk of being caught, the likelihood of survival, the defenses that would be faced if a given attack was mounted,and the international reaction to such an attack are all relevant to such adecision. how any given terrorist will weigh such factors cannot beknown in advance.for example, terrorists who want to create immediate public fear andterror are more likely to use a physical attack (perhaps in conjunctionwith an attack using it to amplify the resulting damage) than an attackthat targets it exclusively. the reason is that the latter is not likely to beas cinematic as other attacks. what would television broadcast? therewould be no dead or injured people, no buildings on fire, no panic in thestreets, and no emergencyresponse crews coming to the rescue. (this isnot to say that an attack targeting it exclusively could not shake publicinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.27types of threats associated with it infrastructureconfidenceñbut it would not have the same impact as images of deathand destruction in the streets.)note also that òlikelihoodó is not a static quantity. while it is true, allelse being equal, that it is appropriate to devote resources preferentiallyto defending against highly likely attacks, the deployment of a defensethat addresses the threat of a highly likely attack a may well lead to asubsequent increase in the likelihood of a previously less likely attack b.in short, terrorists may not behave in accordance with expectations thatare based on static probability distributions. it is therefore very difficultto prioritize a research program for countering terrorism in the same waythat one might, for example, prioritize a program for dealing with naturaldisasters.how likely are terrorist attacks on the it infrastructure or attacksusing the it infrastructure compared to terrorist attacks spreading smallpox or smuggling a stolen nuclear weapon into the united states? forobvious reasons, the committee is not in a position to make such judgments. but while the considerations discussed in this section make certain types of attack more or less likely, none of the scenarios described insection 2.2 can be categorically excluded.this fact argues in favor of a longterm commitment to a strategicr&d program that will contribute to the overall robustness of the telecommunications and data networks and of the platforms associated withthem. such a program would involve both fundamental research into thescientific underpinnings of information and network security as well asthe development of deployable technology that would contribute to information and network security. ultimately, the strengthening of thenationõs it infrastructure can improve our ability to prevent, detect, respond to, and recover from terrorist attacks on the nation.1313computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1996,computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis management and otherapplications, national academy press, washington, d.c; computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999, information technology research forcrisis management, national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.283investing in informationtechnology researchthis chapter describes the shape of a strategic research and development (r&d) program with respect to information technology for counterterrorism. however, it should be noted that this program has broadapplicability not only for efforts against terrorism and information warfare but also for reducing cybercrime and responding to natural disasters.while the scope and complexity of issues with respect to each of theseareas may well vary (e.g., a program focused on cybercrime may placemore emphasis on forensics useful in prosecution), the committee believes that there is enough overlap in the research problems and approaches to make it unwise to articulate a separate r&d program for eacharea.although many areas of information technology research could bepotentially valuable for counterterrorist purposes, the three areas described below are particularly important for helping reduce the likelihood or impact of a terrorist attack:1.information and network security. research in information and network security is critically relevant to the nationõs counterterrorism effortsfor several reasons.1 first, it attacks can amplify the impact of physical1computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc), 1991, computers at risk: safe computing in the information age, national academypress, washington, d.c. (hereafter cited as cstb, nrc, 1991, computers at risk); computerscience and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999, trust incyberspace, national academy press, washington, d.c. (hereafter cited as cstb, nrc, 1999,information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.29investing in information technology researchattacks and lessen the effectiveness of emergency responses; reducingsuch vulnerabilities will require major advances in information and network security. it attacks on supervisory control and data acquisition(scada) systems in the control infrastructure could also be highly damaging, and research to improve the security of such systems will beneeded. second, the increasing levels of social and economic damagecaused by cybercrime and the tendency to rely on the internet as theprimary networking and communications channel both suggest that thelikelihood of severe damage through a cyberattack is increasing. finally,the evolution of the internet and the systems connected to it demonstratesincreasing homogeneity in hardware and software (box 3.1), which makesthe internet more vulnerable at the same time that it becomes more critical. to address these problems, more researchers and trained professionals who are focused on information and network security will be needed.2.systems for emergency response. òc3ió (command, control, communications, and intelligence) systems are critical to emergency respondersfor coordinating efforts and increasing the promptness and effectivenessof response (e.g., saving lives, treating the injured, and protecting property). while terrorist attacks and natural disasters have many similaritieswith respect to the consequences of such events, the issues raised by c3ifor emergency response for terrorist disasters differ from those for naturaldisasters for several reasons. first, the number of responding agencies,including those from the local, regional, state, and federal levelsñwithpossibly conflicting and overlapping areas of responsibilityñincreasesthe level of complexity. (for example, in a terrorist attack scenario, thedepartment of defense [dod] might be much more involved than itwould be in a natural disaster.) second, ongoing security and lawenforcement concerns are much stronger in the wake of a terrorist attack.while looting is often a threat to the community affected by a naturaldisaster (and may result in the deployment of a police presence in themidst of the recovery effort), the threat from a followon terrorist attackmay well be much greater or more technologically sophisticated than thatposed by looters. and, to the extent that an additional security or lawenforcement presence is required, the sometimesconflicting needs of security and lawenforcement agencies with the needs of othersñfor extrust in cyberspace); computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil, 2001, embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embeddedcomputers, national academy press, washington, d.c. (hereafter cited as cstb, nrc, 2001,embedded, everywhere).information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30information technology for counterterrorismbox 3.1monoculture and system homogenitythe existence of òmonocultureó on the internet has both advantages and disadvantages. its primary advantage is that increased standardization of systems generally allows for greater efficiencies (e.g., easier interoperability). on the other hand,monocultural environments are generally more vulnerable to a single welldesignedattackña fact greatly exacerbated by the extensive interconnections that the internetprovides.for example, a constant barrage of computer viruses has been designed to attack the weaknesses of the windows operating system and its associated browserand office productivity programs. however, these viruses have had a negligibledirect effect on computers running other operating systems. furthermore, while theseattacks can be propagated through computer servers running other operating systems, they are not propagated on these systems.a monoculture is highly vulnerable to attacks because once a successful attackon the underlying system is developed, it can be multiplied at extremely low cost.thus, for all practical purposes, a successful attack on one system means that allsimilar (and similarly configured) systems connected to it can be attacked as well.as a general rule, inhomogeneity of systems would make broadbased attacksmore difficult. this should be considered carefully when designing primary or redundant critical network systems.(natural òliving systemsó provide an interesting analogy to the importance ofdiversity. heterogeneity plays an important role in preventing minor changes in theclimate, environment, or parasites from destroying the entire system. different species demonstrate varying levels of vulnerability to the variety of challenges encountered, and this lends resilience to the system as a whole. the diversity of species alsolessens the possibility of infectious disease spreading across the entire system.)ample, the fire and medical personnel onsiteñmean that security andlaw enforcement may interfere with rescue and recovery operations.3.informationfusion systems for the prevention, detection, attribution, andremediation of attacks. òinformation fusionó promises to play a central rolein countering future terrorist efforts. information fusion is an essentialtool for the intelligence analysis needed if preemptive disruption of terrorist attacks is to be successful. knowing that a biological attack is inprogress (an issue of detection) or determining the perpetrators of anattack (an issue of attribution) may depend on the fusion of large amountsof information and, in many cases, early warning of an attack increasesthe effectiveness of any counterresponse to it. in every case, informationfrom many sources will have to be acquired, integrated, and appropriately interpreted to support decision makers (ranging from emergencyresponse units to intelligence organizations). given the range of formats,the permanence and growing volume of information from each source,and the difficulty of accurately analyzing information from single let alonemultiple sources, information fusion offers researchers a challenge.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.31investing in information technology researchit must also be noted that although technology is central to all of theareas listed above, it is not the sole element of concern. research in theseareas must be multidisciplinary, involving technologists, social scientists,and domain experts (e.g., the people from the multiple agencies that needto work together during crisis solutions). all technology deployed foroperational purposes is subject to the reality of implementation and operation by humans. thus, systems issues, including human, social, andorganizational behavior, must be part of the research to develop theneeded technology and the system design to implement it. technologycannot be studied in isolation of the ways in which it is deployed, andfailure to attend to the human, political, social, and organizational aspectsof solutions will doom technology to failure. for this reason, section 3.6addresses social and organizational dimensions that must be incorporated into study in these areas.to assist decision makers in the formulation of a research program,table 3.1 presents the committeeõs rough assessment of the criticality ofthe various research areas identified, the difficulty of the research problems, and the likely time scale on which progress could be made. thecriticality of a research area reflects an assessment of the vulnerabilitiesthat might be reduced if significant advances in that area were accomplished and deployed; areas are ranked òhigh,ó òmedium,ó or òlow.óhow hard it will be to make significant progress is rated òvery difficult,óòdifficult,ó or òeasy.ó the time frame for progress is ranked as ò14years,ó ò59 years,ó or ò10+ years.ó of course, the deployment of researchresults also presents obstacles, which may reduce effectiveness or lengthenthe time until a research result can become a reality. it must also be notedthat these assessments are both subjective and subject to some debate, asthey were intended to provide readers with a quick calibration of theseissues rather than a definitive conclusion.finally, while r&d is an essential element of the nationõs response tocounterterrorism, it is not alone sufficient. indeed, the history of information security itself demonstrates that the availability of knowledge ortechnology about how to prevent certain problems does not necessarilytranslate into the application of that knowledge or the use of that technology. it is beyond the scope of this report to address such issues in detail,but policy makers should be cautioned that r&d is only the first step ona long road to widespread deployment and a genuinely stronger andmore robust it infrastructure.3.1information and network securitya broad overview of some of the history of and major issues in information and network security is contained in the cstb report cybersecurityinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32information technology for counterterrorismtable 3.1 a taxonomy of prioritiestime scale forr&d forsignificantresearchprogress andcategorycriticalitydifficultydeploymentimproved informationand network securityhighdifficult59 yearsdetection and identificationhighdifficult59 yearsarchitecture and design forcontainmenthighdifficult59 yearslarge system backup anddecontaminationhighdifficult59 yearsless buggy codehighvery difficult59 yearsautomated tools for systemconfigurationhighdifficult14 yearsauditing functionalitylowdifficult10+ yearstradeoffs between usabilityand securitymediumdifficult59 yearssecurity metricsmediumdifficult14 yearsfield studies of securityhigheasy14 yearsc3i for emergency responsehighdifficult14 yearsad hoc interoperabilityhigheasy14 yearsemergency deployment ofcommunications capacityhigheasy14 yearssecurity of rapidly deployedad hoc networksmediumdifficult59 yearsinformation managementand decisionsupport toolsmediumdifficult59 yearscommunications with thepublic during emergencyhighdifficult14 yearsemergency sensor deploymenthigheasy14 yearsprecise location identificationmediumdifficult59 yearsmapping the physicaltelecommunicationsinfrastructurehigheasy14 yearscharacterizing the functionalityof regional networks foremergency respondershighdifficult14 yearsinformation fusionhighdifficult14 yearsdata mininghighdifficult14 yearsdata integrationhighdifficult14 yearslanguage technologieshighdifficult14 yearsimage and video processinghighdifficult59 yearsevidence combinationmediumdifficult14 yearsinteraction and visualizationmediumdifficult14 yearsprivacy and confidentialityhighdifficult14 yearsplanning for the futuremediumdifficult10+ yearsinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.33investing in information technology researchtoday and tomorrow: pay now or pay later.2 that report builds on a varietyof earlier, more detailed cstb studies related to information and networksecurity.despite diligent efforts to create effective perimeter defenses, the penetration of defended computer and telecommunications systems by a determined adversary is highly likely. software flaws, lax procedures forcreating and guarding passwords, compromised insiders, and insecureentry points all lead to the conclusion that watertight perimeters cannotbe assumed. nevertheless, strengthening defensive perimeters is helpful,and this section deals with the methodologies of today and tomorrow thatcan detect or confine an intruder and, if necessary, aid in recovery fromattack by taking corrective action. (box 3.2 describes some of the fundamental principles of defensive strategy.)as noted above, the technology discussed here is relevant for effortsin defensive information warfare and for fighting cybercrime. in addition, many advances in information and network security can improvethe reliability and availability of computer systems, which are issues ofimportance to users even under ordinary, nonthreatening conditions. thefact that such advances have dual purposes could help to generate broaderinterest and support in r&d in this area, as well as to motivate its incorporation into industry products.research and development in this area should be construed broadlyto include r&d on defensive technology (including both underlying technologies and architectural issues), organizational and sociological dimensions of such security, forensic and recovery tools, and best policies andpractices. research in information and network security can be groupedin four generic areas: authentication, detection, containment, and recovery. a fifth set of topics (e.g., reducing buggy code, dealing with misconfigured systems, auditing functionality) is broadly applicable to morethan one of these areas.3.1.1authenticationa terrorist may seek to gain access to a computer system that he orshe is not authorized to use. once access is gained, many opportunitiesfor causing harm are available, including the installation of hostile pro2computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 2002. cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later. national academypress, washington, d.c. (hereafter cited as cstb, nrc, 2002, cybersecurity today and tomorrow).information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34information technology for counterterrorismbox 3.2principles of defensive strategycomputing and communications systems that contain sensitive information orwhose functioning is critical to an enterpriseõs mission must be protected at higherlevels of security than are adequate for other systems. several policies should bemandatory for such critical systems:¥the use of encryption for communication between system elements and theuse of cryptographic protocols. these practices help to ensure data confidentialityagainst eavesdroppers and data integrity between major processing elements (e.g.,host to host, site to site, element to element); prevent intrusion into the networkbetween nodes (e.g., making òmaninthemiddleó attacks much more difficult); andprovide strong authentication (e.g., through the use of publickeybased authentication systems that use encryption and random challenge to strengthen the authentication process or to bind other elements of the authentication, such as biometrics, tothe identity of a user).¥minimal exposure to the internet, which is inherently insecure. firewallsprovide a minimal level of protection, but they are often bypassed for convenience.(balancing ease of use and security is an important research area discussed in themain text of this report.) truly vital systems may require an òair gapó that separatesthem from public networks. likewise, communication links that must remain secureand available should use a private network. (from a security perspective, an alternative to a private network may be the use of a connection on a public network that isappropriately secured through encryption. however, depending on the precise characteristics of the private network in question, a private network mayñor may notñprovide higher availability.)¥strong authentication technology for authenticating users. security tokensbased on encryption (such as smart cards) are available for this purpose, and allentrances from a public data network (such as a network access provider or insecuredialin) should use them. furthermore, for highly critical systems, physical securitymust also be assured.¥robust configuration control. such control is needed to ensure that onlyapproved software can run on a system and that all of the securityrelevant knobsand switches are correctly set.such measures are likely to affect ease of use and convenience, as well as cost.these are prices that must be paid, however, because hardening critical systems willgreatly reduce vulnerability to a cyberattack.grams and the destruction or compromise of important data. in otherinstances, a terrorist might orchestrate the actions of multiple computersto undertake harmful acts, for example through denialofservice attacks.33computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc), 1999, realizing the potential of c4i: fundamental challenges, national academy press,washington d.c., pp. 144152 (hereafter cited as cstb, nrc, 1999, realizing the potential ofc4i); cstb, nrc, 1999, trust in cyberspace.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.35investing in information technology researchto prevent a terrorist from gaining unauthorized access to a computer, it is necessary to prevent that person from successfully posing as anauthorized user.4 in other words, an authorized user must pass successfully through an authentication process that confirms his or her assertedidentity as an authorized user. the same is true of computertocomputerinteractionsñfor some transactions, it is necessary for computer a todetermine if computer b is one of the computers authorized to interactwith it. here too, a computertocomputer authentication process is necessary so that only individual authorized devices connecting to a networkcan receive services.today, the prevailing method of user authentication is the password.passwords are easily compromised by the use of weak passwordchoosing techniques, the recording of passwords in open places, the communication channel used for the password entry or administration, and bypasswordcracking techniques. requiring several login procedures (andusually with different passwords for each) for mapping to permission orauthorization techniques makes system administration even more complex for the user and the system administrator. other devices, such ashardware tokens, are usually more secure than are passwords, but a usermust have them available when needed.the ideal authentication system would be a simple, easytouse system that verified identity, could be managed in a distributed manner, hadthe trustworthiness of cryptographically based systems without todayõscomplexity, could be scaled to hundreds of thousands (or even millions),and had a cost of ownership that was competitive with passwords. inpractice, these desirable attributes often entail tradeoffs with one another; one way to focus a research effort in authentication would be toaddress the reduction of these tradeoffs.53.1.2detectioneven with apparently secure authentication processes and technologies, it might still be possible for an intruder to gain unauthorized accessto a system, though with more effort if the system were more secure. thispossibility suggests a need for detecting and identifying intruders. how4the case of a terrorist as an insider who has already been granted access is not withinthe scope of this particular problem. insider attacks are addressed in other parts of thisreport.5an ongoing cstb project examines in detail the technologies underlying authentication. see the web site <http://www.cstb.org> for more information on this subject.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36information technology for counterterrorismever, intruders are often indistinguishable from valid users and frequentlytake great care to hide their entry and make their behavior look innocuous.intrusiondetection systems are designed to monitor users and trafficto detect either anomalous users or unusual traffic patterns that mightindicate an active attack. of course, such monitoring requires good characterizations of what ònormaló behavior is and knowledge of what various kinds of behavior mean in the context of specific applications. today,the major deficiency in this approach is the occurrence of too many falsepositives. that is, the behavior of legitimate users is sufficiently diversethat some types of legitimate behavior are mischaracterized as anomalous(and hence hostile). thus, research is needed on reducing the rate of falsepositives in intrusiondetection systems.another approach to intrusion is based on deceiving the cyberattacker. for example, traps (sometimes referred to as honeypots)ñsuchas apparently interesting filesñcan be crafted to attract the attention of anintruder so that he or she might spend extra time examining it. that extratime can then be used to provide warning of hostile intent, and it mighthelp in forensic investigation while the hostile party is connected to thesystem. alternatively, tools might be created that disguise the actualdetails of a network when it is probed. tools of this nature, as well as thedevelopment of forensic tools for use in attackerdeceiving environments,may be fruitful areas of research.a related challenge is the development of intruderdetection methodsthat scale to function efficiently in large systems. current approaches tointrusion detection generate enormous amounts of data; higher prioritymust be given to systems that can analyze rather than merely collect suchdata, while still retaining collections of essential forensic data. moreover,the collection and analysis of such large amounts of data may degradeperformance to unacceptable levels.intrusiondetection systems are also one element of technology thatcan be used to cope with the threat of insider attack. because the trustedinsider has legitimate access to system resources and information, his orher activities are subject to far less suspicion, which usually allows theinsider to act with much greater freedom than would be permitted anoutsider who had penetrated the system. thus, new technologies specifically focused on the possibility of insider attack may be a particularlyfruitful avenue of research (box 3.3). in addition, research focused onunderstanding common patterns of insider attack (e.g., through the use ofapplicationlevel audits to examine usage patterns) could be integratedwith other kinds of audits to provide a more robust picture of systemusage.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.37investing in information technology research3.1.3containmenttodayõs systems and networks often fail catastrophically. that is, asuccessful attack on one part of a system can result in an entire system ornetworkõs being compromised. (for example, the failure of a perimeterdefense, such as a firewall, surrounding otherwise unprotected systemscan result in an intruderõs gaining full and complete access to all of thosesystems.) a system that degrades gracefully is more desirableñin thiscase, a successful attack on one part of a system results only in that partõsbox 3.3illustrative technologies for dealing with theinsider attackauthentication, access control, and audit trails are three wellunderstood technologies that can be used in combating the insider threat. using these mechanismsto enforce strict accountability can improve protection against the insider threat, butin practice they are often not as successful as they might be. for example, manycurrent tools for access control and audits are difficult to use, or they generate largevolumes of data that are, for practical purposes, unreviewable.other technology research areas that may be relevant to dealing with insiderattack include:¥attackspecification languages. programming languages designed for easeof modeling attacks and/or expressing attack behaviors and modalities.¥modeling and simulation of insider attacks. better understanding of suchattacks to help those seeking to validate technologies to counter the insider threat.today, simulations of such attacks are difficult to perform and are personnelintensive.¥authentication of roles, rights, privileges. approaches to using finergrainedauthentication strategies based not on authenticating an individual as an individualbut as the holder of certain rights and privileges or embodying a certain role.¥semantics of authorized access. development of the semantics of operations and authorization that enable more finegrained authorization decisions or theflagging of potentially suspect audit trails.¥automated, dynamic revocation of privileges. development of effectivestrategies for the automatic revocation of privileges based on policyspecified factorssuch as the timing of certain types of access or other user behavior.¥fingerprinting of documents. strategies for embedding identifying information into a document so that its subsequent disposition can be more effectively traced.such information would be analogous to a copyright notice in a document that canhelp to determine its origin, except that it would not be easily removable from thedocument itself.¥continuous authentication. technologies for authenticating a user after theinitial authentication challenge (to deal with the fact that people walk away fromtheir computers without logging out).information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38information technology for counterterrorismbeing compromised, and the remainder of the system continues to function almost normally.6the principle of graceful degradation under attack is well accepted,but system and network design for graceful degradation is not well understood. nor are tools available to help design systems and networks insuch a manner. even more difficult is the challenge of modifying existinglegacy systems to fail gracefully.in addition, the building blocks of todayõs systems are generally commercial offtheshelf components.7 despite the security limitations ofsuch components, the economics of system development and the speedwith which the it environment changes inevitably require them to bebuilt this way. however, it is not known today how to integrate components safely, how to contain faults in them, and how to disaggregate themwhen necessary. while this lack of understanding applies to systemsranging from accounting and payroll systems to telephone switching systems, scada systems are a particularly important case.architectural containment as a systemdesign principle calls for theability to maintain critical functionality (such as engine control on a ship)despite failures in other parts of a system.8 a sophisticated control system used during ònormal operationsó must be able to provide basic functionality even when parts of it have been damaged.9 such an approachcould be one of the most effective longterm methods for hardening ittargets that oversee critical operations.for the most part, current approaches to system design involve eitherthe independence of system components (which in modern largescalesystems leads to inefficiencies of operation) or the integration of systemcomponents (with the inherent vulnerabilities that this approach entails).containment essentially navigates between the two extremes; its essentialelement is the ability to òlock downó a system under attackñperhaps tosuspend normal operation temporarily while preserving some basic functionality as the system finds and disables potential intruders and to resume normal system operation afterwardñwith less disruption thanmight be caused by shutting down and rebooting.research is thus necessary in several areas: in understanding how to6cstb, nrc, 1999, realizing the potential of c4i, pp. 144152.7cstb, nrc, 1999, trust in cyberspace.8it should be noted that an essential aspect of designing for containment is the ability todefine and prioritize which functions count as essential. for systems used by multipleconstituencies, this ability cannot be taken for granted.9as an example, a shipboard networking failure on the uss yorktown left the ship without the ability to run its engines. (gregory slabodkin. 1998. òsoftware glitches leave navysmart ship dead in the water.ó government computing news, july 13.)information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.39investing in information technology researchfuse a simple, highly secure, basic control system used primarily for operations under attack with a sophisticated, highly effective, and optimizedcontrol system used for normal operations; in the òdecontaminationó of asystem while it is being used (see section 3.1.4); and in the resumption ofoperations without the need for going offline. one ògrand challengeómight be the development of a system that could be made more secure atthe touch of a button; the cost would be the loss of some nonessentialfunctionality while the system simultaneously decontaminated itself orshut out attackers. a second challenge involves existing systems thatneed to be examined and restructured. methods and tools for analyzingsystems to identify essential functionality and to restructure those systems to tolerate the loss of nonessential functions could be productivelyapplied to existing designs well before a body of design principles andtheories become clear.a serious problem for which few general solutions are known is thedenialofservice (dos) attack. for example, consider a dos attack that islaunched against the major internet news services to coincide with aphysical bomb attack on some other target such as a crowded sportsstadium. it would be nearly impossible to distinguish legitimate users,who would simply be looking for information, from attackers inundatingthe news service web sites to try to prevent access to that information,possibly increasing panic and spreading misinformation. a distributeddenialofservice (ddos) attack uses many computers to launch attacksagainst a given target, rendering ineffective the obvious approach of simply cutting off an attacking computer.one approach to countering a dos attack calls for authentication sothat intruders and bogus traffic can more easily be distinguished. developing such methods that are both fast and scalable (i.e., effective and fasteven when they involve the authentication of large numbers of parties)remains the major challenge in this area, however. (a technique that maybe worth further development, at least in the context of authenticatingtraffic to and from heavily used web sites, is easytouse subscriptionmodels.10) in any event, research on countering dos attacks is important.another approach within this general area of containment is the de10a subscription model calls for a user to register for service in some authenticated way,so that a site can distinguish that user from a random bad user. because denialofserviceattacks depend on a flood of bogus requests for service, the availability of a database ofregistered users makes it easy to discard service requests from requests that are not registeredñand those are likely to account for the vast majority of bogus requests. (of course,there is nothing in this scheme to prevent a registered user from conducting a hostile action,but the number of hostile registered users is likely to be small, allowing counteractions tobe taken on an individual basis.)information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40information technology for counterterrorismvelopment of broad architectural principles of robust infrastructure fordifferent kinds of applications (e.g., scada systems). for example, principles are needed to guide decisions about the relative robustness of distributed power generation versus centralized power generation in theface of attack.3.1.4recoveryonce an intruder has been detected, confined, and neutralized, thegoal becomes recoveryñthe restoration of a systemõs full functional operating capability as soon as possible. as with containment, recovery ishighly relevant for reliability, although the presence of a determined adversary makes the problem considerably harder. recovery includespreparations not only to help ensure that a system is recoverable but alsoto be able to actively reconstitute a good system state.backup is an essential prerequisite for reconstitution. although thebasic concepts of system backup are well understood, there are majorchallenges to performing and maintaining backups in real time so that aslittle system state as possible is lost. however, normal backup methodshave been developed under the assumption of benign and uncorrelatedfailure, rather than that of a determined attacker who is trying to destroyinformation. further, backups of large systems take a long time, and ifthey are in use during the backup, the system state can change appreciably during that time. thus, research is needed on ways to preserve information about system state during backup.reconstituting a computer system after an intrusion relies on the useof backup. unlike a restore operation used to recreate a clean systemafter a failure, reconstitution requires an additional step: decontamination, which is the process of distinguishing between clean system state(unaffected by an intruder) and the portions of infected system state, andeliminating the causes of those differences. because system users wouldprefer that as little good data as possible be discarded, this problem isquite difficult. decontamination must also remove all active infections, aswell as any dormant ones. once decontamination is performed, attentioncan be turned to forensics in an attempt to identify the attacker11 andacquire evidence suitable for prosecution or retaliation. in the end, thisability is critical to longterm deterrence.given that penetration of computer and telecommunications networks is likely to continue despite our best efforts to build better perimeter security, more resilient and robust systems are necessary, with backupand recovery as essential elements.11cstb, nrc, 1999, realizing the potential of c4i, pp. 144152.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.41investing in information technology research12cstb, nrc, 1991, computers at risk; cstb, nrc, 1999, trust in cyberspace.13catherine meadows, 1996, òthe nrl protocol analyzer: an overview,ó journal oflogic programming, vol. 26 (2); dawn song et al., 2001, òathena, a novel approach toefficient automatic security protocol analysis,ó journal of computer security, vol. 9 (1, 2).new approaches to decontamination are also needed, especially whena system cannot be shut down for decontamination purposes. at present,much of the activity associated with a properly running system interfereswith decontamination efforts (particularly with respect to identifying asource of contamination and eliminating it).3.1.5crosscutting issues in information andnetwork security researcha number of issues cut across the basic taxonomy of detection, containment, and recovery described above.reducing buggy codeprogress in making systems more reliable will almost certainly makethem more resistant to deliberate attack as well. but buggy code underlies many problems related both to reliability and to security, and noattempt to secure systems and networks can succeed if it does not takethis basic fact into account.12buggy software is largely a result of the fact that, despite many yearsof serious and productive research in software engineering, the creationof software is still more craft than sciencebased engineering. furthermore, the progress that has been made is only minimally relevant to thelegacy software systems that remain in all infrastructures.the fact that essentially all software systems contain bugs is not new.bugs can result from a variety of causes, ranging from lowlevel errors(e.g., a mathematical expression uses a plus sign when it should use aminus sign) to fundamental design flaws (e.g., the system functions as itwas designed to function, but these functions are inappropriate in thecircumstances of operation).dealing with buggy code is arguably the oldest unsolved problem incomputer science, and there is no particular reason to think that it can besolved once and for all by any sort of crash project. nevertheless, twoareas of research seem to be particularly important in a security context:¥securityoriented tools for system development. more tools that support securityoriented development would be useful.13 for example,information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42information technology for counterterrorismmodelchecking tools, which have been used successfully for hardwareverification, can be used for analyzing designs of security protocols including authentication protocols14 and electronic commerce protocols;15static analyzers that have been used successfully for compiler optimization may be usable to analyze code for information flow properties;16dynamic analyzers for online monitoring (detection) and reconfiguring(response and recovery) may be used for intrusion detection and forensics;17 and theoremproving tools18 that have been used for proofcarrying code19 can be extended to handle more expressive securityspecificlogics.¥trustworthy system upgrades and bug fixes. it often happens that asystem bug is identified and a fix to repair it is developed. obviously,repairing the bug may reduce system vulnerability, and so system administrators and usersñin principleñhave some incentive to install the patch.however, with current technology, the installation of a fix or a systemupgrade carries many risks, such as a nontrivial chance of causing otherproblems, a disruption of existing functionality, or possibly the creationof other security holes, even when the fix is putatively confined to amodule that can be reinstalled.20 the essential reason for this problem is14gavin lowe, 1996, òbreaking and fixing the needhamschroeder publickey protocolusing fdr,ó in tools and algorithms for the construction and analysis of systems, tizianamargaria and bernard steffen (eds.), vol. 1055 of lecture notes in computer science, springerverlag; will marrero et al., 1997, model checking for security protocols, technical report 97139, department of computer science, carnegie mellon university, pittsburgh, pa., may;j.c. mitchell et al., 1997, òautomated analysis of cryptographic protocols using murphi,óieee symposium on security and privacy, oakland, available online at <http://theory.stanford.edu/people/jcm/papers/murphiprotocols.ps>.15nevin heintze et al., 1996, òmodel checking electronic commerce protocolsó (extendedabstract), usenix workshop on electronic commerce; darrell kindred and jeannette m.wing, 1996, òfast, automatic checking of security protocols,ó in proceedings of the usenix1996 workshop on electronic commerce, november.16andrew c. myers and barbara liskov. 1997. òa decentralized model for informationflow control,ó in proceedings of the acm symposium on operating system principles (sospõ97). saint malo, france, october.17giovanni vigna and richard a. kemmerer. 1999. ònetstat. a networkbased intrusion detection system.ó journal of computer security, vol. 7 (1).18lawrence c. paulson. 1999. òproving security protocols correct,ó pp. 370381 in ieeesymposium on logic in computer science. trento, italy. available online at <http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/users/lcp/papers/auth/lics.pdf>.19george c. necula and peter lee. 1997. òproofcarrying code,ó pp. 106119 in proceedings of the 24th annual acm sigplansigact symposium on principles of programminglanguages (popl). acm press, new york, january.20frederick p. brooks. 1975. the mythical manmonth. addisonwesley, boston, mass.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.43investing in information technology researchthat although fixes are tested, the number of operational configurations ismuch larger than the number of test configurations that are possible.research is thus needed to find ways of testing bug fixes reliably and todevelop programming interfaces to modularize programs that cannot bebypassed. an additional dimension of trustworthy upgrades and bugfixes is their installation. if such upgrades and fixes can be developed,their automatic online installation becomes a reasonable desire. today,some operating systems and programs allow automatic download of suchmodifications, but it is often the case that they cannot be installed whilethe system is running. moreover, in light of the security concerns mentioned in section 2.2.6, automatic downloads of bug fixes must be madevery highly secure. research will be needed to solve this problem.21misconfigured systems (configuration management)because existing permission and policy mechanisms are hard to understand, use, and verify, many system vulnerabilities result from theirimproper administration.22 there is also a tradeoff between finegrainedaccess control and usability, and both needs are growing. for example,an entire group of people may be given access privileges when only oneperson in that group should have them. or, a local system administratormay install a modem on the system he or she administers with the intentof obtaining access from home, but this also provides intruders with anunauthorized access point.the ability to formulate security policies at the appropriate level, toensure that policies are consistent across all levels and to state these policies crisply and clearly (e.g., what language is used to express the policy,what mechanisms are used to enforce it, and what is to be done if it isviolated) would be helpful. in addition, it will be necessary to developmethods of generating formal descriptions of actual, existing securitypolicies in place and to compare them with desired security policies. thus,better tools for formulating and specifying security policies and for checking system configurations quickly against prespecified configurationsshould be developed. better tools for system and network operators todetect added and unauthorized functionality (e.g., the addition of a trojan horse) are also necessary.21advances in this area would also have substantial benefit in reducing the workload ofsystem administrators, who today must spend considerable time keeping up with the sheervolume of security patches and assessing the costs and benefits of installing them.22cstb, nrc, 1991, computers at risk; cstb, nrc, 1999, trust in cyberspace.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44information technology for counterterrorismauditing functionalityvalidation sets are used to ensure that a piece of hardware (e.g., achip) has the functionality that its design calls for. however, these setstypically test for planned functionalityñthat is, can the hardware properly perform some specified function? they do not test for unauthorizedfunctionality that might have been improperly inserted, perhaps by someone seeking to corrupt a production or distribution chain. similar problems are found in the development of software, especially software systems with many components that are developed by multiple parties.research is needed for developing tools to ensure that all of the calledforfunctionality is present and that no additional functionality is present.research is needed to develop tools that can detect added unauthorizedfunctionality.managing tradeoffs between functionality and securityas a general rule, more secure systems are harder to use and havefewer features.23 conversely, featuresñsuch as executable content andremote administrationñcan introduce unintended vulnerabilities even asthey bring operational benefits. (for example, newer word processorsallow the embedding of macros into word processing files, a fact thatresults in a new class of vulnerabilities for users of those programs as wellas added convenience.)one good example of the tradeoff between security and usability isthe difficulty of establishing an encrypted communications channel usinga popular encryption program. one study found that a majority of testpopulation individuals experienced in the use of email were unable tosign and encrypt a message using pgp 5.0. in a security context, theseusability issues go beyond the userinterface design techniques appropriate to most other types of software.24a second example is the buffer overflow problem.25 over half of the23cstb, nrc, 1991, computers at risk, pp. 159160.24for example, from the userõs perspective, security is secondary to the primary goal ofusing the software for some practical purpose. traditional userinterface design techniquespresume that users are motivated to use software for their primary purposes. more discussion of this and other relevant issues can be found in alma whitten and j.d. tygar. 1999.òwhy johnny canõt encrypt: a usability evaluation of pgp 5.0,ó proceedings of the 9thusenix security symposium, august.25in a buffer overflow, memory is overwritten by an application and control is transferred to rogue code. typesafe languages allow memory accesses only to specificallyauthorized locations. for example, programs written in typesafe languages cannot read orwrite to memory locations that are associated with other programs.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.45investing in information technology researchsystem and network security vulnerabilities documented by the computer emergency response team (cert) of the software engineeringinstitute at carnegie mellon university throughout certõs existence involve buffer overflows. these can exploited by an adversary to gaincontrol over a target system. some ways of preventing buffer overflowsare known, but they involve degradations in performance. for example,it is possible for processors to support a programmerusable capability todesignate certain areas of memory as òcodeó (that cannot be overwritten)versus òdataó (that can be overwritten). if this designation is made, bufferoverflows cannot result in the transfer of control to rogue code. on theother hand, the extra hardware needed to implement this capability hasthe effect of slowing down memory access by nontrivial amounts. javaand similar typesafe languages are also more resistant to buffer overflows than are other languages, but there is overhead in undertaking thecheck of parameter ranges needed to prevent overflows.more research is required for performing essential tradeoffs betweena rich feature set or performance and resistance to attack. transparentsecurity would be more acceptable to users and hence would be employed more frequently. new authentication mechanisms (or implementations) that combine higher security with lower inconvenience are alsoneeded.security metricsmany quantitative aspects of security are not well understood. forexample, even if a given security measure is installedñand installed properly (something that cannot be assumed in general)ñthere is no way ofknowing the degree to which system security has increased. threat models are often characterized by actuarial data and probability distributionsin which the adverse effects of vulnerabilities are prioritized on the basisof how likely they are to occur; but such models are of little use in countering deliberate terrorist attacks that seek to exploit nominally lowprobability vulnerabilities. notions such as calculating the return on a security investmentñcommon in other areas in which security is an issueñarenot well understood either, thus making quantitative risk management avery difficult enterprise indeed.26 research is needed for developingmeaningful security metrics.26information on the economic impact of computer security is available online at<http://www.nist.gov/director/progofc/report021.pdf>.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46information technology for counterterrorismintelligence gatheringgiven the rate at which information technology changes, it is likelythat new vulnerabilities and new types of attack will emerge rapidly.because insight into the nature of possible attacks is likely to result inadditional options for defense, it is highly desirable to keep abreast ofnew vulnerabilities and to understand the potential consequences if suchvulnerabilities were to be exploited.field studies of securitytraditional criteria for secure systems, as specified in the òorangebook,ó27 have not been successes. they do not capture current needs ormodels of computation.28 worse yet, they have largely failed in the marketplace; very few customers actually bought orange bookrated systems, even when they were available.29 understanding why previousattempts to build secure systems and networks have failed in the marketplace, or in defending against outside attack, would help to guide futureresearch efforts. (further, human and organizational factors are key elements of such analysis, as previously described, and the understandingfrom such study is likely to be based at least as much on economics,sociology, and anthropology as on technology.30)3.2systems for emergency responsetechnologies for command, control, communications, and intelligence(c3i) have major importance in the response phase of a disaster. in general, the it infrastructure for emergency responders must be robust in the27the òorange bookó is the nickname for trusted computer system evaluation criteriañcriteria that were intended to guide commercial system production generally and therebyimprove the security of systems in use. see u.s. department of defense. 1985. trustedcomputer system evaluation criteria. department of defense 5200.28std, òorange book.ónational computer security center, fort meade, md., december.28cstb, nrc, 1999, realizing the potential of c4i, pp. 144152; cstb, nrc, 1991, computers at risk; cstb, nrc, 1999, trust in cyberspace.29for example, commercial needs for computer security focused largely on data integrity, while military needs for security focused on confidentiality, as noted in david clarkand david wilson, 1987, òa comparison of commercial and military computer securitypolicies,ó in proceedings of the 1987 ieee symposium on security and privacy, ieee, oakland,calif. another key failing of the orange book approach to security included its omissionof networking concerns. for more discussion, see cstb, nrc, 1999, trust in cyberspace.30see, for example, donald mackenzie. 2001. mechanizing proof: computing, risk, and trust.mit press, cambridge, mass.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.47investing in information technology researchface of damage and even potential terrorist attack.31 although the incident management process has been well studied,32 the it requirementsfor such management do not appear to have been thoroughly conceived,even though in a disaster it is essential that it systems provide for thecapability to deliver information, interagency communication and coordination, and communication with those affected both within and beyondthe immediate disaster area. in a disaster, equipment must be deployedimmediately to provide for appropriate communication to those responding to the situation, and it must be deployed to the multiple agencies inthe private and public sectors that are affected, and to and between thosedirectly affected by the incident.33the committee believes that research in a number of areas, describedbelow, can advance the state of the art for c3i systems for emergencyresponse (and provide collateral benefits for the responses to more common natural disasters as well).3.2.1intra and interoperabilitythe c3i systems of emergencyresponse agencies must support bothintraagency and interagency communications. but many disasters(whether natural or attackrelated) reveal technological shortcomings in agiven agencyõs c3i systems as vital communications are lost or neverheard. and, although the public rhetoric of every emergencyresponseagency acknowledges the need for cooperation with other agencies, almost every actual disaster reveals shortcomings in the extent and natureof interagency cooperation.perhaps the most basic requirement for an agencyõs c3i systems isthat they reliably support communications among the personnel of thatagency. the c3i systems of most emergency responders today are basedon analog radio technology. although digital and analog communica31computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 1999. information technology research for crisis management. national academypress, washington, d.c., p. 39 (hereafter cited as cstb, nrc, 1999, information technologyresearch for crisis management).32hank christen, paul maniscalco, alan vickery, and frances winslow. 2001. òan overview of incident management.ó perspectives on preparedness, no. 4, september. availableonline at <http://ksgnotes1.harvard.edu/bcsia/library.nsf/pubs/pop4>. accessed november 14, 2002.33computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 1996. computing and communications in the extreme: research for crisis managementand other applications. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 14 (hereafter cited ascstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme).information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48information technology for counterterrorismtions systems have advantages and disadvantages (box 3.4), the disadvantages of analog communications for emergency responders are considerable in the context of largescale disasters or incidents.for most routine work, the mostlyanalog systems deployed todayfunction adequately to keep personnel in contact with one another. and,because routine work is mostly what response agencies do, the motivation for acquiring new systems is low. even when new procurements areconsidered, the needs highest on an agencyõs list of priorities are mostlikely to be those that focus on enhancing its ability to do its everydaywork more effectively.nevertheless, disasters increase the demand for communicationsamong emergency responders dramatically, and the capacity limitationsof analog systems become more apparent. in addition, largescale disasters may affect telecommunications facilities. for example, antennas supporting the communications systems of the fire department of new york,the new york police department, and the emergency medical system(ems) were based on the roof of building 1 of the world trade center,which collapsed soon after the strike.34inadequacies in the deployed base of c3i systems for emergency responders cannot be fixed merely by adding more channels. though emergency planning often results in the allocation of additional channels, thesechannels ease the problem only temporarily. in addition, extra channelsrequire more bandwidth, and hence a broader radio spectrum dedicatedto public service communication, even though radio spectrum is a limitedresource. more efficient use of spectrum can be obtained by using digitalcommunications systems, which offer additional advantages as well (box3.4), such as greater noise immunity and higher security against eavesdropping (especially with encryption). however, one major impedimentto the acquisition of such systems is inadequate funding. funding needsare further exacerbated by the difficulty of acquiring new digital systemsthat preserve backwards compatibility with existing legacy analog systems. (in new york city, the fire department relied on radios that wereat least 8 years old and in some cases 15 years old, and a senior firedepartment official reported that òthere [are] problems with the radios atvirtually every highrise fire.ó35)34ronald simon and sheldon teperman. 2001. òlessons for disaster management.ó critical care, vol. 5:318320. available online at <http://www.disasterrelief.org/disasters/011115wtclessons/>.35jim dwyer, kevin flynn, and ford fessenden. 2002. ò9/11 exposed deadly flaws inrescue plan.ó new york times, july 7. available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.49investing in information technology researchbox 3.4a comparison of digital and analog wirelesscommunications technologiesadvantages of digital communications1¥digital communications provide higher fidelity and lower susceptibility tointerference and static compared with analog communications.¥digital communications are more inherently secure than analog communications are, and more easily encrypted as well.¥channels (frequencies) can be shared between users, thus increasing thenumber of supportable users per channel.¥because channels can be shared, multiple users can speak simultaneouslyon a single frequency, thus increasing the amount of information that can be exchanged.advantages of analog communications¥analog communications devices are easier to make interoperable because itis only necessary to match the frequencies of communicating wireless sets, whereasdigital systems require the additional step of matching their communications protocols.¥problems in analog communications devices are often easier to diagnose,and communications problems in analog systems are often easier to work aroundthan are those in digital systems.¥the number of technicians and users trained in the use of analog systems islarger.¥analog communications offer better graceful degradation than that offeredby digital systems in the presence of noise as signaltonoise ratios drop, and theyoffer better warning to users (through the tone of the communications carried) whenthey are near the margins of usability.¥lowfrequency transmissions, which are better suited for analog communications than for digital communications, are less subject to lineofsight restrictionsand thus have a higher likelihood of penetrating most walls and bypassing debris.1viktor mayerschınberger. 2002. emergency communications: the quest for interoperability in the united states and europe. bcsia discussion paper 20027. john f. kennedy schoolof government, harvard university, cambridge, mass., march.2002/07/07/nyregion/07emer.html?pagewanted=1>. also according to this article, thenew york fire department had replaced at least some of its analog radios in early 2001with digital technology better able to transmit into buildings; but after a few months, thesenew radios were pulled from service because several firefighters said they had been unableto communicate in emergencies. it is not clear whether or not a full òheadtoheadó systematic comparison between the analog and digital systems was ever undertaken.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50information technology for counterterrorisminteroperability is a broad and complex subject rather than a binaryattribute of systems, and it is important to distinguish between interoperability at the operational and technical levels.36 operational interoperability refers to the ability of different operating agencies (e.g., police,fire, rescue, utilities) to provide information services to and accept information services from other agencies and to use these services in supportof their operational goals. thus, the dimensions of operational interoperability go beyond it systems to include people and procedures, interacting on an endtoend basis. by contrast, technical interoperability refers to the ability of it systems to exchange information or services directlyand satisfactorily between them and/or their users. technical interoperability involves the ability to exchange relevant bitstreams of informationand to interpret the exchanged bits according to consistent definitionsñmerely providing information in digital form does not necessarily meanthat it can be readily shared between it systems.furthermore, numerous computational and database facilities mustbe established to provide complete and realtime information37 to diverseconstituencies whose information and communication requirements, security needs, and authorizations all differ. these facilities must be established quickly in disaster situations, as minutes and even seconds matterin the urgent, early stages of an incident.38 furthermore, tight security isessential, especially if the incident is the result of a terrorist attack, because an active adversary might try to subvert the communications ordestroy data integrity.39 in addition, an atmosphere of crisis and emergency provides opportunities for hostile elements to overcome securitymeasures that are normally operative under nonemergency circumstances. thus, another research area is how to build systems that permitsecurity exceptions to be declared without introducing new vulnerabilities on a large scale.4036an extended discussion of interoperability, though in a military context, is provided incstb, nrc, 1999, realizing the potential of c4i.37cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 29.38cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 83; cstb,nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 12.39cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 24.40for example, in a crisis, emergency responders may need to identify all of the individuals working at a specific company location, and tax records might well be one source ofdata to construct such a list. however, while names and home addresses may be relevant,income is almost certainly not relevant. technology that enables controlled release underexceptional circumstances and a means to discern when an òexception stateó exists wouldbe helpful for such scenarios, although implementations that simply weaken access controlpolicies in an emergency are highly vulnerable to improper compromise through socialinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51investing in information technology researchefforts to coordinate communications are complicated by the fact thatemergency response to a largescale incident has many dimensions, including direct òonthegroundó action and response, management of theincident response team, operations, logistics, planning, and even administration and finance. moreover, response teams are likely to includepersonnel from local, county, state, and federal levels.41poor interoperability among responding agencies is a wellknownproblem (see, for example, box 3.5)ñand one that is as much social andorganizational as it is technical.42 the fundamental technical issue is thatdifferent agencies have different systems, different frequencies and waveforms, different protocols, different databases, and different equipment.43(box 3.6 addresses some of the impediments to interoperability.) moreover, existing interoperability solutions are ad hoc and do not scale well.44the nature of agenciesõ missions and the political climates in which theytraditionally operate make it even harder for them to change their communication methods. thus, it is unlikely that agencies will ever bestrongly motivated to deploy interoperable it systems. efforts to solveproblems of interagency cooperation by fiat are likely to fail to achievetheir goal unless they address interagency rivalries and political infighting about control and autonomy. efforts to achieve interoperability somehow must work within this reality of organizational resistance (as discussed further in section 3.6.3).45for practical purposes, these comments suggest that when large,multiagency responses are called for, the individual òcomeasyouareócommunications systems will eventually have to be transitioned to aninteroperable structure that supports all agencies involvedñandtransitioned with minimal disruption of function during that transfer.46this complex problem has technological and social dimensionsñthe techengineering (see section 3.6.1). by contrast, there are fewer risks of abuse (but also lessflexibility) in implementations that are based on a formal declaration of emergency or aparticular threat condition rather than on a conversation persuading an operator that such asituation exists. for more discussion, see computer science and telecommunications board(cstb), national research council (nrc), 2002, information technology research, innovation,and egovernment, national academy press, washington, d.c. (hereafter cited as cstb,nrc, 2002, information technology research, innovation, and egovernment).41cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 7.42see for example, viktor mayerschınberger, 2002, emergency communications: the questfor interoperability in the united states and europe, bcsia discussion paper 20027, john f.kennedy school of government, harvard university, cambridge, mass., march.43cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 26.44cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 119.45cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 27.46cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 26.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52information technology for counterterrorismbox 3.5 examples of interoperability difficulties amongemergency responderscolumbine high schoolin april 1999, two 16yearold students entered columbine high school inlittleton, colorado, and started a shooting spree that left 15 people dead and dozensof others wounded.1 within minutes of the first shootings, local police, paramedics,and firefighters arrived at the scene. over the next several hours, they were joined byalmost 1,000 lawenforcement personnel and emergency responders. these responders included police forces from 6 sheriffõs offices and 20 area police departments, 46 ambulances and 2 helicopters from 12 fire and emergency medical serviceagencies, as well as personnel from a number of state and federal agencies. however, there was no communication system that would permit the different agencies tocommunicate with one another, and thus coordination became a serious problem.agencies used their own radio systems, which were incompatible with other systems. with more and more agencies arriving on the scene, even the few pragmaticways of communication that had been established, such as sharing radios, deteriorated rapidly. cellular phones offered no alternative, as hundreds of journalists rushedto their phones and overloaded the phone network. within the first hour of the operation, the jefferson county dispatch center lost access to the local command postbecause of jammed radio links. steve davis, public information officer of the jefferson county sheriffõs office, later commented that ò[r]adios and cell[ular] phones andeverything else were absolutely useless, as they were so overwhelmed with theamount of traffic in the air.ó2nologies of different responders must not interfere with one anotherõsoperation, and the systems into which these technologies are integratedmust be designed so that they complement the users rather than distractthem from their missions.47one important area of research is in defining lowlevel communication protocols and developing generic technology that can facilitate interconnection and interoperation of diverse information resources.48 forexample, softwareprogrammable waveforms can (in principle) allow asingle radio to interoperate with a variety of wireless communicationsprotocols; research in this area has gone forward, but further research isneeded.49 a second example is an architecture for communications, per47cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, pp. 50, 84;computing and communications in the extreme, p. 33.48cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 85.49computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1997.the evolution of untethered communications. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.53investing in information technology researchhaps for selected mission areas, that translates agencyspecific information into formats and semantics compatible with a global system.50 moregenerally, òtranslationó technology can be developed to facilitate interoperable communications among emergency responders (e.g., technology that facilitates interoperability between disparate communications ordatabase systems).note also that new technical approaches are not the only option forhelping to facilitate interoperable crisis communications. for example, itis likely that some portion of the public networks would survive anydisaster; emergencyresponse agencies could use that portion to facilitateworld trade centeron the morning of september 11, 2001, a few minutes after the south tower ofthe world trade center had collapsed, police helicopters inspecting the north tower reported that òabout 15 floors down from the top, it looks like itõs glowing redó andthat collapse was òinevitable.ó a few seconds later, another pilot reported, òi donõtthink this has too much longer to go. i would evacuate all people within the area ofthat second building.ó transmitted 21 minutes before the north tower fell, thesemessages were relayed to police officers, most of whom managed to escape. however, most firefighters in the north tower never heard those warnings, nor did theyhear earlier orders to get out, and the new york times estimated that at least 121firefighters were in the tower when it collapsed. the fire department radio systemhad proven unreliable that morning, and it was not linked to the police radio system.moreover, the police and fire commanders on the scene had only minimal interactions to coordinate strategy or to share information about building conditions.source (columbine): adapted from viktor mayerschınberger. 2002. emergency communications: the quest for interoperability in the united states and europe. bcsia discussionpaper 20027. john f. kennedy school of government, harvard university, cambridge, mass.,march. (world trade center): adapted from jim dwyer, kevin flynn, and ford fessenden. 2002.ò9/11 exposed deadly flaws in rescue plan.ó new york times, july 7. available online at<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/07/nyregion/07emer.html?pagewanted=1>.1the description and analysis of the columbine high school incident is based on two johnf. kennedy school of government cases: òthe shootings at columbine high school: respondingto a new kind of terrorism,ó case no. c16011612.0, and òthe shootings at columbine highschool: responding to a new kind of terrorism sequel,ó case no. c16011612.1.2id, at 16.50cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 17; cstb, nrc,1999, information technology research for crisis management. an additional discussion ofmission slices and working the semantic interoperability problem appears in cstb, nrc,1999, realizing the potential of c4i.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54information technology for counterterrorismbox 3.6why interoperability is difficultinteroperability is difficult in an emergencyresponder context for many reasons. among them are the following:¥a lack of common operating frequencies. for historical reasons, variouspublic service agencies, from law enforcement to firefighters to emergency medicalservices have traditionally used different frequency bands for their radio communications.1 thus, different agencies using different radio systems have generally resorted to sharing or carrying radios from other agencies to facilitate interoperabilityñanobviously clumsy solution.¥inadequacies of analog radio technology used for emergency commmunications. todayõs emergency communications are largely based on analog technology.though analog technologies have some advantages for emergency responders, suchas greater robustness in the presence of clutter and freedom from lineofsight restrictions (see box 3.4), they are generally unable to handle the enormous traffic volumethat characterizes severe incidents.¥independence of the procuring agencies. as a general rule, response agencies acquire it systems independently, with little coordination of objectives orrequirements, whereas optimizing overall system performance requires a full understanding of the tradeoffs entailed by different choices. individual agencies, especially those that seldom interact with other units, are strongly motivated to solve theirown pressing problems, even if doing so makes it harder for them to interact withother units.¥inability to anticipate all relevant scenarios for use. it is difficult to anticipatein detail how information systems will be usedña difficulty that is multiplied in anuncertain environment. for example, the responders to a largescale terrorist attackare likely to include agencies that have not worked together in the past. achievingflexibility in such a situation depends heavily on building in a sufficient degree ofinteroperability, and yet if a given scenario has not been anticipated, the wouldberesponders may have no particular idea about who they will need to work with.¥inclusion of legacy systems. legacy systems are inplace systems that arerelatively old and were not designed to be easily integrated with current and futureinformation systems, but which remain absolutely essential to the functioning of anorganization. furthermore, they often represent significant investment, so replacingthem with new, more interoperable systems is not a nearterm option. today, theselegacy systems include the vast installed base of conventional analog radio equipment used by most emergencyresponse agencies.sources: for the first bullet item above, viktor mayerschınberger, 2002, emergencycommunications: the quest for interoperability in the united states and europe, bcsia discussion paper 20027, john f. kennedy school of government, harvard university, cambridge,mass., march; for second item, box 3.4 in this report; for third through fifth items, computerscience and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999, realizing the potential of c4i, national academy press, washington d.c.1the federal communications commission allocates 13 discrete portions of spectrum forpublic safety operations but does not specify the types of public safety agencies that are requiredto use each portion; see public safety wireless network,1999, spectrum issues and analysisreport.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.55investing in information technology researchinteroperability if there were mechanisms for giving them first priorityfor such use. a second option would be to allocate dedicated spectrumbands for emergency responders and to require by law that they use thosefrequencies. (this option is likely to be undesirable under most circumstances, because for routine work a high degree of interoperability is notrequired, and sharing frequencies might well interfere with such work.)a third option would be to mandate frequency and waveform standardsfor emergency responders so that they are interoperable. these policyoptions are not mutually exclusive, and all might benefit from technologies described above.3.2.2emergency deployment of communications capacityin an emergency, extraordinary demands on communications capacity emerge. a disaster (or an attack on the communications of emergencyresponders in conjunction with a physical attack) is likely to destroy somebut not all of the communications infrastructure in a given area, leavingsome residual capability. meanwhile, the disaster provokes greater demands for communication from the general public. the result is often adenialofservice condition for all, including emergency communicationsservices. the absence of telephone dial tone in a disaster area is commonbecause of increased demands.51 even under hightraffic but nonemergency situations, cellphone networks are sometimes unable to handle thevolume of users in a given cell because of statistical fluctuations in callvolume, leaving some users without the ability to connect to the network.nor is the internet immune to such problemsñcongestion of sharedinternet links, including both lastmile and aggregated feeder links, cancause greatly slowed traffic to occur on facilities that are still operationalin a disaster area. note also that today, the internet provides modes ofcommunicationñemail and webbased information servicesñthat aredifferent from that provided by voice communications.given the vastly increased demands for wireless communications thataccompany any disaster, efficient spectrum management is essential. oneimportant issue here is the fact that emergency bands need to be keptclear of nonemergency transmissions. however, certain types ofnonstandardized but sometimesdeployed higherspeed dsl (digital subscriber line) telecommunications equipment are known to radiate in thesebands at unacceptable levels of power, and such equipment can interfere51cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 17.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56information technology for counterterrorismwith all emergency transmissions and receptions within 50 yards of theoffending telephone lines.52in addition, it may be possible to improve the use of available spectrum in a disaster area through the use of processing and portable hardware (network equipment or antennas carried by truck into area) thatwould nominally exceed cost constraints for general deployment. suchequipment ranges from truckportable cellular stations to antennas usable for receiving and rebroadcasting degraded emergencyband communications. vector signal processing of signals from multiple antennasdeployed rapidly and ubiquitously can increase available spectrum by anorder of magnitude or more. fast reconnection to highperformanceequipment can also greatly increase the amount of information flow toand from affected areas.research is needed on using residual (and likely saturated) capacitymore effectively, deploying additional (òsurgeó) capacity,53 and performing the tradeoffs among different alternatives. one problem in this areais the management of traffic congestion and the development of priorityoverrides for emergency usage (and prevention of the abuse of such authority).54 for example, the capacity of dsl links could be significantlyincreased through coordination across neighboring telephone lines (bandwidth increases of an order of magnitude are sometimes possible). undernormal circumstances, signals transmitted by other users result in cross52the specific type of equipment is known as òsinglecarrier vdsl (very high data ratedigital subscriber line).ó it is sold by several vendors, despite some local exchange carriersreporting that it interferes with the reception of any amateur radio receiver (which is thesame type used in emergencies) within at least 30 meters of an aerial telephone line. atleast one local exchange carrier is known to have deployed it in a vdsl trial in phoenix,arizona, despite its violation of the radio interference requirements. (john cioffi, stanforduniversity, personal communication, july 9, 2002.)53cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 83.54cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, pp. 39, 52;cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 20. in addition, thewhite houseõs national communications system (ncs) office has moved to implement awireless priority service that facilitates emergencyrecovery operations for the governmentand local emergencyservice providers. this service will be implemented in phases, withan immediate solution available in early 2002 in selected metropolitan areas and a nationwide solution (yet to be developed) scheduled for late 2003. further work after 2003 willconcentrate on the development and implementation of òthirdgenerationó technologiesthat enable highspeed wireless data services. see convergence working group. 2002.report on the impact of network convergence on ns/ep telecommunications: findings and recommendations. february.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.57investing in information technology researchtalk that limits available bandwidth, but in an emergency those interestscould be reprioritized.55a second problem is that optimization algorithms for communications traffic that are appropriate in normal times may have to be alteredduring emergencies. for example, the destruction of physical facilitiessuch as repeaters and the massive presence of debris could result in animpaired environment for radio transmissions. the rapid deployment ofprocessors optimized to find weak signals in a suddenly noisier environment could do much to facilitate emergency communications.research is also needed to develop selfadaptive networks that canreconfigure themselves in response to damages and changes in demand,and that can degrade gracefully.56 for example, in a congested environment, programmed fallback to less dataintensive applications (e.g., voicerather than video, text messaging rather than voice) may provide a minimal communications facility. even today, many cellular networks allowthe passing of text messages. also, both public and private elements ofcommunications infrastructure could be tapped to provide connectivityin a crisis, as happened in new york city on september 11.573.2.3security of rapidly deployed ad hoc networksthe management of communications networks poses unique problems in the crowded emergency disaster zone. security must be established rapidly from the outset, as terrorists might try to infiltrate as emergency agencies responded.58 it is also necessary to determine a means fortemporarily suspending peopleõs access to facilities, communications, anddata without impeding the ability of those with legitimate need to usethem. but this suspension process has to be done rapidly, given thatminutes and seconds matter in severe emergencies. note also that largedeployments may well pose security problems that are more severe thanthose posed by smaller deployments.55actions that disadvantage commercial consumers in times of emergency have someprecedent. of particular relevance is the civil reserve air fleet program of the dod,under which priority use of commercial airliners is given to the defense department intimes of national emergency. (because ordinary airliners lack the strong floors needed tosupport heavy military equipment, the floors are strengthened at government expense, andthe government pays the incremental fuel costs of carrying that excess weight.)56cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 39.57cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 39.58cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 24. embedded, everywhere (cstb, nrc, 2001) also discusses security issues associated with ad hoc networks,though in the context of sensor networks rather than communications networks for humanbeings.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58information technology for counterterrorismresearch is therefore needed on the special security needs of wirelessnetworks that are deployed rapidly and in an ad hoc manner. (for example, ad hoc networks are not likely to have a single system administrator who can take responsibility for allocating user ids.)3.2.4information management and decisionsupport toolsemergency responders have multiple information needs that technology can support.59 for example, a multimedia terminal for a firefightercould have many uses: 60 accessing maps and planning routes to a fire,examining building blueprints for tactical planning, accessing databaseslocating local fire hydrants and nearby fire hazards such as chemicalplants, communicating with and displaying the locations of other fire andrescue teams, and providing a location signal to a central headquarters sothat a firefighting team can be tracked for broader operational planning.note that only some of this data can be prestored on the terminal, especially because some data may have to be updated during an operation, sorealtime access to appropriate data sources is necessary. moreover, thesedifferent applications require different data rates and entail differenttradeoffs between latency and freedom from transmission errors. voicecommunications, for example, must have low latency (i.e., be real time)but can tolerate noisy signals, whereas waiting a few seconds to receive amap or blueprint will generally be tolerable, though errors may make itunusable. some applications, such as voice conversation, require symmetrical bandwidth; others, such as data access and location signaling,are primarily oneway (the former toward the mobile device, the latteraway from it).another issue arises because disasters create huge volumes of information to be handled. a large volume of voice and data traffic will betransmitted and received on handheld radios, phones, digital devices,and portable computers. large amounts of additional information will beavailable from various sources including the world wide web, buildingblueprints, and interviews with eyewitnesses. however, sorting out reliable and useful information from this vast array of sources is inevitablydifficult, and many crisis responders have adopted a rule of thumb aboutsuch information: onethird of the information is accurate, onethird is59this discussion is taken from cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in theextreme, p. 59.60randy h. katz. 1995. òadaptation and mobility in wireless information systems.óunpublished paper, available online at <http://daedalus.cs.berkeley.edu>. august 18.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.59investing in information technology researchwrong, and onethird might be either right or wrong.61 such inaccuraciesfurther compound the difficulties of integrating such data.thus, emergencyresponse managers need tools that can draw oninformation from diverse and unanticipated sources to assist them inevaluating, filtering, and integrating information and in making decisionsbased on incomplete knowledge of conditions, capabilities, and needs.62such tools would interpret information about the quality and reliability ofvaried inputs and assist the user in taking these variations into account.these tools would differ from, but could build upon, traditional decisionsupport tools such as knowledgebased systems, which operate usingrules associated with previously examined problems. because many ofthe problems raised by crisis management are not known ahead of time,more general techniques are needed. these might include the development of new representations of the quality of inputs (such as metadataabout those inputs regarding qualities such as reliability and uncertaintyin the data), data fusion, models of information representation and integration (e.g., integrating preexisting disaster response plans with decisionsupport tools), rapidly reconfigurable knowledgebased systems, andnew techniques for filtering and presenting information to users and forquickly prioritizing tasks. section 3.3 addresses some of these issues in abroader context.3.2.5communications with the public during an emergencyin a crisis, channels to provide information to the public are clearlyneeded. radio, television, and often the web provide crisis informationtoday, but such information is usually generic and not necessarily helpfulto people in specific areas or with specific needs. information tailored tospecific individuals or locations through locationbased services (and perhaps simple response systems to ascertain the location of the injured andto identify critical timeurgent needs) could be put to more effective use.research is needed to identify appropriate mechanismsñnew technologies such as òcall by locationó and zoned alert broadcastsñfor tailoring information to specific locations or individuals.63 to enable effectiveinteraction with individual users, ubiquitous and lowcost access is re61cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, appendix b.62cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, national academypress, washington, d.c., p. 104; cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisismanagement, pp. 3233.63cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 35.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60information technology for counterterrorismquired.64 in addition, such systems should be highly robust against spoofing (entry by an intruder masquerading as a trusted party) so that onlyauthorized parties can use the systems to send out information.for example, the current cellphone system does not directly supportthese functions, but it might be possible to modify and exploit it to provide òreverse 911ó service,65 that is, a oneway channel to people affectedby the crisis that provides a flow of relevant information and guidance.such mechanisms would probably have to be locally sufficient. that is,the disaster might spare the local cell siteñor a temporary cell site couldbe deployed along with wireless alternatives66ñbut access to central services might not be possible.finally, providing information to those located outside the immediate emergency area provides important psychological comfort and helpsto mitigate a disasterõs consequences. (for example, in the immediateaftermath of the september 11 attacks, òiõm aliveó internet bulletin boardssprang up spontaneously.) research is needed for establishing more effective means of achieving this objectiveñespecially in updating the status of affected peopleñwhile compromising the local communicationsinfrastructure to a minimal degree.3.2.6emergency sensor deploymentduring an emergency, responders need information about physicalontheground conditions that is sufficiently finegrained and accurate tobe useful. however, existing sensor networks may be disrupted or destroyed to some extentñand it is important to be able to recognize anattack on a sensor network and to monitor the state of the networkõshealth so that emergency responders have an idea of the extent to whichthey can continue relying on the information provided by the network.when the surviving sensor capability cannot provide adequate information, the deployment of additional sensors is likely to be necessary. depending on the nature of the emergency, sensor capacity would be neededto identify and track the spread of nuclear, chemical, or biological contaminants, characterize and track vehicular traffic, locate survivors (e.g.,through heat emanations, sounds, or smells), and find pathways throughdebris and rubble. developing robust sensors for these capabilities is onemajor challenge; developing architectural concepts for how to deploythem and integrate the resulting information is another.6764cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 40.65cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 35.66cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 18.67cstb, nrc, 2001, embedded, everywhere.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.61investing in information technology research3.2.7precise location identificationwhen extensive physical damage to a structure or an area occurs,determining the location of physical structures and of people is a majorproblem. one reason is that many reference points for observers on theground or in the structure may become unavailable: debris, airborne contaminants such as smoke and dust, and perhaps simply the lack of illumination can reduce visibility, and street signs may disappear. also, thephysical environment changes to some extent as a result of physical damage: fires destroy rooms in buildings, one floor collapses into another, acrater exists where there used to be three buildings.thus, technology must be available to help establish reference pointswhen existing ones are destroyed or inadequate. in an open physicalenvironment, location finders based on the global positioning system(gps) serve a useful role, but airborne contaminants, equipment damage,and lineofsight restrictions could adversely affect the reliability of gps,and research is needed on ways to determine location in a disaster environment. embedded location sensors and sensor networks, either already in place or deployed in response to an incident, are likely to bevaluable information sources.68responders and victims also require rapid access to accurate locational databases. one such source is preexisting building blueprints anddiagrams.69 where these do not exist, or where the structures themselveshave suffered significant physical damage, onthespot mapping will inevitably be needed. thus, research is needed to develop digital floorplans and maps of other physical infrastructure.70 the resulting datacould be stored in geospatial information systems (gis), which wouldallow responders to focus on the highprobability locations of missingpeople (such as lunchrooms), and avoid dangerous searches of lowprobability locations (such as storage areas).71 research is needed in wearablecomputers for searchandrescue operations72 so that responders couldupdate the gis in real time as they discover victims and encounter infra68cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, pp. 24, 25; cstb, nrc,2001, embedded, everywhere.69j. hightower and g. boriello. 2001. òlocation systems for ubiquitous computing.óieee computer, vol. 33 (8).70as one example, consider that a firm that installs fiberoptic cables in a cityõs sewers iscapable of mapping those sewers as well using a sewercrawling robot that lays cable andtracks its position.71cstb, nrc, 1996, computing and communications in the extreme, p. 14.72cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research for crisis management, p. 38.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62information technology for counterterrorismstructural damage. another research area is in òmap antsó73ñdistributed, selforganizing robots deployed in a disaster area to sense movement or body heat, for instance. it may also be possible to develop technology to generate the data for accurate maps of a debrisstrewn disasterlocation.finally, keeping track of emergency respondersõ positions within adisaster area is an essential element of managing emergency response.technology (similar to e911 for cell phones) to monitor the progress ofthese individuals automatically is not yet available on a broad scale. 3.2.8mapping the physical aspects of thetelecommunications infrastructureas noted in section 2.2.2, the telecommunications infrastructure is forthe most part densely connected; hence physical attack is unlikely to disrupt it extensively for long periods of time. however, the physical infrastructure of telecommunications (and the internet) does not appear to bewell understood (that is, immediate knowledge of where various circuitsare located is in many cases available only in a disaggregated form distributed throughout a myriad of company databases), and there may wellexist critical nodes whose destruction would have disproportionate impact. (on the other hand, knowing where these critical nodes are is difficult for both network operators and terrorists.) thus, an important priority is to develop tools to facilitate the physical mapping of networktopology, and to begin that mapping with the tools that are availabletoday. this is particularly important for the many converged networksover which both voice and data are carried.3.2.9characterizing the functionality of regional networks foremergency respondersin order to develop mechanisms for coordinating emergencyresponseactivities, it is necessary to understand what the various communicationsand computer networks of emergency responders in a given region aresupposed to do. for example, managers from different agencies oftenspeak different òlanguagesó in describing their needs, capabilities, andoperational priorities; a common conceptual framework for these purposes would be enormously helpful for the coordination of planning ac73a study in progress by the computer science and telecommunications board on theintersections between geospatial information and information technology discusses theseselforganizing robots. see <http://www.cstb.org> for more information on this study.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.63investing in information technology researchtivities, yet one is not available.74 sharing of information among the various providers of critical infrastructure and emergencyresponse agencies,even about common tasks and processes, has been a rather uncommonactivity in the past.an additional and challenging problem is that severe emergenciesoften change what different agencies are expected to do and what priorities their duties have. for example, existing plans are often overridden bycircumstances (e.g., in the aftermath of the september 11 attacks, phoneservices to the financial district in wall street were given priority; thiseventuality had not been anticipated in prior emergency planning). moreover, even if existing plans do not require alteration, emergency agenciesmust know and be able to execute on what those plans contain. (forexample, the notebook containing personnel assignments in a certain typeof emergency must be available and easily found.) for this reason, drillsand exercises are necessary, and they must involve enough personnel thatin a real emergency, some people with drill experience will be participating in actual response operations.3.3information fusionas discussed below, information fusion promises to play a centralrole in the future prevention, detection, attribution, and remediation ofterrorist acts. information fusion is defined as the acquisition of datafrom many sources, the integration of these data into usable and accessible forms, and their interpretation. such integrated data can be particularly valuable for decision makers in law enforcement, the intelligencecommunity, emergencyresponse units, and other organizations combating terrorism. information fusion gains power and relevance for thecounterterrorist mission because computer technology enables large volumes of information to be processed in short times. (box 3.7 provideselaborated scenarios for ways in which informationfusion techniquescould be useful.)¥prevention. security checkpoints have become more important, andmore tedious, than ever at airports, public buildings, sporting venues,and national borders. the efficiency and effectiveness of checkpointscould be significantly improved by creating informationfusion tools to74hank christen, paul maniscalco, alan vickery, and frances winslow. 2001. òan overview of incident management.ó perspectives on preparedness, no. 4, september. availableonline at <http://ksgnotes1.harvard.edu/bcsia/library.nsf/pubs/pop4>.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64information technology for counterterrorismbox 3.7scenarios for automated evidence combinationintelligence analysisa video monitoring program detects an unknown person speaking at a meetingwith a known terrorist in an arabic television broadcast. this information is broughtto the attention of the intelligence analyst who set up the program to scan tv forvideoclips that mention individuals known to associate with a particular terroristgroup. the analyst decides to find out as much as possible about this new unknownperson. first, a check is run on video archives using face detection/recognitionsoftware to see if this personõs face had appeared before but was missed. second, therecording of the personõs speech from the videoclip is used to match against storedarchives of conversations. third, the personõs name, mentioned by someone in thevideoclip, is used to search information resources that are both internal (across intelligence agencies) and external (such as the web and multilingual news archives).the search is focused on text that mentions this name in the context of terrorism or inconnection with any of the activities of the known terrorist. the material that isfound is summarized in a variety of ways to aid analysis, such as in a time line withgeographic locations.the result of this search indicates that the unknown person works for an aidorganization that operates in a number of countries, and that the person has recentlyvisited the united states. a request for appropriate legal authority results in a targeted search of the hotel, air travel, car rental, and telephone transactions associatedwith this trip. this search reveals connections to other people that the fbi has hadunder surveillance in the washington, d.c., area, including through courtapprovedwiretaps. the automatic analysis of phone calls between the unknown person andthose already under surveillance also indicates an unusual pattern of language including phrases like òwedding partyó and òspecial deliveryó in arabic. these phrases are subsequently linked to overseas intelligence intercepts. on the basis of thisinformation, the analyst concludes that there may be something being planned for aspecific time period and thus initiates a number of additional automatic monitoringand alerting tools focused on these people and these language patterns.airport security screeningat airport security checkpoints, every carryon bag is xrayed, and some percentage (say, 15 percent) of these bags receives a manual examination searching foritems that could be used as weapons. though this is similar to search procedures inoperation today, this scenario also entails checkpoint operators supported by a network of computers in this airport that captures image, sound, xray, and other sensorinformation; analyzes these data using computer perception software; shares the dataacross a national computer network that links every airport in the united states;assists human security agents; can be instructed to monitor for certain people orevents as needed; and learns from experience what is normal and abnormal withineach of the nationõs airports.first, the xray machines that capture images of each bag are connected to acomputer network. as each bag goes through the machine, a computer vision system analyzes it to attempt to detect suspicious items, such as sharp objects and guns,and alerts the operator if anything is detected, highlighting it on the xray screen.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.65investing in information technology researchthis computer vision system is not infallible, but then neither is the human baggagescreener, and the two working together notice different things, so that together theyare more effective than either alone (if they make the same number of errors, butindependently, their combined error rate is halved).second, as the manual checks are performed on 15 percent of the bags, thecomputer is informed about which bags are checked and whether anything wasfound. this information provides training data to the computer, which is tied back tothe xray image of the bag, enabling the vision system over time to improve its abilityto detect suspicious items from the xrays. standard machinelearning algorithms areused for this purpose, not unlike those used in face recognition. of course, thehuman operator will learn on the job in this way as well, but there is one majordifference: the human operator may inspect hundreds or a few thousand bags in aweek, whereas the computer network is capturing data from every security station inevery airport around the world. thus, the computer has thousands of times moretraining experience to learn from in a single day than any human operator couldaccumulate in a lifetime, leading it to much more refined capabilities.because of these extensive training experiences, the computer network is ableto learn things that a single operator never could. for example, it will learn whichnew models of suitcases, briefcases, and purses have become common, and it willtherefore be able to spot bags that may be custombuilt by a terrorist who has designed luggage for a special purpose. it will learn what are typical false alarms raisedby each model as it goes through security (e.g., the metal clasp on a particular pursemight often be mistaken as a blade by those unfamiliar with that luggage model).the computer system advises the security operator about which 15 percent of thebags should be inspected, decreasing the chance that the operator misses an item ora person who should not go unnoticed. note that the human operator is still incharge but is greatly aided by the vast experience base gained by the selfimprovingnetwork of computer sensors and image analyzers.third, the computer network can detect patterns involving multiple people entering through multiple security stations, or at multiple times. if there are severalpeople taking the same flight, each of whom has òaccidentallyó brought a pocketknife, this would be detected by the system, even though the individual operators atthe different security posts would likely be unaware of this global pattern. globalpatterns could also be detected instantly across multiple airports (e.g., single passengers boarding with similar òaccidentaló pocketknives in boston, san francisco,washington, d.c., and new york city).fourth, the security checkpoint operator will be informed by the system ofevents that occurred more globally throughout the airport and in airports with connecting flights, as captured by security cameras and other sensors throughout theairport. for example, if two people arrived at the airport together (as indicated by thecameras elsewhere in the airport) but get in different lines going through security, theoperator might be informed of this somewhat unusual behavior. while no singleclue such as this is clearcut evidence of a dangerous situation, the security stationoperators are more effective because the network of computer sensors and analysisprovides them a more global and more informed picture of what is going on in theairport, enabling them to focus their attention on the most significant risks.finally, the information garnered, learned, and transmitted across this networkof airport monitoring systems is used to help train individual security operators andto analyze how past security breaches were successful.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66information technology for counterterrorismsupport the checkpoint operator in real time. for example, future airportsecurity stations could integrate data received from multiple airports toprovide a more comprehensive view of each passengerõs luggage andactivities on connecting flights. the stations could use datamining methods to learn which luggage items most warrant handinspection, and theycould capture data from a variety of biometric sensors to help verify theidentities of individuals and to search for known suspects.¥detection and attribution. intelligence agencies are routinely involved in information fusion as they attempt to track suspected terroristsand their activities. one of their primary problems is that of managing aflood of data. there are wellknown examples in which planned terroristactivity went undetected despite the fact that evidence was available tospot it, because the evidence was just one needle in a huge haystack.future intelligence and lawenforcement activities could therefore benefitenormously from advances in the automated interpretation of text, image, video, sensor, and other kinds of unstructured data. automatedinterpretation would enable the computer to sort efficiently through massive quantities of data to bring the relevant evidence (likely combinedfrom various sources) to the attention of an analyst.¥remediation (response). early response to biological attacks couldbe supported by collecting and analyzing realtime data, such as ambulance calls, admissions to hospital emergency rooms and veterinary offices, or purchases of nonprescription drugs in grocery stores to identifyspreading disease. prototype systems are already under development(box 3.8). if anomalous patterns emerge that may signify an outbreak ofsome new pathogen, system administrators can quickly alert health officials.many other opportunities exist for such computeraided evidencebased decision making. for example, the monitoring of activity on computer networks might flag potential attempts to break through a firewall;or, sensor networks attached to public buildings might flag patterns ofactivity within the building that suggest suspicious behavior. in suchcases, an unaided decision maker might have difficulty detecting subtlepatterns, because the data are voluminous and derive from a variety ofsources.as a general proposition, the development of tools that provide human analysts with assistance in doing their jobs has a higher payoff (atleast in the short to medium term) than do tools that perform most or allof the analystõs job. the former approach places a greater emphasis onusing technology to quickly sift large volumes of data in order to flagpotentially interesting items for human attention, whereas the latter apinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.67investing in information technology researchbox 3.8examples of information fusion for detection ofbioterrorism attacks¥the biomedical security instituteõs realtime outbreak and disease surveillance system monitors about 1,200 patient visits per day in 17 western pennsylvaniahospitals and recognizes patterns of infectious disease.1 the system looks for sudden and frequent outbreaks of cases involving flulike symptoms, respiratory illnesses, diarrhea, and paralysis that might indicate a bioterror attack. a sudden peak in acertain type of symptom may be the result of a biological agent. emergency roomsand hospitals provide patient information such as symptoms, age, gender, address,and test results directly to the system.2 public health doctors are automatically notified if a pattern develops, and they in turn notify the proper authorities.¥the centers for disease control and prevention supports a number of enhanced surveillance projects (esps) that monitor certain hospital emergency departments to establish baseline rates of various clinical syndromes.3 anomaly detectionmodels identify significant departures from these baseline rates that are called to theattention of state and local health departments for confirmation and appropriate followup. esp has been tested at the 1999 world trade organization ministerial inseattle, the 2000 republican and democratic national conventions held in philadelphia and los angeles, respectively, and the super bowl/gasparilla festival intampa, florida. a similar effort is the lightweight epidemiology advanced detection and emergency response system (leaders), which provides a set of tools originally developed for the military to provide realtime analysis of medical data enteredat health care delivery points (e.g., hospitals). these data are examined for spatialcorrelations so that areas of potential disease outbreak can be rapidly identified.¥a system in washington, d.c., called essence ii (essence stands for electronic surveillance system for early notification of communitybased epidemics) isan operational prototype for the national capital region that integrates informationon nonmedical information such as employee absenteeism and overthecounterdrug sales with information available from doctorsõ visits, diagnostic laboratories,hospital emergency rooms, 911 and poison control calls, and so on. these data areacquired on a nearrealtime basis, and are examined to search for temporal and/orspatial anomalies that might indicate an early warning of a bioterrorist attack. nonmedical information is valuable in this context because it is likely to reflect changesin public health status before affected individuals seek medical care on a scale largeenough to register a possible attack.41bruce gerson. 2002. òpresident bush praises carnegie mellon, pitt collaboration tofight bioterrorism.ó carnegie mellon news. february 13. available online at <http://www.cmu.edu/cmnews/extra/020213gbush.html>.2james oõtoole et al. 2002. òbush here today to highlight spending on terrorism.ópittsburgh postgazette, february 5. available online at <http://www.postgazette.com/regionstate/20020205visit0205p2.asp>.3see <http://ndms.umbc.edu/conference2001/2001con20/treadwe.htm>.4for more information on essence ii, see the web site at <http://www.nyam.org/events/syndromicconference/agenda.shtml>.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68information technology for counterterrorismproach relies on computers themselves to make highlevel inferences inthe absence of human involvement and judgment.a final dimension of information fusion is nontechnical. that is,disparate institutional missions may well impede the sharing of information. underlying successful informationfusion efforts is a desire to shareinformationñand it is impossible to fuse information belonging to twoagencies if those two agencies do not communicate with each other. establishing the desire to communicate among all levels at which relevantinformation could be shared might have a larger impact than the fusionthat may occur due to advances in technology. for example, hospitalsgenerally see little benefit and many risks in sharing patient informationwith other hospitals, even if it may facilitate the care of some patients thatuse both facilities or improve epidemiologic monitoring. (note also thatachieving a desire for different facilities or agencies to communicate witheach other may take more than moral persuasion. this point is addressedin greater detail in sections 3.6.3 and 3.6.4.)3.3.1data miningdata mining is a technology for analyzing historical and currentonline data to support informed decision making. it has grown quickly inimportance in the commercial world over the past decade, because of theincreasing volume of online data, advances in statistical machinelearning algorithms for automatically analyzing these data, and improved networking that makes it feasible to integrate data from disparate sources.the technical core of data mining is the ability to automatically learngeneral patterns from a large volume of specific examples. for example,given a set of known fraudulent and nonfraudulent creditcard transactions or insurance claims, the computer system may learn general patterns that can be used to flag future cases of possible fraud. other applications are in assessing mortality risk for medical patients (by learningfrom historical patient data) and in predicting which individuals are mostlikely to make certain purchases (by analyzing other individualsõ pastpurchasing data). decisiontree learning, neuralnetwork learning, bayesiannetwork learning, and logisticregressionandsupport vector machines are among the most widely used statistical machinelearning algorithms. dozens of companies now offer commercial implementations,which are integrated into database and datawarehousing facilities.the majority of these commercial datamining applications involvewellstructured data. however, current commercially available technology does not work well with data that are a combination of text, image,video, and sensor information (that is, data in ònonstructuredó formats).information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.69investing in information technology researchmoreover, it is largely unable to incorporate the knowledge of humanexperts into the datamining process. despite the significant value ofcurrent machinelearning algorithms, there is also a need to develop moreaccurate learning algorithms for many classes of problems.new research is needed to develop datamining algorithms capableof learning from data in both structured and nonstructured formats. and,whereas current commercial systems are very dataintensive, research isneeded on methods for learning when data are scarce (e.g., when thereare only a few known examples of some kinds of terrorist activity) byincorporating the knowledge of human experts alongside the statisticalanalysis of the data. another research area is that of better mixedinitiative methods that allow the user to visualize the data and direct the dataanalysis.3.3.2data interoperabilityan inherent problem of information fusion is that of data interoperabilityñthe difficulty of merging data from multiple databases, multiplesources, and multiple media. often such sources will be distributed overdifferent jurisdictions or organizations, each with different data definitions. new research is needed for normalizing and combining data collected from multiple sources, such as the combination of different sets oftimeseries data (e.g., with different sampling rates, clocks, and timezones), or collected with different data schemas (e.g., one personnel database may use the variable òjobtitle,ó while another uses òemployeetypeó). note that data interoperability is also an essential element oforganizational and operational interoperability.3.3.3natural language technologiesin the past decade, the area of language technologies has developed awide variety of tools to deal with very large volumes of text and speech.the most obvious commercial examples are the web search engines andspeech recognition systems that incorporate technology developed withfunding from the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa)and the national science foundation (nsf). other important technologies include information extraction (e.g., extracting the names of people,places, or organizations mentioned within a document), crosslingual retrieval (e.g., does an email message written in arabic involve discussionof a chemical weapon?), machine translation, summarization, categorization, filtering (monitoring streams of data), and link detection (findingconnections). most of these approaches are based on statistical models oflanguage and machinelearning algorithms.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70information technology for counterterrorisma great deal of online information, in the form of text such as email,news articles, memos, and the web, is of potential importance for intelligence applications. research is needed on methods for accurately extracting from text certain structured information, such as descriptions ofevents (e.g., the date, type of event, actors, and roles.) research is neededto handle multiple languages, including automatic translation, crosslingual information retrieval, and rapid acquisition of new languages. otherimportant areas of future research are link detection (related to the normalization problem mentioned above) and advanced question answering.3.3.4image and video processingthe technologies for image and video processing tend to be domainspecific and often combine information from multiple modes. for example, several companies are beginning to offer imagerecognition software for face recognition and automatic classification of medical and othertypes of images. commercially available video indexingandretrievalsoftware improves effectiveness by combining techniques of segmentation, face detection, face recognition, key frame extraction, speech recognition, textcaption extraction, and closedcaption indexing. this is agood example of information fusion in which multiple representations ofcontent are combined to reduce the effect of errors coming from any givensource.the major limitation of present language and image technologies is inaccuracy and performance: despite significant progress, these need to beconsiderably improved. this is particularly important for counterterroristsystems where the data may be very noisy (i.e., surrounded by irrelevantinformation) and sparse.work is needed on improved algorithms for image interpretation andspeech recognition. many of these research issues are specific to problems arising in a particular mediumñfor example, recent progress onface recognition has come primarily from understanding how to extractrelevant image features before applying machinelearning methods,though this approach may not be applicable to machine learning in othercontexts. however, new research is also needed on perception based onmixed media, such as speech recognition based on sound combined withlip motion.3.3.5evidence combinationmany of the techniques used to combine information from multiplesources, as in video indexing or metasearch engines, are ad hoc. currentinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71investing in information technology researchresearch on more principled methods for reasoning under uncertaintyneeds to be extended and tested extensively in more demanding applications. this is a key technical problem, with widespread implications formany of the applications mentioned aboveñfor example, how to combine evidence from hospital admissions and from nonprescription drugpurchases to detect a possible bioterrorist attack, how to combine evidence from face recognition and voice print to estimate the likely identityof a person, how to combine evidence from multiple sensors in a buildingto detect anomalous activity, and how to undertake more effective personnel screening.3.3.6interaction and visualizationall technologies developed for information access and analysis relyon human involvement to specify information problems and to makesense of the retrieved data. research on humancomputer interaction inthe areas of query formulation and visualization has the potential forsignificantly improving the quality and efficiency of intelligence applications. in the area of query formulation, some topics of interest includesupport for naturallanguage queries, query triage (deciding which information resource is needed based on the form of the query), and personalization based on the context of previous searches and the current task. avariety of visualization techniques have been developed for largescalescientific applications, but more research is need on techniques that areeffective for visualizing huge amounts of dynamic information derivedfrom unstructured data about people, places and events. such research ispotentially valuable because it takes advantage of the human ability torecognize patterns more easily than automated techniques can.3.4privacy and confidentialitythe essential rationale underlying a sciencebased approach to countering terrorism is that, absent measures to reduce the intrusiveness andburdens of a counterterrorism regime on individuals, these burdens willbecome so high that they will be intolerable to the american people overthe long run. as pressure mounts for the government to collect andprocess more information, it becomes increasingly important to addressthe question of how to minimize the negative impacts on privacy anddata confidentiality that may arise with applications of information fusion.it is axiomatic that information that is not collected can never beabused. for example, consider the possible collection of an individualõshiv status. if the individual has concerns that his or her privacy interestsinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72information technology for counterterrorismmight be compromised by the improper disclosure of hiv status to anemployer, then the most effective way to protect such information is notto collect information on hiv status (e.g., by not recording it in medicalrecords or not requiring an hiv test). however, it is also true that information that is not collected can never be used. thus, if no one evercollects information about the individualõs hiv status, that personõs medical treatment may be adversely affected.this dilemma is magnified in a counterterrorism intelligence context.because terrorists are not clearly identified with any entity (such as anationstate) whose behavior can be easily studied or analyzed, their individual profiles of behavior and communication are necessarily the focusof an intelligence investigation. most importantly, it is often not knownin advance what specific information must be sought in order to recognize a suspicious pattern, especially as circumstances change. from theperspective of intelligence analysis, the collection rule must be òcollecteverything in case something might be useful.ó such a stance generatesobvious conflicts with the strongest proprivacy rule òdonõt collect anything unless you know you need it.ódata mining and information fusion have major privacy implications,and increased efforts by commercial and government entities to correlatedata with a specific person negatively impact privacy and data confidentiality. there is no clear and easy way of resolving this tension. nevertheless, research can help to ameliorate this tension in several ways:¥at a minimum, policy makers need accurate information about thetradeoffs between privacy and confidentiality on the one hand and analytical power for counterterrorist purposes on the other under differentcircumstances of data disclosure. for example, under what circumstancesand at what state in an analytical effort are specific identities necessary?what is the impact of increasing lesspersonalized information? researchis needed to answer such questions.¥research is needed to mitigate negative aspects of data mining,including research on datamining algorithms that discover general trendsin the data without requiring full disclosure of individual data records.for example, some algorithms work by posing statistical queries to eachof a set of databases rather than by gathering every data record into acentralized repository. others collect aggregate data without requiringfull disclosure of individual data records.7575as a simple example, say that a public health agency is interested in the overall incidence of a particular kind of disease being treated at hospitals in a certain area. onemethod of obtaining this information is for the agency to ask each hospital for the numberinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.73investing in information technology research¥research is needed to develop architectures for data storage thatprotect privacy without compromising analysis. for example, arrangements could be made to use totally separate and distributed data repositories. using such an approach to information access, an intelligenceagency could send a request to other government agencies and òcontentprovidersó asking them if there were any connections between certainindividuals. without revealing the details of the connections, the presence of connections could be made known and then specific legal actioncould be taken to acquire the data.note that institutional concerns about confidentiality can be as strongas individual concerns about privacy. for example, asking hospitals topass along personally identified patient information to parties not traditionally entitled to such information may well engender institutional resistance that may well not be surmountable by fiat (see the discussion insection 3.6.3).for many applications such as badges and access tokens, detailedpersonal information is not necessary; the only requirements are that thetoken is recognizable as valid and that it has been issued to the personpresenting it. it does not even have to have an individualõs name on it. onthe other hand, a sufficient aggregation of nonpersonallyidentified information can often be used to identify a person uniquely. identifyingsomeone as a man of chinese extraction who has a doctorate in physics,enjoys swing dancing, has an adopted 7yearold daughter, and lives inupper northwest washington, d.c., is probably sufficient to specify aunique individual, even though no particular name is associated with anyof these pieces of information. thus, the mere fact that information isdisconnected from personal identifiers is no assurance that an individualcannot be identified if data were aggregated.76of cases of that disease and to total them. however, if for some reason a hospital has anincentive to keep that number secret, such a request for data raises privacy concerns. analternative approach is to ask each hospital to report the sum of the number of cases plussome random number. the agency totals the sums and then asks each hospital to report therandom number it used. to obtain the true incidence, it then subtracts out from the total allof the random numbers submitted. in reporting this way, no hospital compromises the truenumber of cases at that hospital.76it is sometimes surprising how little nonnamed information is necessary to aggregatein order to recreate an individualõs identity. for example, a large number of people can beidentified simply by aggregating their date of birth and zip code. see computer scienceand telecommunications board, national research council. 2000. it research for federalstatistics. national academy press, washington d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74information technology for counterterrorismanother conflict between privacy and intelligence analysis arises because data can be linked. assuming that various pieces of data have beencollected somewhere, intelligence analysis relies on the ability to link datain order to reveal interesting and perhaps significant patterns. indeed,the very definition of a òpattern of behavioró is one in which data associated with a given individual are grouped so that a trip to location a canbe seen in the context of transaction b and a phone call with person c. itis exactly such linkage that gives rise to privacy concerns. thus, actionstaken to increase the interoperability of databases so that meaningfullinkages can be created will inevitably raise privacy concerns.what technical or procedural protections can be developed to guardagainst inappropriate privacycompromising linkages but do not alsocripple the legitimate search for terrorists? research in this area is vital.one approach calls for linkages to be uncovered in the relevant computers but not to be revealed except under special circumstances (e.g., whensome reasonable cause for suspicion exists77). for example, the mostrecent version of essence (box 3.8) uses data that can be rendered anonymous on a sliding scale of anonymity.78 during normal operation (i.e.,when nothing has been detected), sufficiently anonymous data are provided. once evidence of an attack is encountered, data that are less anonymous and more identifiable, but also more useful for further analysis, areautomatically transmitted. thus, routine compromises of privacy are notentailed, but when a potential threat is uncovered, less privacy is provided in order to support an appropriate public health response. anotherarea of research is on decentralized surveillance tools and systems thatcan provide analysts with information about data trends and clustering,rather than the data values themselves. such systems promise access tofar more data with fewer privacy concerns.a second approach for protecting privacy calls for audits of accessesto information and generators of linkages to deter those who might do so77the question of what set of facts and circumstances constitutes reasonable cause belongs to the realm of policy and law rather than to technology or social science. an analogous situation exists with the privacy of medical records. while it is possible for unauthorized parties to hack their way past security systems that guard medical records, the largestand most significant disclosures of medical records to third parties occur because policyand law exist to allow such disclosures in a perfectly legal manner. see computer scienceand telecommunications board, national research council. 1997. for the record: protectingelectronic heath information. national academy press, washington, d.c.78computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.summary of a workshop on information technology research for federal statistics. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 36.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.75investing in information technology researchinappropriately and to punish those who actually do. in this scenario, anindividual uses authorized access to a computer system to obtain sensitive information or develops a sensitive linkage and then uses it for someinappropriate purpose. research is needed to investigate the feasibilityof technologies that can mitigate the damage done when òinsidersó usetechnological means to obtain such information inappropriately and alsoincrease the likelihood that the individual abusing his or her access willbe caught. effective organizational policies, practices, and processes tocounter such abuses are also an important area of research.a third approachñentirely based in policyñis to take steps that reduce the harm suffered by individuals whose privacy is compromisedinappropriately. that is, many (though by no means not all) concernsabout privacy arise from the fear that improperly disclosed informationmight be used to an individualõs economic or legal detriment. thus, aconcern about privacy with respect to records of hiv status may be partlyrooted in a fear that improper disclosure might result in the loss of healthinsurance or the denial of a job opportunity in the future; a concern aboutthe privacy of oneõs financial records may be rooted in a fear that onecould become a òmarkó for criminals or the subject of unwarranted taxaudits. laws and regulations prohibiting the use of information obtainedthrough inappropriate disclosures and providing victims with reasonablerecourse should such disclosures occur could serve to ease public concerns about privacy. (such laws and regulations are likely to be relevantalso to individuals with inaccurate data associated with them, e.g., aninaccurate report of hiv status on a medical record.)3.5other important technology areasa number of other areas of it are important for counterterrorismpurposes. while the committee believes that the research areas describedin sections 3.1 through 3.4 should have the highest priority in any comprehensive it research program for counterterrorist purposes, the material below is intended to indicate why these areas are important and tosketch out how the research might be done.3.5.1roboticsrobots are useful in the areas of military operations, hostile environments, and toxicwaste management. they can serve in hightech arenassuch as space exploration or in home environmentsñ as personal assistants for the elderly. autonomous vehicles in particular include roboticcars, tanks, aircraft, helicopters, land rovers, and òsnakesó that crawl upand down rough surfaces. the area of robotics has made substantialinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76information technology for counterterrorismadvances in recent years, especially when combined with technologiessuch as mobile wireless, virtual reality, and intelligent or behaviorbasedsoftware.as an extension of small devices and sensors, robots serve two purposes. first, robots currently exist to assist or replace emergency workersor military personnel in dangerous situations. for example, bomb squadsuse robots to inspect, open, and destroy or detonate suspicious packages;tethered or wireless robots, with receivers and transmitters, could respond to commands to disarm bombs.a second purpose for robots could be as sensing devices to detectmotion and airborne chemicals. but unlike stationary sensors, robotshave the ability to move. for example, a òsearchandrescueó robot couldcrawl into crevices that are inaccessible or dangerous for humans (e.g.,gasfilled pockets), provide surveillance via a mounted camera or microphone, and communicate a situational assessment with a wireless transmitter. the use of such robots presents challenges such as their being fitinto an existing organizational and information hierarchy and being usedby workers who might not be familiar with technology.though the field of robotics has existed in some form for many years,practically useful robots are only beginning to emerge. for example, therobots used today for search and rescue are little more than remotecontrolled vehicles. much more research has to be done on making themfunction more autonomously, with more robust control and behavior circuits. in addition, the management of teams of robots poses importantresearch problems with respect to multiagent learning, planning, and execution in the face of uncertainty and potential opponents.robots combine complex mechanical, perceptual, computer, and telecommunications systems. more work on all of these areasñand on theproblems of integrationñneeds to be done. robot arms and manipulators are still a major source of weakness. robotics is a canonical exampleof a research area that cuts across disciplines. with research problems inpattern recognition, planning, object manipulation (especially at a finelevel), machine emotions, mechanical compliance, control theory, andmethods for humanrobot interaction, robotics draws on expertise fromand poses challenges in computer science, mechanical engineering, andelectrical engineering, as well as the social sciences.3.5.2sensorssensors are relevant in preventing certain kinds of attack (e.g., threatwarning sensors that detect smuggled nuclear materials), detecting certainkinds of attack (e.g., incidentresponse sensors that indicate the presenceinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.77investing in information technology researchof deadly but odorless chemical agents), and mitigating the consequencesof an attack (e.g., sensors that indicate whether an individual has beenexposed to a biological agent). (for more discussion of particular sensorspecific challenges related to counterterrorism, see the parent report,making the nation safer.79 the networking of sensors will also be necessary for broad coverage to be achieved; this area also presents researchchallenges.80)sensors can be deployed in various environments to gather data: onrooftops to detect airborne chemicals, in hallways to detect movement,and within physical infrastructure such as buildings and bridges to detectmetal fatigue and points of failure. these devices could be integrated intoobjects or systems that are likely to last for long periods of time and mustfunction under constraints such as limited power source, need for adequate heat dissipation, and limitations on bandwidth and memory.moreover, because they protect a civilian rather than a military population (civilian populations are much less tolerant of false positives andmuch more vulnerable to false negatives), sensors for counterterroristpurposes must place a very high premium on overall accuracy (i.e., lowfalse positive and low false negative rates).81 characteristics such asoperation against the widest possible number of agents and wide areacoverage are also important.in addition to the challenges related to emergency sensor deploymentdescribed in section 3.2.6, these areas pose difficult research challenges.sensors are most effective when individual sensors are linked and coordinated in a distributed sensor network. such a network allows information to be collected, shared, and processed via a òdigital nervous systemófor situational assessment and personnel monitoring. perhaps the mostimportant research problem for sensor networks is their selfconfigurabilityñsensor networks must be able to configure themselves (i.e., interconnect available elements into an ensemble that will perform the required functions at the desired performance level) and adapt to theirenvironments automatically (respond to changes in the environment or insystem resources). this is not to deny the problems faced in particularsensor modalities (e.g., the automatic recognition of dangerous objects inan xray of carryon luggage), but it nevertheless remains a key challenge79national research council. 2002. making the nation safer: the role of science and technology in countering terrorism. national academies press, washington, d.c., pp. 320324.80cstb, nrc, 2001, embedded, everywhere.81in general, for any given test, as the criteria for a positive result are increased, the rateof false positives decreases while the rate of false negatives increases. the only way todecrease both simultaneously is to devise a better test.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78information technology for counterterrorismto undertake sensor networking and to integrate into a single threat picture sensor readings from a large number of sensors (this is importantbecause of the need for monitoring large areas) each of which are of lowaccuracy.3.5.3simulation and modelingmodels are mathematical representations of a system, entity, phenomenon, or process, while simulation is a method for implementing amodel over time.82 modeling and simulation can play important rolesthroughout crisismanagement activities. specifically, emergency responders in a crisis must take actions to mitigate imminent loss of lifeand/or property. thus, the ability to make predictions about how eventsmight unfold (e.g., how a plume of chemical or biological agents mightdisperse in the next few hours, how a fire might spread to adjoining areas,how long a building might remain standing) is important to emergencyresponders. simulations can also be useful for testing alternative operational choices.while traditional simulation models have been applied to severestorms, earthquakes, and atmospheric dispersion of toxic substances, theirprimary focus has been scientific research rather than realtime crisis response. one difference between scientific simulations and crisis simulations is that the presentation of results for scientific purposes is not always compatible with the needs of emergency responders. for example,plume models of a chemical spill or release of radioactive material typically produce maps showing dispersion in parts per million as a functionof time, whereas an emergency responder needs an automatic translationof the concentration of materials into easily interpretable categories suchas òsafe,ó òhazardous but not life threatening,ó or òlife threateningó sothat appropriate action can be taken quickly.research in simulation and modeling is needed in several areas ifthese are to become useful tools for emergency responders:¥developing ad hoc models. in many situations, a particular terroristscenario will not have been anticipated. thus, it would be helpful to havetools to facilitate the creation of ad hoc situationspecific models rapidly(i.e., on a time scale of hours or days). this would include both the data82the discussion in this section is adapted largely from cstb, nrc, 1996, computing andcommunications in the extreme, and cstb, nrc, 1999, information technology research forcrisis management.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.79investing in information technology researchgathering needed for input to the model and the construction of the modelitself. such tools would likely incorporate significant amounts of subjectmatter expertise. the performance of such models could not be expectedto match that of models developed under leisurely conditions, but theymight provide rough guidance that could be very useful to emergencyresponders. (as with other issues relating to the use of technology, howpeople actually use such tools matters a great deal. thus, understandingthe actual utility of hastily constructed models as a function of the practice and experience of the users involved is also an essential component ofthis research.)¥increasing the timeliness of modeling results. because of the time pressures facing emergency responders, timely results are critical. one element is fast processing capabilities. another element, easy to overlook, isthe timeliness of data that can be inserted into a model. to be useful foremergency responders, data must be entered on a nearrealtime basis(e.g., a model could be linked to weather sensor data), a task that becomesimpossible if large efforts at data preprocessing or formatting are necessary before a simulation can be run.¥obtaining adequate computational power. because many simulationsrequire large amounts of computing power, techniques are needed thatenable the rapid requisitioning of computers engaged in scientific research and other activities to serve simulation needs in a crisis. suchtechniques will require both new administrative arrangements and further advances in the flexibility, affordability, and ease of use of theseresources.¥rapid rescaling of models. different emergency responders mayneed predictions at different time and distance scales. for example, themayor of a city might require information on whether to order an evacuation in response to a successful attack on a nuclear plant and thus wouldneed information on what might happen at the plant on a time scale of 24hours. on the other hand, a firefighter at the plant may need to knowwhat might happen in the next hour. the ability to run simulations atvarying scales of resolution is important for both the mayor and thefirefighter, and the needs of each drive the tradeoffs between the accuracy of a prediction and the speed of the response. thus, research isneeded to develop the capability for rescaling models rapidly in responseto requests from crisis managers.¥making initial damage estimates. rapid assessment of the extent anddistribution of damage in the wake of any large incident is difficult because acquiring and synthesizing damage reports take considerable time.however, initial damage estimates are essential for directing responseefforts. for example, the destruction of a dam could release a tidal waveinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80information technology for counterterrorismof water that would destroy some houses and spare others. a model thatprovided initial damage estimates would have to account for buildingstock (structure type, age, and so on), critical facilities, and lifelines, aswell as geological information and demographics, in order to predict thenumber of casualties and the need for shelter and hospitals. note alsothat such models would have direct relevance to the insurance industryand might help guide the development of criteria and pricing for terrorism insurance policies.¥improving model interoperability. as a rule, models are developedand used in isolation. integrating models into information systems foremergency responders would enable more accurate and timely predictions to be made. for example, emergency responders at the murrahbuilding in oklahoma city in 1995 used computeraided design (cad)software to map the areas to be searched and to correlate estimated locations of victims (based on where their offices had been located before theblast) with the actual scene. more useful would have been the coupling ofthe cad data into a structural model that could perform finiteelementanalysis to predict the loads on various parts of the damaged building,thus indicating where shoring was necessary to prop up damaged structures and reduce the danger to survivors and rescuers from further collapses.3.6people and organizationsthe craft of espionage distinguishes between the initial penetration ofan organization and an ongoing exploitation that continues to yield useful information or access. technology (e.g., a worm, rogue code, a bug, aplanted microchip) is often essential to the ongoing exploitation, but it isalmost always social methods (e.g., bribing a lowlevel worker) that allowthe initial penetration which facilitates the introduction of that technology. for example, a bug planted in a room will reveal conversations therefor a long time, but it is a failure of people and organizations that allowsan enemy agent to plant the bug in the first place. in the immediateaftermath of world war ii, soviet spies in the united states used a onetime pad encryption system, an encryption approach that is provablyunbreakable. nevertheless, u.s. cryptanalysts broke the soviet codeñbecause the soviets began to reuse some of the key pads.8383key pads are simply lists of random numbers, so there was no particular reason whythe soviets were forced to reuse them. their reuse was a human error that violated theessential premise underlying the security of onetime pad encryption systems. (see nsainformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.81investing in information technology researchthis lesson generalizes to any study that involves the weaknesses andvulnerabilities of any system. that is, technology is always used in somesocial and organizational context, and human error and human culpability are central in understanding how the system might fail. thus, designand deployment are system issues, and since human, social, and organizational behavior are part of the system, they must be part of the researchand design efforts. the technology cannot be examined in isolation of theways in which it is deployed.technology is aimed at helping people, organizations, and society toaccomplish their goals. technology is essential to modern everyday life,and technology is essential to thwarting wouldbe terrorists and criminals. at the same time, if deployed poorly, the technology can actuallymake problems worse. if it is poorly designed, it will lead to numerouserrors, usually blamed on the unwitting users of the system, but almostinvariably traceable to poor design from a human or organizational pointof view. whatever the reason, human error can be extremely costly intime, money, and lives. research findings from the behavioral and socialsciences can aid in the design of solutions that are effective while beingminimally obtrusive. good design can dramatically reduce the incidenceof errorñas the experience in commercial aviation shows.3.6.1principles of humancentered designboth technology and the people around it make errors. it is simplynot possible to have zero false positives and zero false negatives simultaneously, especially in a world filled with uncertainty, ambiguity, andnoise. most importantly, deliberate adversaries seek to cause and exploitfalse alarms. as a result, the design of a system involving both technology and people must assume some percentage of false positives and falsenegatives. the design of a system must provide multiple levels of defense, accommodate continual feedback, and allow systematic attempts toimprove. in most cases, most errors should be taken as useful feedbackand used to improve system performance rather than as signs of failurethat require punishment and blame.the best systems will look for incipient failuresñproblems that aredetected before they do damageñas important measures of operation.venona papers online at <http://www.nsa.gov/docs/venona/monographs/monograph2.html>.) more generally, the use of onetime pad systems is cumbersome and difficult anddoes not scale easily to large numbers of users, so they are disfavored for many applications. these disadvantages are all human factors and illustrate well the tradeoff betweensecurity and ease of use.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82information technology for counterterrorismthe time to take corrective action is when incipient errors reach an undesirable state but before they turn into serious issues. it is only natural toignore these early warnings because, of course, no damage has yet beendone. but it was exactly this ignoring of earlywarning trouble signs thatled directly to the disaster with the orings on the space shuttle challenger.84in general, systems must be designed from a holistic, systemsoriented point of view rather than by focusing on the technology. indeed,understanding the human and organizational interactions is importantwell before technical requirements are established. then, as the system isbeing designed, the experts on technology and human behavior jointlydevise possible systems and develop rapid prototypes that allow quickand efficient testing of the ideas. attention to the human requirementsearly in the design stage coupled with iterative design techniques savestime in the end by minimizing the end testing requirements and reducingthe likelihood of major revisions late in the development process.consider the phenomenon of òhuman error.ó experience demonstrates that often what is blamed on òhuman erroró is in fact design error.a focus on the technology in isolation of the manner in which it is deployed invariably leads to problems. it is common in the development ofautomated systems to automate whatever can be done, leaving the rest tothe human operators. this often means that the human is òout of theloop,ó with little responsibility, until matters reach the point at which theautomatic systems can no longer cope. then the human is suddenly andunexpectedly faced with an emergency, and because at this point everything is under human control, any failure is labeled òhuman error.óby contrast, when systems are designed with a full understanding ofthe powersñand weaknessesñof human operators, the incidence of human error is greatly diminished. people must be given meaningful tasks.they must always be engaged (i.e., òin the loopó), and their talents shouldbe employed for highlevel guidance, not for entering detailed sequencesthat require high accuracy. machines are good at accurate, repetitiveactions. people are not.humancentered design is a wellexplored field with several societies, professional journals, and much academic research as well as applications, especially in aviation safety and computer systems.85 the following subsections address some basic principles of humancentered design.84see r.p. feynman. 1986. òpersonal observations on reliability of shuttle,ó in app. f,report of the presidential commission on the space shuttle challenger accident. available onlineat <http://science.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/missions/51l/docs/rogerscommission/appendixf.txt>. accessed november 18, 2002.85see, for example, jef raskin, 2000, the human interface, addisonwesley, boston.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.83investing in information technology researchdefend in depth and try to avoid commonmode failuresmany of todayõs systems have a single point of defense. if problemsarise there, if there is some error, there is no second line to fall back on.86a notable exception is aviation safety, which builds multiple systems sothat failure at one point does not break the system.a key difficulty in such a design philosophy is the existence of commonmode failures. the accident literature is filled with examples ofcommonmode failure, in which redundant safety systems all failed at thesame time. for example, in the september 11 attack on the world tradecenter, the medical response was hindered by the fact that the cityõsoffice of emergency management (oem), responsible for coordinatingall aspects of a disaster response, was housed in building 7 of the worldtrade center, one of the buildings that collapsed several hours after theairplane strikes.this is not to say that commonmode failures are usually ignored indesign. but they can often be difficult to detect and eliminate. the òredundantó communications lines cited in section 2.2.2 are a potential commonmode failure, and yet as the discussion of section 3.2.8 emphasizes,redundant links that are in fact not redundant are often not easy to identify. a more complex example of a hidden commonmode failure occurred in a commercial airliner that lost oil pressure in all three enginessimultaneously. the two engines on the wing were quite different fromthe engine in the tail, and they had been serviced by different technicians.however, it turned out that each engine required an oring seal, and dueto a complex chain of events, the oring was left off the part that wasserviced on all three engines. thus, in this case, the oring was the commonmode failure, though on the surface the simultaneous failure did notappear to be a commonmode failure.87account for the difference betweenwork as practiced and work as prescribedin the study of work practices, it is commonplace to observe the distinction between work as practiced and work as prescribed. when peopledescribe their work, they can provide clear and coherent statements about86p.a. hancock and s.g. hart. 2002. òdefeating terrorism: what can human factors/ergonomics offer?ó ergonomics in design, vol. 10 (1): 616.87national transportation safety board (ntsb). 1984. aircraft accident reportñeasternair lines, inc., lockheed l1011, n334ea, miami international airport, miami, florida, may 5,1983. report no. ntsb/aar84/04. national transportation safety board, washington,d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84information technology for counterterrorismthe procedures they follow. but observation of these same people doingactual work shows that they are inconsistent with the descriptions theyprovided. why? because òthat was a special case.ó in fact, it turns outthat special cases are the norm, and the descriptions are of the prototypical case that seldom actually happens. additionally, these descriptions ofprocedure are for nonemergency circumstances. during emergencies,established procedures will prove even more inadequate than they areunder putatively normal circumstances.a common approach to improving safety and security is to tightenprocedures and to require redundant checking. but tighter procedures toimprove security address work òas prescribed.ó in practice, the technology and procedures that are added to make operations safer and moresecure quite often get in the way of getting the work done. securitytechnology and procedures can introduce so many problems into gettingthe job done that people learn to circumvent them. because people areinherently helpful and well motivated to do their work, they developworkarounds to bypass security, not because they are not well trained ormotivated, but precisely because they are well trained and motivated. inmany cases, they could not accomplish their tasks without violating procedures. this is especially true in crises, where normal routines breakdown and workarounds are essential. consider, for example, advice that is often given about passwords.people are advised to use passwords that are long and obscure and tochange them frequently so that if one is compromised, it does not remaincompromised for long. the result is that people write down their passwords on yellow postit notes and paste them on their terminals, wherethey are easy for unauthorized users to see.biometrics provides another example. widely accepted as a strongerauthentication mechanism than passwords, even biometrics cannot be theentire solution. biometric mechanisms must sometimes be bypassed forentirely legitimate reasons. òi burned my hand and itõs all bandaged up,so i canõt use the fingerprint machine. can you let me in just this once?óòi just had a cataract operation and i have to wear an eye patch, so how doi do an iris scan?ó any opening for legitimately bypassing normal procedures opens the door for illegitimate bypasses. even if technology cannotbe fooled (and it almost always can be), the people behind the technologycan be fooled.sometimes problems occur because the pressures on individuals differ from the stated goals of the organization. when people are asked tofollow arduous security requirements while at the same time maintainingefficient and productive work schedules, there can be conflicts. workersmust choose which is of greatest importance. quite often it is the workschedule that is given priority, and although this is not unreasonable, itinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.85investing in information technology researchoccurs at the cost of security. the proper goal is to design systems andprocedures in which these are not in conflict.in short, there is a terrible tradeoff: the very things that make security more secure are often those that make our lives more difficult, or insome cases, impossible. when human and organizational factors are nottaken into account in system design and development, the measures intended to increase security may reduce it because dedicated, concernedworkers will thwart such measures in order to get their jobs done. realistic security is cognizant of human and organizational behavior.plan for people who want to be helpfulcrooks, thieves, criminals, and terrorists are experts at exploiting thewillingness of people to be helpfulña process usually known as òsocialengineering.ó these adversaries use people to help them understandhow to use the onerous technology, and they use people by taking advantage of situations that cause breakdowns in normal procedures. in short,they help human error to occur.for example, badges are often required for entry into a secure facility.however, entry can usually be obtained in the following manner: walkup to the door carrying an armload of computers, parts, and danglingcords. ask someone to hold the door open, and thank them. carry thejunk over to an empty cubicle, look for the password and login name thatwill be on a postit note somewhere, and log in. if you cannot log in, asksomeone for help. as one guide for hackers puts it, òjust shout, ôdoesanyone remember the password for this terminal?õ . . . you would besurprised how many people will tell you.ó88a firefighter who needed to know the security code to get in a securebuilding through the back door might call the management office of thebuilding and say:hey, this is lt. john hennessy from firehouse 17. this is a code 73emergency. there are people screaming behind the doors, the buildingis going to collapseñwhatõs the security code? hurry, iõm losing mysignal. hello? hello? better hurry. [sounds of screaming and otherloud noises in background.] a terrorist who needed to know the security code to enter a securebuilding through the back door would call and say:88òthe complete social engineering faq.ó available online at <http://morehouse.org/hin/blckcrwl/hack/soceng.txt>.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86information technology for counterterrorismhey, this is lt. john hennessy from firehouse 17. this is a code 73emergency. there are people screaming behind the doors, the buildingis going to collapseñwhatõs the security code? hurry, iõm losing mysignal. hello? hello? better hurry. [sounds of screaming and otherloud noises in background.] times of stress and emergency, when security is perhaps of mostimportance, are exactly the times when the strains are the greatest and theneed for normally nonauthorized people (such as firefighters, police, rescue and health personnel) to gain access is acute. and this is when it iseasiest for a terrorist to get in, using the same mechanisms.countering social engineering by an adversary is an importantcounterterrorist technique. but whatever the counter, the solution mustnot be based on extinguishing the tendencies of people to be helpful. thereason is that helpful people often play a key role in getting any workdone at allñand thus the research challenge is to develop effective techniques for countering social engineering that do not require wholesaleattacks on tendencies to be helpful.understand bystander apathyas more people are involved in checking a task, it is possible forsafety to decrease. this is called the òbystander apathyó problem, namedafter studies of a new york city crime in which numerous people witnessed an incident but no one helped and no one reported it. laboratorystudies showed that the greater the number of people watching, the lowerthe likelihood that anyone would helpñthe major reason being that eachindividual assumes that if an incident is serious, someone else out of allthose watching will be doing something, so the fact that nobody is doinganything means that it must not be a real issue. after all, in new york,anything might be happening: it might be a movie shoot. similarly, if iam asked to check the meter readings of a technician, and i know that theimmediate supervisor has already checked them and that someone elsewill check my report, i donõt take the check all that seriously: after all,how could a mistake get through with so many people involved? i donõthave to worry. but what if everyone feels that way?the commercial aviation community has done an excellent job offighting this tendency with its program of crew resource management(crm). in crm, the pilot not flying is required to be an active critic of theactions taken by the pilot who is flying. and the pilot flying is supposedto thank the other for the criticism, even when it is incorrect. obviously,getting this process in place was difficult, for it involved major changes inthe culture, especially when one pilot was junior, the other very senior.but the result has been increased safety in the cockpit.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.87investing in information technology researchaccount for cognitive and perceptual biasesthe research literature in cognitive and social psychology clearly demonstrates that most people are particularly bad at understanding lowprobability events. this might be the òoneinamillionó problem. anairplane pilot might well decide that the situation of three different oilpressure indicators all reading zero oil pressure is likely fallacious, because it is a òoneinamillionó chance that all three engines would fail atthe same time. however, since there are roughly 10 million commercialflights a year in the united states, oneinamillion means that 10 flights ayear will suffer from this problem.on the other hand, salient events are overestimated in frequency.thus, aviation is considered more dangerous than automobile driving bymany people, despite the data that show just the opposite. what aboutterrorist acts? these are truly unlikely, deadly though each may be, but ifairline passengers overreact, they are apt to attack and possibly seriouslyinjure an innocent passenger who meets some of their preconceptions of aterrorist. indeed, each successful encounter between passengers and potential harrowers increases the likelihood of a future false encounter.the òboy who cried wolfó is a third perceptual biasñpotential threatsare often ignored because of a history of false alarms. an effective criminal or terrorist approach is to trigger an alarm system repeatedly so thatthe security personnel, in frustration over the repeated false alarms, eitherdisable or ignore itñwhich is when the terrorist sneaks in.probe and test the system independentlythe terms òred teamó and òtiger teamó refer to efforts undertaken byan organization to test its security from an operational perspective usingteams that simulate what a determined attacker might do. tiger teamsdevelop expertise relevant to their intended targets, conduct reconnaissance to search for security weaknesses, and then launch attacks thatexploit those weaknesses. under most circumstances, the attack is notintended to be disruptive but rather to indicate what damage could havebeen done. properly conducted tigerteam testing has the following characteristics:¥it is conducted on an unscheduled basis without the knowledge ofthe installation being probed, so that a realistic security posture can betested.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88information technology for counterterrorism¥it does not function under unrealistic constraints about what it canor cannot do, so its attack can realistically simulate what a real attackermight do.¥it reports its results to individuals who are not directly responsiblefor an installationõs security posture so that negative results cannot besuppressed.¥it probes and tests the fundamental assumptions on which securityplanning is based and seeks to violate them in order to create unexpectedattacks.why are tiger teams a òpeople and organizationó issue? the essentialreason is that an attacker has the opportunity to attack any vulnerablepoint in a systemõs defenses, whether that point of vulnerability is theresult of an unknown software bug, a misconfigured access control list, apassword taped to a terminal, lax guards at the entrance to a building, ora system operator trying to be helpful.over the years, tiger teams have been an essential aspect of any security program, and tigerteam tests are essential for several reasons:¥recognized vulnerabilities are not always corrected, and knownfixes are frequently found not to have been applied as a result of poorconfiguration management.¥security features are often turned off in an effort to improve operational efficiency. such actions may improve operational efficiency, but atthe potentially high cost of compromising security, sometimes with theprimary damage occurring in some distant part of the system.¥some security measures rely on procedural measures and thusdepend on proper training and ongoing vigilance on the part of commanders and system managers.¥security flaws that are not apparent to the defender undergoing aninspection may be uncovered by a committed attacker (as they would beuncovered in an actual attack).89in order to maximize the impact of these tests, reports should bedisseminated widely. the release of such information may cause embarrassment of certain parties or identify paths through which adversariesmay attack, but especially in the case of vulnerabilities uncovered forwhich fixes are available, the benefits of releasing such informationñallowing others to learn from it and motivating fixes to be installedñgenerally outweigh these costs. furthermore, actions can be taken to mini89cstb, nrc, 1999, realizing the potential of c4i, p. 147.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.89investing in information technology researchmize the possibility that adversaries might be able to obtain or use suchinformation. for example, passing the information to the tested installation using nonelectronic means would eliminate the possibility that anadversary monitoring electronic channels could obtain it. delaying thepublic release of such information for a period of time could allow thevulnerable party to fix the problems identified.finally, tigerteam testing launched without the knowledge of theattacked systems also allows estimates to be made of the frequency ofattacks. specifically, the fraction of tigerteam attacks that are detected isa reasonable estimate of the fraction of adversary attacks that are made.thus, the frequency of adversary attacks can be estimated from the number of adversary attacks that are detected.3.6.2organizational practices in itenabledcompanies and agenciesan organizationõs practices play an important role in countering external threats. the discussion below is not meant in any way to be exhaustive but rather to motivate examination of yet another nontechnological dimension of security.outsourcing of product development and supportfor entirely understandable reasons, many companies outsource itwork to parties whose interests may not be fully aligned with their own.companies outsource for many reasons, ranging from the availability ofskilled human resources that are not indigenous to them to the oftenlower cost of doing so (especially when the parties doing the outsourcedwork have access to cheaper sources of labor).the practice of outsourcing has security implications. on the onehand, outsourced work represents a potential vulnerability to the company that uses such work, unless that company has the expertise to auditand inspect the work for security flaws. by assumption, a company thatoutsources work has less control over how the work is done, and thepossibility of deliberately introduced security vulnerabilities in outsourced work must be taken seriously. on the other hand, one reason foroutsourcing work is that those doing the work may have greater expertisethan the company hiring themñand if security is a special expertise of theformer, its capabilities for maintaining security may be greater than that ofthe latter.outsourcing is not in and of itself a practice that leads to insecure itsystems and networks. nevertheless, prudence dictates that a companyunderstand the potential risks and benefits of outsourcing from a securityinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90information technology for counterterrorismperspective. if it does outsource work, a company should undertakecareful and informed inspection of the work on system components thatprovide critical functionality.personnel screeningbehavioral and psychological profiles of typical outside òhackersóhave been available for a long time, providing insight into their motivations and techniques. however, similar information about persons likelyto present an insider threat is not available today. one challenge to assembling such information is the fact that insider adversaries can be characterized in many different ways. for example, the behavior of the insider will likely vary depending on a wide variety of factors, includingwhether the person is unwitting, incompetent, coerced, vengeful, and soon. such factors imply that simply relying on externally observable traitsand behaviors in order to identify potential insiders may not prove useful, and so integration with background information on individual employees may be necessary to identify potential risks from insiders. notealso that all screening techniques run the risk of incorrectly labeling problematic behavior acceptable or of determining benign behavioral patternsto be indicative of inappropriate behavior or intent.managing personnel in a securityoriented environmentmanaging employees in a securityoriented environment is complex.the practices that characterize the handling of classified information often impede the sharing of information among people. longterm compliance with security procedures is often difficult to obtain, as employeesdevelop ways to circumvent these procedures in order to achieve greaterefficiency or effectiveness. personnel matters that are routine in nonsecureenvironments become difficult. for example, from a security perspective,termination of the access privileges of employees found to be improperlyhired or retained must happen without warning them of such termination. on the other hand, due process may prevent rapid action frombeing taken. the temptations are strong to relax the requirements of dueprocess for security, but not observing due process often has detrimentaleffects on organizational morale and esprit de corps,90 not to mention thepossibility that almost any pretext will suffice for some individual supervisors to eliminate workers they do not personally like.90illustrations of the conflict between applying due process and managing the requirements of security can be found in the cases of wen ho lee and felix bloch. in investigatingthe alleged passing of nuclear weapons design information to the peopleõs republic ofinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.91investing in information technology researchmany issues arise when an employee is merely under suspicion forwrongdoing or malicious intentñbefore action is taken to rescind accessprivileges, the company may run a significant risk of suffering significantdamage. this suggests that under these circumstances, the work of theemployee must be monitored and controlled, but at the same time therequirements of due process must be observed.3.6.3dealing with organizational resistanceto interagency cooperationan effective response to a serious terrorist incident will inevitablyrequire the multiple emergencyresponse agencies to cooperate. section3.2.1 describes technical barriers to effective cooperation, but technological limitations by no means explain why agencies might fail to cooperateeffectively.specifically, it is necessary to note that the character and traditions ofagencies have a profound impact on their ability and willingness to cooperate. different agencies exhibit many differences in internal cultures(e.g., in philosophies of staff reward and punishment, in traditions amongdisciplines in research and implementation, in ethical criteria of staff interms of private versus public interest, in performance criteria betweenpublic and profitmaking enterprises, and in degree of participatory decision making). turf battles and jurisdictional warfare between agencieswith overlapping responsibilities are also common, with each agency having its own beliefs about what is best for the citizenry.for the public record, the rhetoric of every emergencyresponseagency acknowledges the need for cooperation with other agencies. butthe reality in practice is often quite different from the rhetoric, and inpractice almost every disaster (whether natural or attackrelated) revealsshortcomings in the extent and nature of interagency cooperation.china, lee was charged on multiple counts of mishandling material containing restricteddata with the intent to injure the united states and with the intent to secure an advantage toa foreign nation. after being charged, lee was held in custody under conditions describedby the cognizant federal judge as draconian, because it was believed that his pretrial releasewould pose a grave threat to the nationõs security. the case ended with the dismissal of allbut one charge of mishandling classified information and with the judgeõs apology for theconduct of the government in the prosecution of this case. felix bloch was a foreignservice officer in the state department, investigated in 1989 by the fbi for spying for thesoviet union. bloch was eventually fired and stripped of his pension in 1990 on groundsthat he lied to fbi investigators, but he was never charged. it is alleged that robert hanssengave information to the soviets revealing that bloch was under suspicion, which mightaccount for the fact that sufficient grounds for charging bloch were never found.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92information technology for counterterrorismfor example, the emergency response to the september 11, 2001, attacks on the world trade center revealed a number of cultural barriers tocooperation in the new york city police and fire departments:91¥police helicopters, with the ability to provide firefighters closeupinformation on the progress of the fire in the upper parts of the buildingsas well as some aerial rescue capability of those gathered on the roofs,were never used for those purposes. an onsite fire department chieftried to request police helicopters for such roles but was unable to reachthe police dispatcher for the helicopters either by phone or radio. furthermore, the fire department had established its command post in thebuilding lobbies, while the police had established their command postthree blocks away, and the police did not report to the fire departmentcommanders onsite. said one senior fire department official, òthey [thepolice] report to nobody and they go and do whatever they want.ó¥the police and fire departments have a formal agreement (in placesince 1993) to share police helicopters during highrise fires and to practice together. however, neither agency has any records of joint drills,although some less formal òfamiliarization flightsó may have been conducted for the fire department a year or so before september 11.¥while most states and the federal government have forged agreements among emergencyresponse agencies that specify in advance whowill be in overall charge of a crisis response, new york city has no suchagreement, which left its police and fire departments with no guidanceabout how to proceed with overall command arrangements on september11.¥police fault firefighters and firefighters fault police for unwillingness to cooperate. some police believe that sharing command with thefire department is difficult because firefighters lack paramilitary discipline characteristic of the police force, while some firefighters thoughtthat the police felt they could and should do everything.¥in the aftermath, senior fire department and police departmentofficials disagreed over the extent to which the departments were able tocoordinate. a senior fire department official said that òthere is no question there were communications problems [between the fire departmentand the police department] at this catastrophic incident,ó while a seniorpolice department official said, òi was not made aware that day that wewere having any difficulty coordinating.ó91see jim dwyer, kevin flynn, and ford fessenden. 2002. ò9/11 exposed deadly flawsin rescue plan.ó new york times, july 7. available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/07/nyregion/07emer.html?pagewanted=1>.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.93investing in information technology researchcultural barriers separating the cia and the fbi have also been revealed in the postmortems that have been conducted since september 11.in particular, the essential mission of the cia is one of intelligence collection and analysis, while the essential mission of the fbi has been directedtoward law enforcement. as a broad generalization, these missions differin that intelligence is more focused on anticipating and predicting badevents, while law enforcement is more focused on prosecutions and holding perpetrators of dangerous events accountable to a criminal justicesystem. to illustrate, intelligence analysts place a high value on protecting sources and methods for gathering intelligence so that they will beable to continue obtaining information from those channels, while lawenforcement officials place a high value on the ability to use informationin open court to gain convictions. (the fact that the fbi and cia alsooperate under very different legal regimes governing their domestic activities is also quite relevant, but beyond the scope of this report. sufficeit to say that these different legal regimes impose explicit behavioral constraints and serve to shape the environment in which the cultural attitudes within each agency develop.)desires of agencies to preserve their autonomy also contribute to anactive (if subterranean) resistance to interoperability. personnel of oneagency without the capability of communicating with another agency arenot easily directed by that other agency. furthermore, an agency mayhave a fear (often justified) that communications overheard by anotheragency will lead to criticism and secondguessing about actions that ittook in the heat of an emergency.there are no easy answers for bridging cultural gulfs between agencies that do not interact very much during normal operations. differentagencies with different histories, different missions, and different daytoday work would be expected to develop different policies, procedures,and philosophies about what is or is not appropriate under a given set ofcircumstances.for the most part and under most circumstances, an agencyõs cultureserves it well. but in crisis, interagency differences impede interagencycooperation, and they cannot be overcome by fiat at the scene of the crisis.for example, a policy directive requiring that agencies adopt and usecommon communications protocols does not necessarily require emergency responders from different agencies to actually interact with oneanother while an emergency response is occurring.3.6.4principles into practiceputting these principles into practice requires that the human requirements be considered equally with technical and security requirements.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94information technology for counterterrorismthe most secure and reliable systems will be those developed with behavioral scientists from the user interface community who use an iterativedesigntestdesign implementation strategy.the major point is to recognize that security and reliability are systems problems: the needs and standard working practices of the peopleinvolved are as important as the technical requirements. the very virtuesof people are often turned against them when intruders seek to broachsecurity: the willingness to help others in distress is perhaps the weakestlink of all in any defensive system, but it would be preferable to designsecurity systems that detract minimally from this valuable human attribute. many failures are due to security requirements that are unreasonable from the point of view of human cognition (e.g., asking for frequentmemorization of long, complex passwords) or that severely impact theability to get the required work done because they conflict with the organizational structures and requirements. it is therefore essential that theneeds of the individuals, the workgroups, and the organization all betaken into account. conscientious workers will do whatever is necessaryto get the work done, often at the cost of compromising security. butthrough proper design, it should be possible to design systems that areboth more efficient and more secure.to achieve effective interagency cooperation in crisis, many thingsmust happen prior to the occurrence of crisis, taking into account therealities of organizational resistance to interoperability. such cooperationis likely to require:¥strong, sustained leadership. when a strong leader places a highpriority on interagency cooperation, is willing to expend resources andpolitical capital in support of such cooperation, and can sustain that expenditure over a time long enough so that the agencies in question cannotòoutwaitó his or her efforts, organizational change that moves in the direction of that priority is more likely.¥activities that promote interagency understanding and cooperation. oneexample of such activities is the temporary detailing of personnel fromone agency to another (e.g., firefighters and police officers or fbi and ciaanalysts on temporary duty at each otherõs agencies). prior exposure toone anotherõs operational culture generally helps to reduce frictions thatare caused by lack of familiarity during a crisis. of course, to be genunielyhelpful, this practice must be carried out on a sufficiently large scale thatthe personnel so exposed are likely to be those participating in a responseto a crisis. another useful activity is joint exercises that simulate crisisresponse. as a rule, exercises that involve most or all of the agencieslikely to be responding in a disasterñand that use the it infrastructurethat they are expected to useñare an essential preparation for effectiveinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.95investing in information technology researchinteragency cooperation.92 exercises help to identify and solve somesocial, organizational, and technical problems, and they help to reveal therivalries and infighting between agencies whose resolution is importantto real progress in this area. to the extent that the agencies and personnelinvolved in an exercise are the same as those involved in the response toa real incident, exercises can help the response to be less ad hoc and moresystematic. other, less formal activities can also be conducted to improveinteragency understanding. for example, personnel from one agency canbe detailed to work in another agency in emergencyresponse situations.as a part of preservice and inservice training, personnel from one agencycan be posted to other agencies for short periods to develop contacts andto understand the operating procedures of those other agencies.¥budgets that support interagency cooperation. for many agencies,battles of the budget are as important as their daytoday operationalresponsibilities. this is not inappropriate, as adequate budget resourcesare a prerequisite for an agencyõs success. thus, it is simply unrealistic todemand cooperation from agencies without providing budget resourcesthat are dedicated to that end. note that budget resources support operations (e.g., personnel and training matters) and the procurement of systems, and both are relevant to interagency cooperation.3.6.5implications for researchthe discussion in the previous sections has two purposes. one is todescribe the operational milieu into which technology is deployedñawarning that human beings are an essential part of any operational system and that system design must incorporate sophisticated knowledge ofhuman and organizational issues as well as technical knowledge. a second purpose is to develop a rationale for research into human and organizational issues relating to technology in a counterterrorism context.research in this area will be more applied than basic. the socialsciences (used broadly to include psychology, anthropology, sociology,organizational behavior, human factors, and so on) have developed asignificant base of knowledge that is relevant to the deployment of itbased systems. but in practice, social scientists with the relevant domainexpertise often lack applied skills and the requisite technical it knowl92despite the creation of new york cityõs office of emergency management in 1996 andexpenditures of nearly $25 million to coordinate emergency response, the city had notconducted an emergency exercise between 1996 and september 11, 2001, at the world tradecenterñwhich had been bombed in 1993ñthat included the fire department, the police,and the port authorityõs emergency staff.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96information technology for counterterrorismedge. similarly, information technologists often lack the appropriate domain knowledge and often use a system development process that makesit difficult to incorporate human and organizational considerations.this point suggests that research is relevant in at least four differentareas.1.the formulation of system development methods that are more amenableto the incorporation of domain knowledge and social science expertise. theòspiral developmentó methodology for software development is an example of how user inputs and concerns can be used to drive the development process, but the method is hard to generalize to incorporate knowledge about the organizational context of use.2.the translation of social science research findings into guidelines andmethods that are readily applied by the technical community. the results of thisresearch effort might very well be software toolboxes as well as a òhandbook of applied social scienceó or a òcognitive engineering handbookócontaining useful principles for system development and design derivedfrom the social science research base.3.the development of reliable security measures that do not interfere withwhat legitimate workers must do. these methods must minimize loads onhuman memory and attention and task interference while providing theappropriate levels of security in the face of adversaries who use sophisticated technologies as well as social engineering techniques to penetratethe security.4.understanding of the it issues related to the disparate organizationalcultures of agencies that will be fused under the department of homeland security. this is a complex task, with difficult technical issues interspersedwith complex procedural, permissions, and organizational issues requiring a mix of technical and social skills to manage. operationally, thequestion is how to allow for the sharing of communication and dataamong different organizations that have different needs to know, differing requirements, and different cultural and organizational structures, ina way that enhances the desired goals while maintaining the requiredsecurity.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.974what can be done now?developing a significantly less vulnerable information infrastructureis an important longterm goal for the united states. this longterm goalmust focus on the creation of new technologies and paradigms for enhancing security and reducing the impact of security breaches. in theshort term, the committee believes that the vulnerabilities in the communications and computing infrastructure of the firstresponder networkshould receive focused attention. efforts should concentrate on hardening first respondersõ communications capability as well as those portionsof their computing systems devoted to coordination and control of anemergency response. the committee believes that existing technologycan be used to achieve many of the needed improvements in both thetelecommunications and computing infrastructures of first responders.unfortunately, the expertise to achieve a more secure system often doesnot reside within the host organizationsñthis may be the case, for example, in local and state government. these facts lead to two shorttermrecommendations.shortterm recommendation 1: the nation should develop a program that focuses on the communications and computing needs of emergency responders. such a program would have two essential functions:¥ensuring that authoritative currentknowledge expertise and support regarding information technology are available to emergencyresponse agenciesprior to and during emergencies, including terrorist attacks. one implementainformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98information technology for counterterrorismtion option is to situate the mechanism administratively in existing government or private organizationsñfor example, the national institute ofstandards and technology, the department of homeland security, thedepartment of defense, the computer emergency response team of thesoftware engineering institute at carnegie mellon university. a secondoption is to create a national body to coordinate the private sector andlocal, state, and federal authorities.1 in the short term, a practical optionfor providing emergency operational support would be to exploit it expertise in the private sector, much as the armed services draw on theprivate sector (national guard and reserve forces) to augment activeduty forces during emergencies. such a strategy, however, must provideadequate security vetting for privatesector individuals serving in thisemergency role and must also be a complement to a more enduringmechanism for providing ongoing it expertise and assistance to emergencyresponse agencies.¥upgrading the capabilities of the command, control, communications,and intelligence (c3i) systems of emergencyresponse agencies through the use ofexisting technologies and perhaps minor enhancements to them. one key element of such upgrading should be a transition from legacy analog c3isystems to digital systems. of course, in the short term, this transition canonly be started, but it is clear that it will be necessary over the long term toachieve effective communications capabilities. in addition, maintainingeffective communications capability in the wake of a terrorist attack is ahigh priority, and some possible options for implementing this recommendation include a separate emergencyresponse communications network that is deployed in the immediate aftermath of a disaster and theuse of the public network to support virtual private networks, with priority given to traffic from emergency responders. (table 4.1 describes someillustrative advantages and disadvantages of each approach.) given thefact that emergencyresponse agencies are largely state and local, there isno federal agency that has the responsibility and authority over state andlocal responding agencies needed to carry out this recommendation.thus, it is likely that a program of this nature would have to rely onincentives (probably financial) to persuade state and local responders toparticipate and to acquire new interoperable c3i systems.1cstb has a pending fullscale project on information and network security r&d thatwill address federal funding and structure in much greater detail than is possible in thisreport. see the web site <http://www.cstb.org> for more information on this subject.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.99what can be done now? table 4.1a comparison of separate emergency networks withreliance on surviving residual capacityemergencyillustrativeillustrativenetworkadvantagedisadvantageseparate network deployedprovides highconfidencewould not be the systemafter an emergencyassurance of knownregularly used by personnel;bandwidth availability.without continuous updatesand training, they may notbe able to use it properly inemergency settings.deployment of networkmay take too long.residual publicnetworkassures immediatenot possible to assure thecapacity plus priority foravailability of someavailability of adequateemergency respondersbandwidth because somebandwidth for emergencypart of the public networkresponders becauseis likely to survive anyavailability depends on thedisaster.amount of surviving publicnetwork.shortterm recommendation 2: the nation should promote the useof best practices in information and network security in all relevantpublic agencies and private organizations. nearly all organizations,whether in government or the private sector, could do much better withrespect to information and network security than they do today, simplyby exploiting what is already known about that subject today, as discussed at length in cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or paylater.2 users of it, vendors in the it sector, and makers of public policycan all take securityenhancing actions.users of it in individual organizations are where the òrubber meetsthe roadóñthey are the people who must actually make the neededchanges work. only changes in operational practice and deployed technology in individual organizations can have an impact on security, and2computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national research council(nrc). 2002. cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later. national academypress, washington, d.c. (hereafter cited as cstb, nrc, 2002, cybersecurity today and tomorrow). the discussion in that volume is based on extensive elaboration and analysiscontained in various cstb reports. including computers at risk (1991), trust in cyberspace(1999), and realizing the potential for c4i (1999), among others.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100information technology for counterterrorismthe parties responsible for taking action range from chief technical (oreven executive) officers to system administrators. individual organizations can and should:¥establish and provide adequate resources to an internal entity withresponsibility for providing direct defensive operational support to system administrators throughout the organization . . . . to serve as thefocal point for operational change, such an entity must have the authorityñas well as a person in chargeñto force corrective action.¥ensure that adequate informationsecurity tools are available, thateveryone is properly trained in their use, and that enough time is available to use them properly. then hold all personnel accountable for theirinformation system security practices . . . .¥conduct frequent, unannounced redteam [tigerteam] penetrationtesting of deployed systems and report the results to responsible management . . . .¥promptly fix problems and vulnerabilities that are known or that arediscovered to exist . . . .¥mandate the organizationwide use of currently available network/configuration management tools, and demand better tools from vendors. . . .¥mandate the use of strong authentication mechanisms to protect sensitive or critical information and systems . . . .¥use defense in depth. in particular, design systems under the assumption that they will be connected to a compromised network or anetwork that is under attack, and practice operating these systems under this assumption.¥define a fallback plan for more secure operation when under attackand rehearse it regularly. complement that plan with a disasterrecovery program.3vendors of it systems and services have key roles to play in improving the security functionality of their products. such vendors should:¥drastically improve the user interface to security, which is [virtually]incomprehensible in nearly all of todayõs systems . . . . users and administrators must be able to easily see the current security state of theirsystems; this means that the state must be expressible in simple terms.¥develop tools to monitor systems automatically for consistency withdefined secure configurations, and enforce these configurations. . . . extensive automation is essential to reduce the amount of human labor3cstb, nrc, 2002, cybersecurity today and tomorrow, p. 13.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.101what can be done now?that goes into security. the tools must promptly and automatically respond to changes that result from new attacks.¥provide wellengineered schemes for user authentication based onhardware tokens . . . . these systems should be both more secure andmore convenient for users than are current password systems.¥develop a few simple and clear blueprints for secure operation thatusers can follow, since most organizations lack the expertise to do thisproperly on their own. for example, systems should be shipped withsecurity features turned on, so that a conscious effort is needed to disable them, and with default identifications and passwords turned off, sothat a conscious effort is needed to select them . . . .¥. . . [c]onduct more rigorous testing of software and systems for security flaws, doing so before releasing products rather than use customersas implicit beta testers to . . . [uncover] security flaws . . . .4 changingthis mindset is one necessary element of an improved . . . posture [forinformation and network security].5in addition, vendors should provide individual consumers with easytouse, defaulton security tools and features to secure home computersand networks. because home computers can play a significant role inattacks against cyber infrastructure, actions securing this diffuse infrastructure could help to reduce the potential threat it poses.makers of public policy have an important role in securing criticalgovernment it systems and networks. the office of management andbudget (omb) has sought to promote government information and network security in the past, but despite its actions, the state of informationand network security in government agencies remains highly inadequate.in this regard, the administration and congress can position the federalgovernment as a leader in technology use and practice by requiring agencies to adhere to the practices recommended above and to report on theirprogress in implementing those measures.6 such a step would also helpto grow the market for security technology, training, and other services.4ònote that securityspecific testing of software goes beyond looking at flaws that emergein the course of ordinary usage in an internetconnected production environment. forexample, securityspecific testing may involve very sophisticated attacks that are not widelyknown in the broader internet hacker community.ó5cstb, nrc, 2002, cybersecurity today and tomorrow, pp. 1314.6this concept has been implicit in a series of laws, beginning with the computer securityact of 1987, and administrative guidance (e.g., from omb and more recently from thefederal chief information officers council). although it has been an elusive goal, movements toward egovernment have provided practical, legal, and administrative impetus.for more discussion, see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2002. information technology research, innovation, and egovernment. national academy press, washington, d.c.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102information technology for counterterrorismbox 4.1a comparison of fire safety with information andnetwork securitytodayõs fire codes seek to provide a certain level of safety against fire in buildings, and there is broad acceptance of the idea that compliance with fire codesresults in buildings that are safer against fire than those that are not compliant. firecodes are also developed and enforced by government regulation. a reasonablequestion is, why canõt the same kind of regulation be used to improve informationand network security?fire safety and information and network security are very different in certainkey dimensions:¥intentionality. most fires are accidental, and hence the fire code is notprimarily concerned with the deliberate bypassing of fire safety measures. arsonpresents a very different problem (fortunately rare compared to the accidents thataccount for the majority of fires), and if arson were the primary problem in fire safety,fire codes would look very different indeedñand would likely be much less effectiveat making buildings safer than they are in todayõs environment. however, in the areaof information and network security, most system penetrations are deliberate, and soinformation and network security is much more like protecting against arson thanprotecting against accidental fires.¥monoculture versus diversity. a building code seeks to standardize the construction of buildings in ways that improve fire resistance. but standardization regarding safety measures in buildings is useful only when the threats to buildings (inthis case, the threat of fires in each of the buildings in question) are independent anduncorrelated. that is, the ways in which fires can start are highly varied, and someasures that are ineffective against one type of fire may well be useful againstanother type. in the case of information and network security for a largely homogeneous environment, the threat is highly correlatedñan attacker who develops techniques for penetrating the security measures of one system knows how to penetratethe security measures of many.¥the rate of change in the underlying technologies. buildings have existedfor many years, and fire has been known to be a threat for a long time. buildings takeas for the private sector, there is today no clear locus of responsibilitywithin government to undertake the òpromotionó of security across theprivate sector, because neither information and network security in theprivate sector nor it products and services are subject today to directgovernment regulation.7 this will not necessarily always be true, but for7in this context, òdirect regulationó is taken to mean governmentissued mandates aboutwhat the private sector must do with respect to cybersecurity.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.103what can be done now?a long time to design and construct, and the techniques for designing and constructing them are relatively stable. by contrast, information technology changes rapidly.thus, the computer and network systems being protected change quickly, their vulnerabilities change quickly, and the threat changes quickly.¥visibility of damage. as a rule, fires create visible damage. but the damageto a computer system or a network may be entirely invisible; indeed, a system thatfails to operate normally is only one possible result of an attack on it. a successfulattack may lay the foundation for later attacks (e.g., by installing trojan horse programs that can be subsequently activated), or it may be set to cause damage wellafter the initial penetration, or enable the clandestine and unauthorized transmissionof sensitive information stored on the attacked system (e.g., password files).¥the underlying science. the science underlying fire safety is much betterunderstood and developed than that underlying information and network security.for example, it is understood how to build a fireresistant structure from first principles. one might specify the use of steel beams that lose structural integrity at acertain temperature. finiteelement analysis based on a sound underlying mathematics enables reliable predictions to be made about structural loading. but no suchscience underlies information and network security and the development of securesystems and networks.¥the availability of metrics. in fire codes, it is meaningful to specify that abuilding must resist burning for a certain period of time. but there is no comparablemetric to specify how long a computer system or network must be able to resist anintruder. more generally, there is no quantitative basis for understanding how muchsecurity is made available by the addition of any particular feature in computer ornetwork design.these important differences should not be taken to mean that nothing is knownabout information and network securityñand as discussed in the main text, there arecommon sense measures that can be taken that do improve such security. but directregulation is always more difficult to impose when the benefits are uncertain and/ordifficult to articulate, and for this reason, those who wish to impose direct regulationto improve information and network security face many difficulties that warrantthought and deliberation.a number of reasons (described in box 4.1), the realities of informationand network security make it less amenable to government regulationthan other fields such as fire or automobile or flight safety.in addition, the committee notes that the it sector is one over whichthe federal government has little leverage. it sales to the government area small fraction of the it sectorõs overall revenue, and because it purchasers are generally unwilling to acquire security features at the expense ofperformance or ease of use, it vendors have little incentive to includesecurity features at the behest of government alone. indeed, it is likelyinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104information technology for counterterrorism8another potentially important aspect of the governmentõs nonregulatory role, a topicoutside the scope of this report, is the leadership role that government itself could play withrespect to information and network security. for more discussion, see cstb, nrc, 2002,cybersecurity today and tomorrow.9 cstb, nrc, 2002, cybersecurity today and tomorrow.10cstb, nrc, 2002, cybersecurity today and tomorrow.that attempts at such regulation will be fought vigorously, or may fail,because of the likely inability of a regulatory process to keep pace withrapid changes in technology.thus, appropriate market mechanisms could be more successful thandirect regulation in improving the security of the nationõs it infrastructure, even though the market has largely failed to provide sufficient incentives for the private sector to take adequate action with respect toinformation and network security. the challenge for public policy is toensure that those appropriate market mechanisms develop. how to dealconstructively with prevailing market dynamics has been an enduringchallenge for the government, which has attempted a variety of programsaimed at stimulating supply and demand but which has yet to arrive at anapproach with significant impact.nevertheless, the committee believes that public policy can have animportant influence on the environment in which nongovernment organizations live up to their responsibilities for security. one critical dimension of influencing securityrelated change is the federal governmentõsnonregulatory role, particularly in its undertaking of research and development of the types described above.8 such r&d might improve security and interoperability, for example, and reduce the costs of implementing such featuresñthereby making it less painful for vendors to adoptthem.other policy responses to the failure of existing incentives to causethe market to respond adequately to the security challenge are more controversial. if the market were succeeding, there would be a significantprivate sector demand for more security in it products, and various itvendors would emphasize their security functionality as a competitiveadvantage and product differentiator, much as additional functionalityand faster performance are featured today. but this is not the case. possible options to alter market dynamics in this area include:¥increasing the exposure of software and system vendors and system operators to liability for system breaches;9information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.105what can be done now?¥mandatory reporting of security breaches that could threaten critical societal functions;10¥changing accounting procedures to require sanitized summariesof informationsecurity problems and vulnerabilities to be made public inshareholder reports; and¥encouraging insurance companies to grant preferential rates tocompanies whose it operations are regarded as meeting certain securitystandards of practice.note, however, that there are disadvantages as well as advantages toany of these specific options, and a net assessment of their ultimate desirability remains to be undertaken.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1065rationalizing thefuture research agendaas noted in chapter 3, the committee believes that the it researchareas of highest priority for counterterrorism are in three major areas:information and network security,1 information technologies for emergency response, and technologies for information fusion. within each ofthese areas, a reasonably broad agenda is appropriate, as none of themcan be characterized by the presence of a single stumbling block or impediment whose removal would allow everything else to fall into place.attention to human and organizational issues in a counterterrorismcontext is also critical. insight, knowledge, and tools that result from suchattention are likely to be much more relevant to systems integration thanto technology efforts devoted to proofsofprinciple or other technologydevelopment issues. however, that fact does not mean that there is norole for research, especially since system development methodologies thatincorporate such tools are scarce or nonexistent. thus, the engagement ofsocial scientists (e.g., psychologists, anthropologists, sociologists, organizational behavior analysts) will be important in any research program init for counterterrorist purposes.based on the discussion in chapter 3, box 5.1 summarizes some of the1further discussion of a broader research agenda on information and network securitycan be found in cstbõs computers at risk (1991) and trust in cyberspace (1999). thoughthese reports were issued several years ago, their comments on a relevant research agendaremain pertinent today, reflecting the reality that the informationsecurity field has notadvanced much in the intervening years.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.107rationalizing the future research agendatopics within these areas that the committee believes would be fruitful toresearch. it is useful to note that progress in these areas would havecommercial applications as well in many cases. the fruits of informationand network security research would benefit all users of information technology, though their particular relevance to providers of critical infrastructure is obvious. emergency responders will be the primary beneficiaries of research that focuses on their particular needs. progress ininformation fusion has relevance across the spectrum of counterterrorismefforts, from prevention to detection to response, and indeed to information mining for other public and private purposes. (a point of particularinterest is the fact that informationfusion efforts for countering bioterrorism have significant applicability to public health, especially with respect to the early identification of ònaturaló disease outbreaks.) advancesin developing tools to incorporate knowledge about human and organizational factors in systems integration would be relevant to the deployment of most large itbased systems.the fact that research in these areas may have commercial relevanceraises for some questions about the necessity of government involvement.as noted in chapter 4, the commercial market has largely failed in promoting information and network security. in other cases, the researchprogram required (e.g., research addressing the needs of emergency responders) is of an applied natureñand focused on counterterror applications. as for information fusion, it is highly likely that its applicationswill have commercial applications once new technologies are developed,but whether those new technologies would develop in the absence ofgovernmentsupported research and become broadly available is anotherquestion entirely.most of these technology research areas are not new. efforts havelong been under way in information and network security and information fusion, though additional research is needed because the resultingtechnologies are not sufficiently robust or effective, they degrade performance or functionality too severely, or they are too hard to use or tooexpensive to deploy. moreover, given the failure of the market to adequately address security challenges, adequate government support forr&d in information systems and network security is especially important. information technologies for emergency response have not receiveda great deal of attention, though efforts in other contexts (e.g., militaryoperations) are intimately related to progress in this area.22military communications and civilian emergencyresponse communications have similarities and differences. military forces and civilian agencies share the need to deployemergency capacity rapidly, to interoperate, and to operate in a chaotic environment. butwhile military communications must typically work in a jamming environment or one ininformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108information technology for counterterrorismbox 5.1illustrative topic areas for longterm researchauthentication, detection, identification¥develop fast and scalable methods for highconfidence authentication.¥explore approaches that could selfmonitor traffic and users to detect eitheranomalous users or unusual traffic patterns.¥develop intruderdetection methods that scale to function efficiently in largesystems.containment¥develop the tools and design methodologies for systems and networks thatsupport graceful degradation in response to an attack.¥develop mechanisms to contain attackers and limit damage rather thancompletely shutting down the system once an intrusion is detected.¥explore how to fuse a simple, basic control system used during òcrisis modeówith a sophisticated control system used during normal operations.recovery¥develop schemes for backing up large systems, in real time and under òhostileó conditions, that can capture the most uptodate, but correct, snapshotof the system state.¥create new decontamination approaches for discarding as little good dataas possible and for removing active and potential infections on a system thatcannot be shut down for decontamination.crosscutting issues in information and network security¥develop tools that support securityoriented systems development.¥find new ways to test bug fixes reliably.¥develop better systemadministration tools for specifying security policiesand checking against prespecified system configurations.¥create new tools to detect added and unauthorized functionality.¥develop authentication mechanisms that provide greater security and areeasier to use.¥create and employ metrics to determine the improvement to system securityresulting from the installation of a security measure.¥monitor and track emerging types of attack and explore potential consequences of such attacks.¥understand why previous attempts to build secure systems have failed andrecommend how new efforts should be structured to be more successful.c3i systems for emergency response¥understand how to transition gracefully and with minimal disruption from aunitspecific communication system to a systemwide structure.¥define new communication protocols and develop generic technology tofacilitate interconnection and interoperation of diverse information sources.¥develop approaches for communication systems to handle surge capacityand function in a saturated state.¥develop methods to provide more capacity for emergency communicationand coordination.¥create selfadaptive networks that can reconfigure themselves as a functionof damage and changes in demand and that can degrade gracefully.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.109rationalizing the future research agenda¥understand the special security needs of rapidly deployed wireless networks.¥develop decisionsupport tools to assist the crisis manager in making decisions based on incomplete information.¥explore mechanisms to provide information tailored to specific individualsor locations through locationbased services.¥establish more effective means of communicating the status of affected people to those outside the disaster area.¥develop robust sensors and underlying architectural concepts to track andlocate survivors as well as to identify and track the spread of contaminants.¥create digital floor plans and maps of other physical infrastructure, and usewearable computers and òmap antsó to generate maps that can be updated.¥develop tools to map network topology, especially of converged networksthat handle voice and data traffic.¥begin to characterize the functionality of regional networks for emergencyresponders.information fusion for counterterrorism¥develop more effective machinelearning algorithms for data mining, including learning for different data types (text, image, audio, video).¥develop methods for systems to learn when data are scarce.¥create better mixedinitiative methods that allow the user to visualize thedata and direct the data analysis.¥explore new methods to normalize and combine data from multiple sources.¥create methods to extract structured information from text.¥build approaches to handle multiple languages.¥improve algorithms for image interpretation, speech recognition, and interpretation of other sensors (including perception based on mixed media).¥extend, and test extensively in more demanding applications, the principlebased methods for reasoning under uncertainty.¥develop techniques for machineaided query formulation.¥develop visualization techniques that are welladapted for unstructureddata.privacy and confidentiality¥understand the impact on confidentiality of different kinds of data disclosure.¥develop datamining algorithms that can be used without requiring full disclosure of individual data records.human and organizational factors¥create system development methods that more easily accommodate inputsrelevant to human and organizational factors.¥develop software toolboxes and handbooks that codify and encapsulateprinciples derived from the social sciences that are relevant to system development and design.¥develop reliable security measures that do not interfere with legitimateworkers.¥understand the it issues related to the disparate organizational cultures ofagencies that will be fused under the department of homeland security.note: a future cstb report on cybersecurity research will explicate research areas ingreater detail.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110information technology for counterterrorismas for the funding of the research program described in this report,computer crime losses are estimated at $10 billion per year (and growing).3 although statistics on the amount lost to cybercrime are of dubiousreliability, there is no doubt that aggregate losses are considerable. thecommittee believes that because this research program has considerableoverlap with that needed to fight cybercrime, progress in this researchprogram has the potential to reduce cybercrime as well. without rigorousargument, the committee believes that the potential reduction incybercrime would likely offset a considerable portion (if not all) of theresearch program described in this report (though of course the primarybeneficiaries will be society at large rather than any individual companythat today may suffer loss). nevertheless, the committee has not hadaccess to information that would allow it to determine an appropriatelevel of funding for the research program described in this report.the time scale on which the fruits of efforts in these research areaswill become available ranges from short to long. that is, each of theseareas has technologies that can be beneficially deployed on a relativelyshort time scale (e.g., in a few years). each area also has other prospectsfor research and deployment on a much longer time scale (e.g., a decadeor more) that will require the development of entirely new technologiesand capabilities.the committee is silent on the specific government agency or agencies that would be best suited to support the program described above,4though it notes that the recently created department of homeland security may expand the options available for government action. rather, themore important policy issue is how to organize a federal infrastructure tosupport this research. in particular, the committee believes that this infrastructure should have the following attributes. it would:¥engage and support multidisciplinary, problemoriented researchthat is useful both to civilian and military users. (note that this approachcontrasts strongly with the disciplinary orientation that characterizes mostacademic departments and universities.)¥develop a research program driven by a deep understanding andwhich there is a need for a low probability of intercept, these conditions do not obtain forcivilian emergencyresponse communications. also, military forces often must communicate in territory without a preexisting friendly infrastructure, while civilian agencies canpotentially take advantage of such an infrastructure.3òcyber crime.ó businessweek online, february 21, 2000. available online at <http://www.businessweek.com/2000/0008/b3669001.htm>.4see cstb, nrc, 2002, cybersecurity today and tomorrow, pp. 1314.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.111rationalizing the future research agendaassessment of it vulnerabilities. this will likely require access to classified information, even though most of the research should be unclassified.¥support a substantial effort in research areas with a long time horizon for payoff. historically, such investigations have been housed mostoften in academia, which can conduct research with fewer pressures forimmediate delivery on a bottom line. (this is not to say that privateindustry has no role. indeed, because the involvement of industry iscritical for deployment, and is likely to be essential for developing prototypes and mounting field demonstrations, it is highly appropriate to support both academia and industry perhaps even jointly in efforts orientedtoward development.)¥provide support extending for time scales that are long enough tomake meaningful progress on hard problems (perhaps 5year project durations) and in sufficient amounts that reasonably realistic operating environments for the technology could be constructed (perhaps $2 millionto $5 million per year per site for systemoriented research programs).¥invest some small fraction of its budget on thinking òoutsidethe boxó in consideration (and possible creation) of alternative futures(box 5.2).¥be more tolerant of research directions that do not appear to promise immediate applicability. research programs, especially in it, are oftenñeven generallyñmore òmessyó than research managers would like.the desire to terminate unproductive lines of inquiry is understandable,and sometimes entirely necessary, in a constrained budget environment.on the other hand, it is frequently very hard to distinguish between (a) aline of inquiry that will never be productive and (b) one that may takesome time and determined effort to be productive. while an intellectually robust research program must be expected to go down some blindalleys occasionally, the current political environment typically punishessuch blind alleys as being of type a, with little apparent regard for thepossibility that they might be type b.¥be overseen by a board or other entity with sufficient stature toattract top talent to work in the field, to provide useful feedback, and to bean effective sounding board for that talent.¥pay attention to the human resources needed to sustain thecounterterrorism it research program. this need is especially apparentin the fields of information and network security and emergency communications. only a very small fraction of the nationõs graduating doctoralstudents in it specialize in either of these fields, only a very few professors conduct research in these areas, only a very few universities supportresearch programs in these fields, and, in the judgment of the committee,information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112information technology for counterterrorismbox 5.2planning for the futureplanning for the future is a critical dimension of any research agenda, thoughthe resources devoted to it need not be large. system architectures and technologiessuch as switched optical networks, mobile code, and opensource or multinationalcode development will have different vulnerabilities from the technologies that characterize most of the existing infrastructure and hence require different defense strategies. similarly, device types such as digital appliances, wireless headphones, andnetworkcapable cell phones may pose new challenges. even today, it is hard tointerconnect systems with different security models or security semantics; unless thisproblem is successfully managed, it will become increasingly difficult in the future.furthermore, the characteristics of deployed technology that protect the nationagainst catastrophic itonly attacks today (e.g., redundancy, system heterogeneity,and a reliance on networks other than the internet for critical business functions) maynot continue to protect it in the future. for example, trends toward deregulation arepushing the nationõs critical infrastructure providers to reduce excess capacity, eventhough this is what provides much of the redundancy so important to reduced vulnerability. in the limit, the market dominance of a smaller number of products leadsto system monocultures that, like their ecological and agricultural counterparts, arehighly vulnerable to certain types of attack.for these reasons, researchers and practitioners must be vigilant to changes innetwork technology, usage and reliance on it, and decreasing diversity. in addition,research focused on the future is likely to have a slant that differs from the orientationof the other research efforts described in this chapter. while the latter efforts mightbe characterized as building on existing bodies of knowledge (and are in that senseincremental), futureoriented research would have a more radical orientation: itwould, for example, try to develop alternative paradigms for secure and reliableoperation that would not necessarily be straightforward evolutions from the internetand information technology of today. one such pursuit might be the design of appropriate network infrastructure for deployment in 2020 that would be much moresecure than the internet of today. another might be an it infrastructure whose security relied on engineered system diversityñin which deployed systems were sufficiently similar to be interoperable, yet sufficiently diverse to essentially be resistantto largescale attacks.only a very small fraction of the universities that do support such programs can be regarded as firstrate universities.one additional attribute of this r&d infrastructure would be desirable, though the committee has few good ideas on how to achieve it. thesuccess of the nationõs r&d enterprise in it (as well as in other fields)rests in no small part on the ability of researchers to learn from each otherin a relatively free and open intellectual environment. constraining theopenness of that environment (e.g., by requiring that research be classified or by forbidding certain research from being undertaken) wouldinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.113rationalizing the future research agendahave obvious negative consequences for researchers and the creation ofnew knowledge. on the other hand, keeping counterterrorist missions inmind, the free and open dissemination of information has potential costsas well, because terrorists may obtain information that they can useagainst us. historically, these competing interests have been òbalancedóñwith more of one in exchange for less of the other. but the committeebelieves (or at least hopes) that there are other ways of reconciling theundeniable tension, and calls for some thought to be given to a solution tothis dilemma that does not demand such a tradeoff. if such a solutioncan be found, it should be a design characteristic of the r&d infrastructure.a comment on the counterterrorist research program is that successfully addressing the privacy and confidentiality issues that arise incounterterrorism efforts will be critical for the deployment of many information technologies. this area is so important that research in the areaitself is necessary and should be a fundamental component of the work invirtually all of the other areas described in this report.finally, it is the belief of the committee that an r&d infrastructurewith the characteristics presented above has the best chance of deliveringsuccessfully on the complex research problems described in this report.the committee is not arguing for unlimited latitude to undertake researchthat is driven primarily by intellectual curiosity, but rather for a programfocused on the specific national needs described in this report that canlook beyond immediate deliverables. more detailed research agendasshould be forthcoming from the agencies responsible for implementingthe broad research program described in this report.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.115appendixbiographies of committeeand staff memberscommittee on the role of information technologyin responding to terrorismjohn l. hennessy, chair, is president of stanford university, wherehe joined the faculty in 1977, was the chair of the department of computer science in 1994, and became dean of the school of engineering in1996. he is an expert in computer architecture and is recognized forinnovation in software techniques as the codeveloper of reduced instruction set computing (risc). in 2001 dr. hennessy received the eckertmauchly award from the association for computing machinery and institute of electrical and electronics engineers computer society andhonorary doctoral degrees from the state university of new york at stonybrook and villanova university, his two alma maters. he is currentlychairman of the board at atheros, and was a board member at alenteccorporation and an advisory board member at microsoft corporationand tensilica. over the past decade, he has served on numerous committees at the national academies, most recently as the chair of the computer science and engineering committee and the committee on membership during 19992000. he has served on the computer science andtelecommunications board committees that produced global trends incomputer technology and their impact on export control, academic careersfor experimental computer scientists and engineers, and evolving the highperformance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure. he has also provided his computer expertiseand leadership skills on committees and commissions of the nationalinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116information technology for counterterrorismscience foundation and the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa). he is an alumnus of cstb and a member of tau beta pi, etakappa nu, pi mu epsilon, and the national academy of engineering.david a. patterson, vice chair, is the e.h. and m.e. pardee chair ofcomputer science at the university of california at berkeley. he hastaught computer architecture since joining the faculty in 1977 and hasbeen chair of the computer science division of the electrical engineeringand computer science department at berkeley. he is well known forleading the design and implementation of risc i, the first very largescale integration (vlsi) reduced instruction set computer, which became the foundation for the architecture currently used by fujitsu, sunmicrosystems, and xerox. he was also a leader of the redundant arraysof inexpensive disks (raid) project, which led to highperformance storage systems from many companies, and the network of workstation(now) project, which led to cluster technology used by internet companies such as inktomi. he is a fellow of the institute of electrical andelectronics engineers and the association for computing machinery. heserved as chair of the computing research association. his current research interests are in building novel microprocessors using intelligentdynamic random access memory (iram) for use in portable multimedia devices and using recovery oriented computing to design available,maintainable, and evolvable servers for internet services. he has consulted for many companies, including digital equipment corporation,hewlett packard, intel, and sun microsystems, and he is the coauthor offive books. dr. patterson served on the cstb committees that producedcomputing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering and making it better: expanding information technology research tomeet societyõs needs. he is a member of the national academy of engineering and a current member of cstb.steven m. bellovin, fellow at at&t research, is a renowned authority on securityñin particular, internet security. dr. bellovin received ab.a. degree from columbia university and an m.s. and ph.d. in computer science from the university of north carolina at chapel hill. whilea graduate student, he helped create netnews; for this, he and the othercollaborators were awarded the 1995 usenix lifetime achievementaward. at at&t laboratories, dr. bellovin does research in networksand security, and why the two do not get along. he has embraced anumber of public interest causes and weighed in (e.g., through his writings) on initiatives (e.g., in the areas of cryptography and law enforcement) that appear to compromise privacy. he is currently focusing oncryptographic protocols and network management. dr. bellovin is thecoauthor of the recent book firewalls and internet security: repelling thewily hacker, and he is a member of the internet architecture board. heinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.117appendixhas recently been elected to the national academy of engineering. heserved on the cstb committee that produced trust in cyberspace and is amember of the committee to study authentication technologies and theirimplications for privacy. that committee is addressing a range of security(and privacy) issues, including those relating to data collection (e.g., biometrics) and analysis (e.g., tracking systems), as well as a range of systems issues.w. earl boebert is an expert on information security, with experiencein national security and intelligence as well as commercial applicationsand needs. he is a senior scientist at sandia national laboratories. hehas 30 years experience in communications and computer security, is theholder or coholder of 13 patents, and has participated in national research council studies on security matters. prior to joining sandia, hewas the technical founder and chief scientist of secure computing corporation, where he developed the sidewinder security server, a system thatcurrently protects several thousand sites. before that he worked 22 yearsat honeywell, rising to the position of senior research fellow. athoneywell he worked on secure systems, cryptographic devices, flightsoftware, and a variety of realtime simulation and control systems, andwon honeywellõs highest award for technical achievement for his part indeveloping a very large scale radar landmass simulator. he also developed and presented a course on systems engineering and project management that was eventually given to more than 3,000 students in 13 countries. he served on the cstb committees that produced computers at risk:safe computing in the information age and trust in cyberspace, and participated in project initiation fund workshops on òcyberattackó and òinsider threat.ódavid borth is an expert on wireless communications, with insightinto national security as well as commercial needs. he is corporate vicepresident and director of the communication systems and technologieslaboratory of motorola incorporated, a part of the companyõs researcharm, motorola laboratory. dr. borth joined motorola in 1980 as a member of the systems research laboratory in corporate research and development in schaumburg, illinois. as a member of that organization, hehas conducted research on digital modulation techniques, adaptive digital signal processing methods applied to communication systems, andpersonal communication systems including both cellular and personalcommunications service systems. he has contributed to motorolaõsimplementations of the gsm, tdma (is54/is136), and cdma (is95)digital cellular systems. in his current role, he manages a multinational(united states, australia, france, japan) organization focusing on all aspects of communication systems, ranging from theoretical systems studies to system and subsystem analysis and implementation to integratedinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118information technology for counterterrorismcircuit designs. dr. borth received his b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degrees inelectrical engineering from the university of illinois at urbanachampaign. previously, he was a member of the technical staff of thesystems division of watkinsjohnson company and an assistant professor in the school of electrical engineering, georgia institute of technology. dr. borth is a member of motorolaõs science advisory board associates and has been elected a dan noble fellow, motorolaõs highesthonorary technical award. he has been issued 31 patents and hasauthored or coauthored chapters of 5 books in addition to 25 publications.he received the distinguished alumnus award from the university ofillinois electrical and computer engineering alumni association and waselected a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers forhis contributions to the design and development of wireless telecommunication systems. he is a registered professional engineer in the state ofillinois and a current member of cstb.william j. brinkman has been vice president of physical sciencesresearch at bell labs of lucent technologies since 1993. he is an expertin the area of condensed matter physics as it pertains to telecommunications and informationprocessing technologies. he received his ph.d. inphysics from the university of missouri in 1965. dr. brinkman joined belllaboratories in 1966 after spending one year as a national science foundation postdoctoral fellow at oxford university. he moved to sandianational laboratories in 1984, but returned to bell laboratories in 1987 tobecome executive director of the physics research division. his responsibilities include the direction of research in physical sciences, optoelectronic and electronic devices, fiber optics, and related areas. he hasworked on theories of condensed matter, and his early work also involved the theory of spin fluctuations in metals and other highly correlated fermi liquids. subsequent theoretical work on liquid crystals andincommensurate systems are additional important contributions that hehas made to the theoretical understanding of condensed matter. as manager of an industrial research organization with a budget of $200 million.dr. brinkman is strongly interested in improving technology conversionand improving the connection between research and products. he wasthe recipient of the 1994 george e. pake prize. over the past 20 years, hehas served on numerous committees of the national academies, currently the national academy of sciences 2002 nominating committeeand most recently the committee on science, engineering, and publicpolicy. he is a member of the national academy of sciences.john m. cioffi is an expert on communications technologies, with anemphasis on wireline contexts. he received his bs in electrical engineering from the university of illinois in 1978 and his ph.d. in electrical engineering from stanford university in 1984. he worked for bell laboratoinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.119appendixries from 1978 to 1984, ibm research from 1984 to 1986, and has been anelectrical engineering professor at stanford university since 1986. dr.cioffi founded amati communications corporation in 1991 (purchasedby texas instruments in 1997) and was an officer/director from 1991 to1997. currently he is on the boards or advisory boards of bigband networks, coppercom, godigital, ikanos, ionospan, ishoni, itex, marvell,kestrel, charter ventures, and portview ventures. dr. cioffiõs specificinterests are in the area of highperformance digital transmission. he hasreceived various awards: member, national academy of engineering(2001), ieee kobayashi medal (2001), ieee millennium medal (2000),ieee fellow (1996), iee jj tomson medal (2000), 1999 university of illinois outstanding alumnus, 1991 ieee communications magazine best paper, 1995 american national standards institute t1 outstanding achievement award, national science foundation presidential investigator(19871992). dr. cioffi has published more than 200 papers and holdsover 40 patents, most of which are widely licensed, including basic patents on dmt, vdsl, and vectored transmission. he served on the cstbcommittee that produced broadband: bringing home the bits and is a current member of cstb.w. bruce croft is chair of the computer science department, as well asdistinguished university professor, at the university of massachusetts,amherst, which he joined in 1979. in 1992, he became the director of thenational science foundation state/industry/university collaborativeresearch center for intelligent information retrieval (ciir), which combines basic research with technology transfer to a variety of governmentand industry partners. dr. croft received his b.sc. (honors) degree in1973 and an m.sc. in computer science in 1974 from monash university inmelbourne, australia. he earned his ph.d. in computer science from theuniversity of cambridge, england, in 1979. his research interests are inseveral areas of information retrieval, including retrieval models, websearch engines, crosslingual retrieval, distributed search, question answering, text summarization, and text data mining. he has publishedmore than 120 articles on these subjects. dr. croft has consulted for manycompanies and government agencies. he cofounded a search enginestartup in 1996, and his research is being used in a number of operationalsystems. he was chair of the acm special interest group on informationretrieval from 1987 to 1991. he is currently editorinchief of the acmõstransactions on information systems and an associate editor for informationprocessing and management. he has served on numerous program committees and has been involved in the organization of many workshopsand conferences. he was elected a fellow of acm in 1997 and receivedthe research award from the american society for information scienceand technology in 2000. he is a member of cstbõs digital governmentinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120information technology for counterterrorismcommittee, which has provided insight into government application contexts. he has a history of research interactions with the intelligence community, and his emphases relate to data collection and analysis. he is acurrent member of cstb.william p. crowell is a former deputy director and chief operatingofficer of the national security agency. prior to the nsa, he was vicepresident of atlantic aerospace electronics corporation. in 1998 he joinedcylink and is currently president and ceo. the company helped pioneerthe use of computer security systems within major financial and government institutions. he holds a bachelorõs degree in political science fromlouisiana state university.jeffrey m. jaffe has broad knowledge of systems, with emphases onnetworked/distributed systems and the associated security challenges.he is vice president of research and advanced technologies for lucenttechnologies bell laboratories. the advanced technologies groupworks with lucentõs business units in the commercial development anddeployment of new technologies, with an emphasis in networks planning, software and systems engineering. prior to joining lucent, dr. jaffeheld a variety of research and management positions with internationalbusiness machines (ibm). he joined ibmõs thomas j. watson researchcenter in 1979, conducting research on networking protocols. he led research teams in developing networking and security software and userinterfaces. he was later promoted to a number of executive positions,including vice president of systems and software. in this role, he coordinated the efforts of global research teams in supporting ibmõs currentproduct lines and developing new software and hardware systems. dr.jaffe next served as corporate vice president of technology and helped toconvert research into commercial products. he played key roles in assessing new technologies and policy enactment. in his most recent position with ibm, dr. jaffe managed all facets of ibmõs network software andsecurity product business. dr. jaffe is a fellow of the ieee and the acm.the u.s. government has consulted with him on numerous policy initiatives with a focus on the internet. in 1997, president clinton appointeddr. jaffe to the advisory committee for the presidentõs commission forcritical infrastructure protection. dr. jaffe has chaired the chief technology officer group of the computer systems policy project (cspp), whichconsists of a dozen of the top computer and telecommunications companies. dr. jaffe earned a b.s. degree in mathematics, as well as m.s. andph.d. degrees in computer science, from the massachusetts institute oftechnology. he is a current member of cstb.butler w. lampson is known for his expertise in systems and systems architecture. at present, he is a distinguished engineer at microsoftcorporation, where he works on problems of broad concern, such asinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.121appendixsecurity and information management. before joining microsoft, dr.lampson was a senior corporate consulting engineer at digital equipment corporation and a senior research fellow at the xerox palo altoresearch center. he has worked on computer architecture, local areanetworks, raster printers, page description languages, operating systems,remote procedure call, programming languages and their semantics, programming in the large, faulttolerant computing, computer security, andwysiwyg editors. he was one of the designers of the sds 940 timesharing system, the alto personal distributed computing system, thexerox 9700 laser printer, twophase commit protocols, the autonet lan,and several programming languages. he received a ph.d. in electricalengineering and computer science from the university of california atberkeley and honorary sc.d. degrees from the eidgenoessischetechnische hochschule, zurich, and the university of bologna. he holdsa number of patents on networks, security, raster printing, and transaction processing. dr. lampson is a member of the national academy ofengineering. he received the association for computing machineryõssoftware systems award in 1984 for his work on the alto, and the turingaward in 1992. he served on the cstb committees that produced computers at risk: safe computing in the information age, evolving the highperformance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure, and realizing the potential of c4i: fundamentalchallenges. he is a current member of cstb.edward d. lazowska has broad knowledge of software and distributed and highperformance systems. he holds the bill and melinda gateschair in computer science in the department of computer science andengineering at the university of washington. dr. lazowska received hisa.b. from brown university in 1972 and his ph.d. from the university oftoronto in 1977. he has been at the university of washington since thattime. his research concerns the design and analysis of distributed andparallel computer systems. dr. lazowska is a member of the darpainformation science and technology group, past chair of the computingresearch association, past chair of the national science foundation computer and information science and engineering advisory committee, anda member of the technical advisory board for microsoft research. heserved on the cstb committees that produced evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure and looking over the fence at networks: a neighborõsview of networking research. currently, he serves on the national research council committee improving learning with information technology.he is a fellow of the acm and of the ieee and is a member of the national academy of engineering and a current member of cstb.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122information technology for counterterrorismdavid e. liddle has a history of conducting and managing computersystems innovation, with an emphasis on interactive systems. at present,after leaving a series of researchmanagement positions, he is a generalpartner in the firm u.s. venture partners (usvp), a leading silicon valleyventure capital firm that specializes in building companies from an earlystage in digital communications/networking, ecommerce, semiconductors, technical software, and ehealth. he retired in december 1999 after 8years as ceo of interval research corporation. during and after hiseducation (he received b.s. and e.e. degrees from the university of michigan and a ph.d. in computer science from the university of toledo, ohio),dr. liddle has spent his professional career developing technologies forinteraction and communication between people and computers in activities spanning research, development, management, and entrepreneurship.he spent 10 years at the xerox palo alto research center and the xeroxinformation products group, where he was responsible for the first commercial implementation of the graphical user interface and local area networking. he then founded metaphor computer systems, whose technology was adopted by ibm and the company ultimately acquired by ibm in1991. in 1992, dr. liddle cofounded interval research corporation withpaul allen. since 1996, the company formed six new companies andseveral joint ventures based on the research conducted at interval. dr.liddle is a consulting professor of computer science at stanford university. he has served as a director at sybase, broderbund software,metricom, starwave, and ticketmaster; he is currently a director with thenew york times. he was honored as a distinguished alumnus from theuniversity of michigan and is a member of the national advisory committee at the college of engineering of that university. he is also a memberof the advisory committee of the school of engineering at stanford university. he has been elected a senior fellow of the royal college of art forhis contributions to humancomputer interaction. dr. liddle has had anumber of interactions with national security entities on an advisory basis, providing insights into military mind sets and needs. he is a currentmember of cstb.tom m. mitchell has just returned to carnegie mellon university(cmu) after a 2year leave of absence as vice president and chief scientistfor whizbang! labs. at cmu, he is the fredkin professor of learning andartificial intelligence in the school of computer science and foundingdirector of cmuõs center for automated learning and discovery. dr.mitchell is known for his work in machine learning, data mining, andartificial intelligence. his research ranges from developing softwareagents that learn to customize to their users, to web crawlers that learn toextract factual information from web sites, to computers that mine medical records to learn which future patients are at high mortality risk. he isinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.123appendixthe author of the widely used textbook machine learning. dr. mitchell is afellow and president of the american association for artificial intelligence. prior to joining the faculty of carnegie mellon university in 1986,he taught at rutgers university. he received his b.s. from the massachusetts institute of technology and his m.s.and ph.d. degrees in electricalengineering from stanford university. he has had research funded by thecentral intelligence agency and has consulted with the agency recentlyabout the application of whizbang! technology to intelligence needs. heis a current member of cstb.donald a. norman is a user advocate. business week calls him acantankerous visionaryñcantankerous in his quest for excellence. dr.norman is cofounder of the nielsen norman group, an executive consulting firm that helps companies produce humancentered products andservices. in this role, he serves on the advisory boards of numerouscompanies. dr. norman is a professor of computer science at northwestern university and professor emeritus of cognitive science and psychology at the university of california, san diego. he is a former vice president of the advanced technology group of apple computer and was anexecutive at hewlett packard. dr. norman is the author of the psychologyof everyday things, things that make us smart, and, most recently, theinvisible computer, a book that business week has called the bible of postpc thinking. he is a current member of cstb.jeannette m. wing is a professor of computer science at carnegiemellon university. her current focus is on applying automated reasoning tools to specify and verify autonomous and embedded systems fortheir faulttolerant, security, and survivability properties. she is the associate dean for academic affairs for the school of computer science and theassociate department head for the computer science ph.d. program. shereceived her s.b. and s.m. degrees in electrical engineering and computerscience in 1979 and her ph.d. in computer science in 1983, all from themassachusetts institute of technology. dr. wingõs general research interests are in the areas of formal methods, concurrent and distributed systems, and programming languages. she was on the computer sciencefaculty at the university of southern california (usc) and has worked atbell laboratories, usc/information sciences institute, and xerox paloalto research center. she has also consulted for digital equipment corporation, the mellon institute (carnegie mellon research institute), system development corporation, and the jet propulsion laboratory. shewas on the national science foundation scientific advisory board andthe defense advance research projects agency (darpa) informationscience and technology (isat) group. she is or has been on the editorialboard of seven journals. she is a member of the acm (fellow), the ieee(senior member), sigma xi, phi beta kappa, tau beta pi, and eta kappainformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124information technology for counterterrorismnu. professor wing was elected an acm fellow in 1998 and is a currentmember of cstb.staffherbert s. lin is senior scientist and senior staff officer at the computer science and telecommunications board, national research council(nrc) of the national academies, where he has been the study directorof major projects on public policy and information technology. thesestudies include a 1996 study on national cryptography policy(cryptographyõs role in securing the information society), a 1991 study on thefuture of computer science (computing the future: a broader agenda forcomputer science and engineering), a 1999 study of defense departmentsystems for command, control, communications, computing, and intelligence (realizing the potential of c4i: fundamental challenges), and a 2000study on workforce issues in high technology (building a workforce for theinformation economy). prior to his nrc service, he was a professional staffmember and staff scientist for the house armed services committee(19861990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms controlissues. he also has significant expertise in mathematics and science education. he received his doctorate in physics from the massachusetts institute of technology. avocationally, he is a longtime folk and swingdancer and a poor magician. apart from his cstb work, a list of publications in cognitive science, science education, biophysics, arms control,and defense policy is available on request.steven woo is the dissemination and program officer with the computer science and telecommunications board of the national researchcouncil. in this capacity, he formulates the dissemination and marketingplan for the study projects and workshops of cstb. this includes distribution of cstb reports in government, policy, academia, and privatesectors; outreach to promote cstb to current and potential sponsors; andraising awareness of cstbõs resources and expertise among governmentand private industry. in addition, he handles the program office activitiesfor some of the projects of cstb. prior to joining cstb, mr. woo was aninternet and marketing consultant for clients ranging from fortune 500sto nonprofits. his background includes marketing services for the losangeles dodgers and several years of experience in systems engineeringand analysis. mr. woo holds a b.s. in engineering from the university ofcalifornia at los angeles and an m.b.a. from georgetown university.d.c. drake has been a senior project assistant with cstb since september 1999. he is currently working on a project on critical informationinfrastructure protection and the law and also helped with the project thatproduced the internet under crisis conditions: learning from september 11.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.125appendixhe came to washington in january 1999 after finishing a masterõs degreein international politics and communications at the university of kentucky. he earned a b.a. in international relations and german fromrhodes college in 1996. he has worked for the hannsseidl foundationin munich, germany, and in washington, d.c., for the national conference of state legislaturesõ international programs office and for the majority staff of the senate foreign relations committee.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.127what is cstb?as a part of the national research council, the computer science andtelecommunications board (cstb) was established in 1986 to provideindependent advice to the federal government on technical and publicpolicy issues relating to computing and communications. composed ofleaders from industry and academia, cstb conducts studies of criticalnational issues and makes recommendations to government, industry,and academic researchers. cstb also provides a neutral meeting groundfor consideration of complex issues where resolution and action may bepremature. it convenes invitational discussions that bring together principals from the public and private sectors, ensuring consideration of allperspectives. the majority of cstbõs work is requested by federal agencies and congress, consistent with its national academies context.a pioneer in framing and analyzing internet policy issues, cstb isunique in its comprehensive scope and effective, interdisciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, and policy issues. beginning withearly work in computer and communications security, cyberassuranceand information systems trustworthiness have been a crosscutting themein cstbõs work. cstb has produced several reports regarded as classicsin the field, and it continues to address these topics as they grow inimportance.to do its work, cstb draws on some of the best minds in the country,inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service. studiesare conducted by balanced committees without direct financial interestsin the topics they are addressing. those committees meet, confer elecinformation technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128information technology for counterterrorismtronically, and build analyses through their deliberations. additionalexpertise from around the country is tapped in a rigorous process ofreview and critique, further enhancing the quality of cstb reports. byengaging groups of principals, cstb obtains the facts and insights criticalto assessing key issues.the mission of cstb is to:¥respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations,and private industry for advice on computer and telecommunicationsissues and from the government for advice on computer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization, and modernization;¥monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer scienceand telecommunications, with attention to issues of human resources,information infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, computertechnology, and telecommunications as critical resources; and¥foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computingand telecommunications technologies and other fields, at large and withinthe national academies.as of november 2002, current cstb activities with a cybersecuritycomponent address privacy in the information age, critical informationinfrastructure protection, authentication technologies and their privacyimplications, geospatial information systems, cybersecurity research, andbuilding certifiable dependable systems. additional studies examine thefundamentals of computer science, information technology and creativity, computing and biology, internet navigation and the domain namesystem, telecommunications research and development, wireless communications and spectrum management, and digital archiving and preservation. explorations are under way in the areas of the insider threat,dependable and safe software systems, wireless communications andspectrum management, digital archiving and preservation, open sourcesoftware, digital democracy, the òdigital divide,ó manageable systems,information technology and journalism, and women in computer science.more information about cstb can be obtained online at <http://www.cstb.org>.