detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10671beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, andcreativity268 pages | 7 x 10 | paperbackisbn 9780309088688 | doi 10.17226/10671william j. mitchell, alan s. inouye, and marjory s. blumenthal, editors;committee on information technology and creativity; computer science andtelecommunications board; division on engineering and physical sciences;national research councilbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on information technology and creativitycomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical scienceswilliam j. mitchell, alan s. inouye, and marjory s. blumenthal, editorsthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.edubeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press500 fifth street, n.w., washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by thegoverning board of the national research council, whose members are drawnfrom the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academyof engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committeeresponsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and withregard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the rockefeller foundation. anyopinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of thesponsor.international standard book number 0309088682library of congress control number 2003103683cover design by jennifer m. bishopcopies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500fifth street, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055, (800) 6246242 or (202)3343313 in the washington metropolitan area. internet, http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americabeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their usefor the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by thecongress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise thefederal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. albertsis president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under thecharter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization ofoutstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in theselection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences theresponsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy ofengineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting nationalneeds, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy ofengineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academyof sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of thepublic. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the nationalacademy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to thefederal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of theinstitute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technologywith the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising thefederal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operatingagency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academyof engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointlyby both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts anddr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on informationtechnology and creativitywilliam j. mitchell, massachusetts institute of technology, chairsteven abrams, ibm t.j. watson research centermichael century, rensselaer polytechnic institutejames p. crutchfield, santa fe institutechristopher csikszentmihalyi, mit media laboratoryroger dannenberg, carnegie mellon universitytoni dove, independent artist, new york cityn. katherine hayles, university of california at los angelesj.c. herz, joystick nation inc.natalie jeremijenko, yale universityjohn maeda, mit media laboratorydavid salesin, university of washington; microsoft researchlillian f. schwartz, computer artistinventor, watchung, new jerseyphoebe sengers, cornell universitybarbara stafford, university of chicagostaffalan s. inouye, study director and senior program officermarjory s. blumenthal, director, computer science andtelecommunications boarddavid padgham, research associatemargaret marsh huynh, senior project assistantlaura ost, consultantdavid walczyk, consultantsusan maurizi, senior editorjennifer m. bishop, senior project assistantbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicomputer science andtelecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chaireric benhamou, 3com corporationdavid borth, motorola labsjohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstthomas e. darcie, at&t labs researchjoseph farrell, university of california at berkeleyjoan feigenbaum, yale universitywendy kellogg, ibm t.j. watson research centerbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationdavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universityhector garcia molina, stanford universitydavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt, chicagokent college of lawdaniel pike, classic communications inc.eric schmidt, google inc.fred schneider, cornell universityburton smith, cray inc.lee sproull, new york universitywilliam stead, vanderbilt universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitymarjory s. blumenthal, directorherbert s. lin, senior scientistalan s. inouye, senior program officerjon eisenberg, senior program officerlynette i. millett, program officercynthia a. patterson, program officersteven woo, dissemination officerjanet briscoe, administrative officerrenee hawkins, financial associatedavid padgham, research associatekristen batch, research associatephil hilliard, research associatemargaret marsh huynh, senior project assistantdavid drake, senior project assistantjanice sabuda, senior project assistantjennifer m. bishop, senior project assistantbrandye williams, staff assistantfor more information on cstb, see its web site at <http://www.cstb.org>,write to cstb, national research council, 500 fifth street, n.w., washington, dc 20001, call at (202) 3342605, or email the cstb at cstb@nas.edu.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiomputer science has drawn from and contributed to manydisciplines and practices since it emerged as a field in themiddle of the 20th century. those interactions, in turn,have contributed to the evolution of information technology: new forms of computing and communications, and new applications, continue to develop from the creative interaction of computerscience and other fields. focused initially on interactions betweencomputer science and other forms of science and engineering, thecomputer science and telecommunications board (cstb) began inthe mid1990s to examine opportunities at the intersection of computing and the humanities and the arts. in 1997, it organized a workshopthat illuminated the potential, as well as the practical challenges, ofmining those opportunities1 and that led, eventually, to the projectdescribed in this report. ensuing discussions between cstb staff andpeople interested in the intersection of computing and the humanitiesor the arts, notably joan shigekawa of the rockefeller foundation, aparticipant in the 1997 workshop, culminated in a grant from therockefeller foundation to study information technology and creativity (see box p.1 for the statement of task).this report should be read with two conditions in mind: first, itis, by design, a record of the project, filled with descriptions, observations, conclusions, and recommendations intended to motivate andsustain interest and activity in the rich intersection of informationtechnology (it) and the arts and design. second, in this book form itcannot possibly convey the exciting possibilities at that intersection.instead, it presents examples and pointers to sites on the world wideweb and in the physical world where that intersection can be observed and experienced. we urge the reader to treat this report as a1see computing and the humanities: summary of a roundtable meeting, published in1998 by the american council of learned societies, one of three collaborators withcstb in organizing the workshop.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceviii¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥primer and guidebook and to seek out instances of it and creativepracticesñitcpñdirectly.committee composition andprocessthe study committee convened by cstb featured an unusuallyeclectic group of individuals (see appendix a for biographies of committee members). characterizing most (or all) of them as experts onparticular subjects would only begin to suggest the talents of thisgroup. collectively, the committee had expertise and experience inthe intersections of information technology and music, the visual arts,film, and literature and in art history, architecture, cultural studies,and many of the technologies pertinent to itcp. the committee did itswork through its own deliberations and by soliciting input from anumber of other experts (see appendix b for a list of those who briefedthe committee). it met first in august 2000 and five times subsequently in plenary session. additional information was derived fromreviewing the published literature, monitoring selected listservs andweb sites, and obtaining informal input at various conferences andother convenings. during the editorial phase of the study, facts werechecked for accuracy with either authoritative published sources orsubject experts.the diversity of this committee made it a microcosm of some ofthe communities it hopes to influence with this report. that diversityposed challenges in the conduct of this project that will be echoed inattempts to learn from it: conversations among people with differenttraining and professional experience can be confounded by jargon andbox p.1statement of taska series of discussions among a cross section of the arts community andexperts in computing and communications will be organized. these discussions will crystallize new ways of conceptualizing joint opportunities and newapproaches to the arts (and/or it [information technology]). they willexplore what would make the most conducive environment for itartsexchange on an ongoing basis, considering physical and virtual options. theywill address possible mechanisms to sustain the discussion, such as fundingand institutional support. finally, they will culminate in both a coherentdescription of potential futures and an agenda for action, action that bridgesthe different communities as well as action most appropriate for one oranother.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixprejudices as well as by differing knowledge basesñeven when thosepeople share interests. the completion of this report attests to thepotential for technologists and artists to find common ground, notonly in undertaking creative work, but also in contemplating optionsfor making such work easier to undertake and more widespread. butfinding this common ground sometimes proved to be a formidablechallenge.the productive interaction among committee members was captured in some of their career developments during the course of thisproject. chris csikszentmihalyi, for example, left rensselaer polytechnic institute to join john maeda at mitõs media lab. michaelcentury left mcgill university for rensselaer polytechnic institute.natalie jeremijenko was hosted by jim crutchfield for a monthõsprofessional visit at the santa fe institute. and john maeda wasinspired by the project to build òa new online bauhaus.ó these andother developments attest to the dynamism and creative energy of thepeople who have been exploring the intersection of it and creativity.although the report refers to several companies, products, andservices by name, such reference does not constitute an endorsementby the committee or the national academies. the committee did notevaluate any product or service in sufficient detail to allow such anendorsement.acknowledgmentsthe committee is particularly grateful to joan shigekawa of therockefeller foundation for initiating this study. she approached cstbwith a conviction that the time was right for a conversation amongpeople of different backgrounds about how to enhance and sustain theintersection of information technology and creative practices. weappreciate her guidance and support through the study process, including her participation in two committee meetings, occasional relayof useful information, and continuing demonstration of interest in theprocess and the eventual results.in addition, we would like to thank those individuals who provided valuable inputs into the committeeõs deliberations. those whobriefed the committee at one of our plenary meetings are listed inappendix b. others who provided us with important inputs includebill alschuler (california institute of the arts), howard besser (newyork university), shari garmise (consultant, washington, d.c.),samuel hope (national office for arts accreditation), sharon kangas(center for arts and culture), anna karlin (university of washington), ruth kovacs (the foundation center), joan lippincott (coalitionfor networked information), and laurens r. schwartz (consultant,new york city). we would also like to acknowledge those organizations that hosted committee meetings: the american institute of¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexgraphic arts, new york university, stanford university, pixar animation studios, and the massachusetts institute of technology.the committee appreciates the thoughtful comments received fromthe reviewers of this report and the efforts of the national researchcouncilõs report review coordinator. the review draft stimulated acomparatively large volume of comments, many of which providedadditional reference material, relevant anecdotes, and observations tobolster or counter the committeeõs earlier thinking. the commentswere instrumental in helping the committee to sharpen and improvethis report. in particular, simon penny of the university of californiaat irvine provided an unusually extensive and thoughtful set of comments that served to improve the quality of this final report.finally, the committee would like to acknowledge the staff of thenrc for their work. alan inouye served as the study director withoverall staff responsibility for the conduct of the study and the development of this final report; his effort to bring the report to completionwas exceptional and demanded far more of his time than anticipated.marjory blumenthal, director of the cstb, provided essential guidance and input throughout the study process, drafted and edited anumber of sections of the final report, and was both helpful andpatient in bringing the committee process to a successful conclusion.margaret marsh huynh had primary responsibility for the administrative aspects of the project such as organizing meeting logistics; herefforts made a particularly complicated and demanding process runsmoothly. consultants laura ost and david walczyk generated initial drafts of several sections of the report; ms. ost also edited severalchapters. susan maurizi edited the manuscript for publication. davidpadgham and jennifer bishop provided research assistance; ms. bishopalso created several of the original figures that appear in this report(including the cover design). the committee also thanks janet briscoe,janice sabuda, and brandye williams of the cstb, and claudette k.baylorfleming and carmela j. chamberlain of the space studies boardfor their support of the committeeõs work.william j. mitchell, chaircommittee on information technology and creativitybeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xihis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs report review committee. thepurpose of this independent review is to provide candid and criticalcomments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to thestudy charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remainconfidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. wewish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:anna bentkowska, conway library, courtauld institute of art,howard besser, new york university,sandra braman, university of alabama,donna cox, university of illinois at urbanachampaign,robert denison, first security company,steve dietz, walker art center,kristian halvorsen, hewlett packard laboratories,paul kaiser, independent artist, new york city,alan kay, hewlett packard company,clifford lynch, coalition for networked information,simon penny, university of california at irvine,bill seaman, rhode island school of design, andmark tribe, rhizome.org.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorsethe conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft ofthe report before its release. the review of this report was overseen byedward lazowska, university of washington. appointed by thebeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsxiinational research council, he was responsible for making certain thatan independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review commentswere carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiisummary and recommendations1information technology, productivity,and creativity15inventive and creative practices, 16domains and benefits of creativity, 18the creative industries, 20interactions among domains of creative activity, 22the roles of information technology, 24the race for creativity in a networked world, 27roadmap for this report, 28creative practices30what makes people creative, 30how creative people work, 34individuals with diverse expertise and skills, 36successful collaborations, 40architecture, 44movie production, 45computer games, 48cultural challenges in crossdisciplinary collaborations, 51overcoming preconceived notions about computer scientistsand artists and designers, 52minimizing communications clashes, 55resources that support creative practices, 57skills training, 57work spaces, 58advancing creative practices throughinformation technology61strange bedfellows?, 61tools needed to support creative work: hardware and software, 65˘ˇˆbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxivhardware and software tools: a mixed blessing, 68support for flexibility, experimentation, and play, 74the internet and the web, 75economic realities, 81standards, 84selected areas for the development of hardwareand software that would promote creative work, 86distributed control, 87sensors and actuators, 88video and audio, 89generative processes, 92reliable, lowlatency communication over the internet, 93tool design and humancomputer interaction, 94programming languages, 95the influence of art and design on computerscience research and development96beyond tools, 96the information arts, 96modeling disciplines: from multidisciplinary to transdisciplinary, 99implications for computer science, 102promising areas, 104mixed reality, 105computer games, 107narrative intelligence, 108nonutilitarian evaluation, 111experimental consumer product design, 112mobile and ubiquitous computing, 113conclusion, 115venues for information technology andcreative practices118studiolaboratories, 119historical perspective, 119three classes of modern studiolaboratories, 120multifaceted newmedia art and design organizations, 125standalone centers, 125hybrid networks, 128other venues for practitioners, 130virtualspacebased strategies, 130professional conferences, 133public display venues, 136corporate experiences with information technology andcreative practices, 143schools, colleges, and universities151organizational models for supporting work, 152specialized centers, 152workshops, 155service units, 157˙˝˛beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvfostering itcp work within mainstream departments anddisciplines, 158computer science, 158examples of itcp work, 159challenges in computer science departments, 162art practice and design, 165schools of art and design, 167crosscutting issues, 170hiring faculty, 170encouraging multiskilled individuals and collaborations, 171designing curricula, 173institutional issues and public policy176digital copyright, 177digital archiving and preservation, 181validation and recognition structures, 184publication, 188curatorial web sites, 189awards and prizes, 190the geography of information technology and creative practices, 191information technology hot spots, 192geographically distributed creativity, 194technologysupported networks of creativity, 195supporting work in information technology andcreative practices197funding in the united states, 199sources of funds, 200federal funding for the artsñthe national endowments, 202indirect public funding for the arts, 204funding by private philanthropy, 205prizes, 210federal funding for information technology research, 211funding for infrastructure, 213risk preferences and the challenge of supporting emerging areas, 216reexamining funding policies and practices, 220funding in the international context, 225public support for the arts, 225public support for information technology research, 230private philanthropy, 234appendixesbiographies of committee members and staff237briefers at committee meetings247the computer science and telecommunications board 251˚ beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1reativity plays a crucial role in culture; creative activitiesprovide personal, social, and educational benefit; and creative inventions (òbetter recipes, not just more cookingó) are increasingly recognized as key drivers of economic development. but creativity takes different forms at differenttimes and in different places. this report argues that, at the beginningof the 21st century, information technology (it) is forming a powerfulalliance with creative practices in the arts and design to establish theexciting new domain of information technology and creative practicesñitcp. there are major benefits to be gained from encouraging,supporting, and strategically investing in this domain.information technology andcreative practicesalliances of technology and creative practices have often emergedin the past. in the 19th century, for example, optical, chemical, andthinfilm manufacturing technologies converged with the practices ofthe pictorial arts to establish the new domain of photography. then,photographic technology became further allied with the practices ofthe performing arts, giving rise to the domain of film. the cultural andeconomic consequences of these developments have been profound.the emerging alliance of information technology with the arts anddesign has, this committee believes, even greater potential.itcp has already yielded results of astonishing variety and significant cultural and economic value. these results have taken suchforms as innovative architectural and product designs, computer animated films, computer music, computer games, webbased texts, and¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity2¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥interactive art installations, to name just a few. they have developedfrom individual, group, and institutional activities; the processes bywhich they have been produced have spanned both the commercialand notforprofit worlds and the formal and informal economic sectors. the products of itcp have begun to appear in many differentcountries, in ways that reflect cultural, economic, and political differences.it has now reached a stage of maturity, costeffectiveness, anddiffusion that enables its effective engagement with many areas of thearts and designñnot just to enhance productivity or to allow moreefficient distribution, but to open up new creative possibilities. thereis a highly competitive race for leadership in this domain. the potential payoffs from success in the near and longterm futures are enormous: billiondollar industries, valuable exports, thriving communities that attract the best and the brightest, enriched cultural experiencesfor individuals and communities, and opportunities for global cultural visibility and influence.by definition, there is no formula for creativity. but there areeffective ways to invest in establishing conditions necessary for itcp,in overcoming impediments, and in providing incentives. furthermore, there are ways to recognize and reward creative contributionsand to derive social benefit from them. in appropriate combination,these measures can add up to powerful strategies for encouraging,supporting, and reaping the rewards of itcp. development alongwith implementation of such strategies is the challenge addressed bythis report.multilevel strategies for itcpitcp can be engaged at multiple levelsñby individual artists anddesigners who deal with it tools, media, and themes; in the structuring and management of crossdisciplinary research and productiongroups working in the itcp domain; in directing educational andcultural institutions with interests in itcp; at the level of regionaldevelopment strategy aimed at fostering itcp clusters; as an aspect ofnational economic and cultural policy; and in multinational collaborative efforts. all of these levels are important, and there are crossconnections among them. there is, therefore, considerable advantagein coordinated, multilevel strategies for encouraging, supporting, andbenefiting from itcp.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations3providing new tools andmedia for artists anddesignersindividual artists and designers have experimented with it sinceits earliest incarnations. artistic exploration of the possibilities of computer graphics, for example, now extends back more than 30 years,and 40 years for computer music. as it has matured and been assimilated into the mass market, the it tools and media available to artistsand designers have become both more diversified and more affordable. there are popular, standardized tools for performing such tasksas creating, editing, and distributing images, audio, and text; there arevariants on standard tools customized to the needs of particular artistsor designers; and there are highly specialized, purposebuilt toolsused by nobody but their creators.to a software developer or an information services manager, itmight seem that the keys to itcp are simply equipment and softwareñdeveloping and providing access to standard, commercial ittools for artists and designers. this perspective is useful as far as itgoes, and it can provide a good way to get started with itcp, but inthe long run it is an insufficiently rich or flexible one. we make ourtools; then our tools make us.1 furthermore, software tools encodenumerous assumptions about the making of art and designñpreciselythe sorts of presuppositions that truly creative practitioners will wantto challenge. and the more software tools emphasize ease of use orfamiliar metaphors, the more they must depend on restrictive assumptions in order to do so. such tools not only must be available, butthey also must be objects of critical reflection; they must be open toadjustment and tweaking, they must support unintended and subversive usesñnot just anticipated onesñand they must not be too resistant to being torn apart and reconceived. if creative practice can develop the powerful spaces and tools that it needs, like the electroniceasel or electronic studio, these spaces and tools could help transformor enlarge the metaphors, spaces, and tools (office, desktop, files) thatthe rest of us have to work with.the relationship between it professionals and artists and designers will be of limited value if it is conceived simply as one of software(or hardware) producer and consumer. it should, instead, be one offlexible and thoughtful collaboration in which the roles of softwaredesigner and user are not rigidly distinguished. the advances madeby it researchers may suggest new forms of art and design practice,1inspired by marshall mcluhan, 1954, ònotes on the media as art forms,ó explorations 2 (april): 613.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity4¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥while the questions raised by artists and designers may provide newways of thinking about itñitcp work challenges the boundaries oftraditional disciplines. modular, reusable and recombinable code elements may support critical reconceptualization more readily thanclosed, proprietary software products. open source development mayprovide better opportunities for crossdisciplinary collaboration,customization, and reconceptualization than tools developed and marketed as protected intellectual propertyñno matter how powerful andattractive those tools may be.providing opportunities todevelop itcp skillsin general, itcp depends on opportunities for learning acrossmultiple disciplinesñsome mix of the arts and design plus it conceptsand tools. the growing numbers of artists and designers becomingskilled programmers or hardware developers, like the smaller numberof computer scientists and technologists engaging seriously with thearts and design, demonstrates that this is feasible. but it is not easy:colleges and universities focus mostly on established disciplines, andthe crossdisciplinary programs that do exist vary widely in theirinstitutional support, effectiveness, and quality.like other professionals, artists and designers can do more with itif they become deeply conversant with its capabilities and limitations.achieving that result requires far more than training on standardtools, and it also demands an ability to understand tools and mediacriticallyñin cultural and historical context. such critical thinkingabout tools is much less typical of education and training in it, adifference that contributes to the asymmetric participation of artistsand computer scientists in itcp. to date, it seems that artists anddesigners have made greater efforts to engage it seriously than computer scientists and technologists have made to acquire deep understanding of creative practices in the arts and design. it is easier to finddesigners who can program than programmers who can design, orcomposers comfortable with signal processing than specialists in signal processing who can compose or perform at high levels of proficiency. this imbalance could change, with outreach to the computerscience community and interest in itcp among those who providefunding and other incentives and rewards.although motivated individuals can and do acquire complementary it and arts or design skills, significant itcp work can also beproduced by crossdisciplinary partnerships between computer scientists and artists or designers. this approach has the advantage ofrequiring that fewer skills be mastered by individual team members,and it is often essential for large projects, but there are some inherentdifficulties. progress in collaborative itcp requires effective dialoguebeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations5between artists and designers and it professionals. differences inprofessional culture, styles, and values, as well as communicationproblems, can confound effective collaboration. yet there are strongtraditions of successful crossdisciplinary collaboration in architecture(particularly as computeraided design/computeraided manufacturing (cad/cam) technology plays an increasing role), in film production, and in the creation of video games, and there have been somesuccessful pairings of artists and technologists to produce visual works,performances, and installations.creating environments thatsupport itcpitcp work can be done in many different places. and the diversity of venues matters, since each type of venue represents differenttradeoffs and provides different combinations of opportunities, constraints, and comparative advantage. so an effective itcp development strategy is likely to be a multivenue one.itcp venues may occupy physical or virtual spaces, be large orsmall, range from loosely organized collectives to formal programs,and be either freestanding or connected to established institutions.specialized exhibitions, performance festivals, presentation and lecture series, conferences, internet forums, and display and performancesites have all played important roles in the growth of itcp communities. by contrast, mainstream arts and design organizationsñmuseums, galleries, arts and design fairs, arts and design publishers, and soonñhave played a lesser role, although they have begun to embraceitcp more as the products of itcp have played a larger cultural roleand as these products have developed in quality and interest.much pioneering exploration of itcp has taken place in studiolaboratories, which build on the tradition of earlier centers of crossdisciplinary research and education in the arts, design, and new technology of the time, such as germanyõs bauhaus in the preworld warii years, the postwar new bauhaus in chicago, and the center foradvanced visual studies established by gyorgy kepes at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit) in the 1960s. mitõs medialaboratory has been among the largest and most visible, and it hasgenerated affiliates in europe and asia. however, the media labõscombination of substantial laboratory and human resources with anatelier style of research and education, building on a consortium ofindustry funders, is difficult to replicate outside the context of a leading research university with strong industrial connections. some universities, such as carnegie mellon university, have formed specialcrossdisciplinary centers that undertake itcp, and several arts schools,such as the california institute of the arts and the art center collegeof design in pasadena, have transformed their curricula to incorporate¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity6it, yielding numerous focused itcp activities. some film schools haveshifted their emphasis from traditional to digital production and distribution technologies, and most architecture and design schools havesupplemented or supplanted drawing boards with cad. several universities have begun to develop crossdisciplinary study programs inaspects of itcp. but a key challenge, particularly in times of tightfinances, is to find effective ways to fund these programsñand toframe them in ways that are pedagogically sound and appropriatelyadaptive to the continuing evolution of itcp.in canada and europe, and emerging in asia and australia, majorefforts are under way to develop standalone, governmentbacked itcpcenters. such centers are typically conceived of as instruments of artsand cultural policy, rather than as equivalents of national researchlaboratories. this is an arena in which the united states lags. in principle, such centers can provide considerable flexibility and freedom ofintellectual direction. on the down side, they are vulnerable to changesin government spending priorities, they can lose the very independence that makes them attractive if they shift to executing contractsfrom industry, and they are usually less able to draw effectively on thelaboratories and human resources of large universities.the technology required for itcp can be expensive, and ambitious itcp productions can require major funding. given the breadthof itcp, some funding is available through commercial channels. itnormally requires close engagement with popular culture and massaudiences, with all the constraints and opportunities that this implies.this path is illustrated by the film and entertainment industriesñthese itcp pioneers overcame difficulty and expense and now canproduce major commercial successes. a focused example is the flourishing video game industry, a direct outcome of the rise of itcp. itobviously would not be possible at all without the necessary it, and itsproducts define a new art form that also resonates with the generalpublic. it has found some highly innovative ways to combine centralized research, development, and marketing with largescale opensource strategies, and it has evolved unique distribution strategies.operating on a small scale and often producing innovative workthrough commissions from enlightened patrons is another group ofplayers that straddle the boundary between commerce and the arts:independent architectural design, product design, graphic design, andmusic and video production houses now make extensive use of ittools and media, and they frequently have it specialists on staff. insome cases, this amounts to little more than straightforward use ofstandard, commercial tools. but more adventurous and innovativehouses have seized the opportunity, through it, to open up someexciting new domains. this is particularly evident in the move ofarchitects into cad/cam design and constructionñwith the resulting emergence of new architectural idiomsñand the move of graphicdesigners into work that is more interactive.much important itcp work occurs outside the marketplace. inaddition to academic efforts, individual, independent artists and designers, operating mostly on a small scale, are responsible for a crucialbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations7¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥segment of itcp. by virtue of their independence, they are well positioned to provide perspectives that challenge mainstream thinkingand to engage industry as catalytic outsiders who can instigate newways of thinking about products and processes. many forms of traditional art production, such as painting and writing, are laborintensiveand modest in their requirements for investments in technology, butitcp is often much more capitalintensive. this increased need forcapital presents a chronic problem for independents; they often operate on a shoestring, struggle to get access to technology and expertise,and must make whatever technology investments they can managefrom projectbyproject funding. they usually depend on some mix ofthe gallery and patronage structures of the art world, arts foundationgrants, and relationships with sympathetic educational institutionsand corporations.itcp activity in all of these venues tends to cluster geographically.fostering such clustersñwith a vital mix of commercial, nonprofit,academic, design and production house, and independent practitioneractivityñcan play an important role in regional economic development. there can be major direct benefits to local economies, and indirect (but potentially even more important) benefits in the form ofbetter design and higher levels of innovation distributed over manysectors of the economy.in addition, by its very nature, itcp lends itself to efficient electronic connection of scattered islands of activity. writers and photographers can submit their work electronically to distant publishers,architects can form geographically distributed design and construction teams, film studios in hollywood can link electronically topostproduction houses in london or animation shops in korea, and soon. that capability for connectivity is leading, increasingly, to multinational itcp alliances and organizations. such a capability can beparticularly important in contextsñsuch as in developing nationsñwhere the local culture supports some unique itcp cluster and electronic connectivity adds value to that cluster by providing wideraccess to resources and markets. it is also important in contextsñsuchas those of australia, new zealand, and singaporeñwhere small buthighly educated populations, combined with the effects of distance,make concentration on highvalue, immaterial, information goods andservices particularly attractive.fostering the culture ofinformation technologyand creative practicesproviding new tools and media for artists and designers, providing opportunities to develop itcp skills, and creating environmentsthat support itcp are all necessary to form thriving itcp clusters, butbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity8they are not in themselves sufficient. it is also essential to foster theculture of itcpñthe flow and exchange of ideas among those engaged, the development of a sense of intellectual community, therepresentation of ideals and values, and the recognition and validation of outstanding work.the academic environment, in particular, is central to the future ofitcp. that is where talent is cultivated, and that is where research andpractice of various kinds can take place largely without market strictures. at present, a gulf exists between computer science and the artsand design. although some computer scientists bridge that gulfñandcontribute considerably to itcpñthat activity often happens outsidetheir department. although some arts departments have been skeptical of ònewmediaó programs, in general the arts and design on campus have welcomed itcp more than have computer science departments. the lack of welcome from computer science departments reflectsa lack of appreciation of itcpõs potential to contribute to the advanceof computer science as a field, as well as concern about already tightcurricula. at the same time, arts and design departments on campusesand arts schools have sought to internalize itcp facilities and todevelop their own research and teaching programs in itcp. the situation echoes earlier efforts to formalize computer science as a field,establish a theoretical foundation for it, and provide it with some levelof autonomy from its predecessor and sister fields. but it is importantto explore the potential for constructive interaction between the artsand design and computer science before universitiesñand practitionersñconclude that òparallel playó is the way to go.building academic clusters is a nontrivial challenge. not only arethere cultural differences among the constituent disciplines, but thereare also significant differences in expectations for funding, use of time,use of graduate students, definitions of what is acceptable work, andso on. special centers, seminars, and other venues are being tried oncampuses, a kind of institutional experimentation that is vital to developing itcp. they help to frame and sustain itcp projects. the time isripe for academic experimentation with itcp, from course contentand curricula to institutional options and incentives.education, collaboration, funding, and professional advancementall depend on how itcp is received. because itcp spans so manyactivities, there is feedback from the commercial space and popularcultureña powerful reinforcement on the design endñand there ismore ambiguous feedback through academic institutions (faculty andadministrators); publications, exhibitions, performances, and prizes,as well as those who select for them; and funders of research and thearts.because the field of itcp is young and dynamic, itcp productionis hard to evaluate. traditional review panelsñrepresenting funders;owners and managers of conventional display, performance, or publication outlets; and those making personnel decisions at academicinstitutionsñmay be hampered by their membersõ ties to single disciplines and the absence of a timetested consensus about what constibeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations9tutes good work in itcp and why. this problem is typical of newfields drawing from multiple disciplines, albeit aggravated by thecontrast between computer science and the arts and design. it is offsetsomewhat by a flourishing array of conferences and other forums, inboth virtual and real space, that provide a sense of community and anoutlet as well as feedback. effective evaluation, validation, and recognition of itcp work are essential for this domain to progress. buildingon traditions in the arts and design, prizes can be powerful for stimulating and recognizing excellence in itcp.a new form of researchitcp can constitute an important domain of research. it is inherently exploratory and inherently transdisciplinary.2 concerned at itscore with how people perceive, experience, and use information technology, itcp has enormous potential for sparking reconceptualizationand innovation in it. in execution, it pushes on the boundaries of bothit and the arts and design. computer science has always been stimulated by exposure to new points of view and new problems, which areeverpresent in the arts and design. because of the breadth of use towhich artists and designers put different forms of it, and because theytypically are not steeped in conventional it approaches, artistsõ anddesignersõ perspectives on tools and applications may provide valuable insights into the needs of other kinds of it users. the needs andwants of artists and designers can suggest new ways of designing andimplementing it. engaging their perspectives is a logical extension ofrecent trends in crossdisciplinary computer science research.recently, for example, artists and designers have brought newconcerns to the design and implementation of sensor systems, distributed control systems and actuators, generative processes and virtualreality, and the internet and other networks. their interests in performance and in engaging the public present challenges for systeminteractivity; their interests in improvisation present new opportunities for exploring humanmachine interaction. although artists andcomputer scientists have long interacted in such spheres as computergraphics and music, almost any form of it may be adopted or adaptedfor uses in the arts and design. this flexibility of purpose parallels theplasticity of the computer itselfñand that helps to explain why artistsõconcerns may motivate new combinations as well as new forms of it.it is important to recognize, however, that serious itcp researchgoes beyond appropriation of established it concepts and techniquesfor artistic or design purposes, or use of straightforward examples¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥2in transdisciplinary itcp work, artists and designers interact as peers with computer scientists, a model that is described in detail in chapter 4.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity10drawn from the arts and design to demonstrate the potential applications of new it. it requires drawing on deep understanding of both itand the arts and design to formulate scientifically interesting newquestions in itcp, and to see the subtle cultural implications of relevant new science. issues arising from the arts and design have motivated challenging and important domains of computer science andtechnology research, such as threedimensional geometric modelingand scene rendering directed at the practices and needs of designersand animators. sometimes artsoriented researchers raise cultural, social, ethical, and methodological questions for computer scientists thatwould not be obvious in a more narrowly focused technological context. conversely, outcomes of computer science research may challenge artists and designers to rethink their established assumptionsand practices (rethinking that includes an evolution from artifact creator to process mediator), as when architects engage the possibilitiesof curvedsurface modeling and associated cad/cam fabricationtechniques, or when photographers ponder the differences in the rolesof digital and silverbased images as cultural products and as visualevidence. and there are areas, such as augmented reality, tangiblecomputing, lifelike computer animation of characters, and usercentered evaluation of computer systems, that are probably best regardedas the joint outcomes of questions posed and investigations conductedby computer scientists and by artists and designers. these developments suggest that the value of itcp lies not just in the capacity ofeach field to answer questions posed by the other, but also in theopportunity for each field to gain fresh, sometimes uncomfortable,perspectives on itself.making itcp happenthe broad scope of itcp implies that it derives funding from bothcommercial activityñnotably in design and entertainment contextsñand nonprofit activity. the latter is where support is particularlyuncertain yet essential, since it is in nonprofit contexts that muchexperimentation takes place and some of the broadest public, participant access becomes possible. the hybrid nature of itcp tends toconfound its funding. in the united states, exploratory and productive work in the arts and at the noncommercial frontiers of design islikely to be funded by private philanthropy, while in computer sciencethe leading funders of basic research are government agencies, oftenin support of specific agency missions. computer science researchgrants are larger (by an order of magnitude) than grants (or prizes)typically available to artistsñand they tend to be tied to the advancesin scientific knowledge or the specific kinds of applications of concernto their funders.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations11advancing itcp requires new approaches to funding. a first stepis recognition by both the arts and computer science patrons thattopics in itcp are legitimate; next must come support for explorationof the intersections between it and the arts and design, and with thatsupport for new kinds of technical and social and intellectual infrastructure for undertaking and providing access to itcp. those newapproaches, in turn, may require new skills and participants in fundersõdecisionmaking processes. grant program definitions should specifically embrace itcp, but without that, progress in itcp will depend ongrant seekersõ ingenuity in influencing program definitions and relating their ideas to existing programs.in addition to monetary support, itcp depends on resolving concerns about intellectual property rights. not only does itcp feature abroad range of content and a broad range of expression, but its production can also involve creative reuse or adaptation of previouslygenerated content or expression. it also requires attention to thearchiving and preservation of itbased works, both those of a fixednature and those designed to change through interactivity or otherfactors.the rise of itcp and the process of contemplating its future pointto the need for better data on artsrelated activities and trends. although imperfect, the data available on scientific and technical research is better than that for arts activities. the lack of good datahinders effective planning and policy making.recommendationsrealizing the potential of itcp requires actions on many frontsñby individuals, organizations, and funders of different kinds. thebenefits will accrue broadlyñin multiple sectors of the economy, geographic regions, and disciplines. other efforts already address theroles of established arts institutionsñmuseums, galleries, theaters,and so onñin relation to itbased art works and performances. thisreport concentrates its recommendations on those most responsiblefor nurturing the talent and the explorations that are the essence ofitcp. the recommendations below build on discussions in the bodyof the report, which explores the ecology of creative practices and thecomponents of the strategies through which itcp can thrive.for educators and academicadministrators1.support the achievement of fluency in information technology(it), and the development of critical and theoretical perspectives onit, by arts and design students through the provision of suitable¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity12facilities, opportunities for handson experience with it tools andmedia, and curricula that engage critical and theoretical issues relatingto it and to information technology and creative practices (itcp).2.support educational experiences for computer science studentsthat provide direct experience in the arts and design, critical discussion, and formation of broader cultural perspectivesñnot merely assemirecreational enrichment, but at a sufficiently challenging level toraise hard questions about the social and cultural roles both of scienceand technology and of the arts and design.3.foster exploration of itcp through incentives and experimentation with a range of informal (e.g., workshops and seminars) andformal vehicles (e.g., centers, awards)ñin particular, by building firmlyand boldly on demonstrated local (and often smallscale) strengthsand productive relationships already in place.4.support curricula, especially at the undergraduate level, thatprovide the necessary disciplinary foundation for later specializationin itcp.for foundations, government agencies,and other funders5.allocate funding not only to support work by specialists inestablished and recognized areas of it and of the arts and design, butalso to foster collaborations that open up new areas of itcp.6.structure proposal review processes to encourage not only continued development of established and recognized areas of it and ofthe arts and design, but also higherrisk, longerhorizon efforts todevelop itcp.7.provide program managers with more time and leeway to learnabout new fields and new kinds of grantees; encourage mobility amonggrant makers, artists, designers, and computer scientists.8.develop a new grantmaking category for tool (instrument)building, emphasizing designs that are extensible and tools that provide support for improvisation, and for providing broad access to theresulting tools. expand research program support for work in aspectsof distributed control, sensors and actuators, video and audio processing, humancomputer interaction, information retrieval, artificial intelligence, networking, embedded systems, generative processes, andother technological areas that are critical to advancing itcp, with aparticular focus on artsanddesigninspired applications of these technologies that extend beyond conventional uses.9.factor infrastructure and archiving and preservation needs intogrant levels because this support is essential to enable future work initcp.10.support the establishment of new prizes for excellence in itcpand the development of curated web sites for its display or performance.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations1311.to support policy decision making, underwrite a better knowledge baseñranging from the history of itcp to the details of who isdoing what, where, when, and howñthat parallels the knowledgebase in scientific and engineering fields.12.underwrite research on the formation of creative clusters andthe role that itcp can play in promoting regional development.13.provide support for the creation and maintenance of networksof organizations (composed of participants from academia, industry,and cultural institutions) involved with itcp.for industry14.seek opportunities to develop new products and services relating to the growing field of itcp and to participate in the formation ofitcp clusters.15.pursue relationships with centers of itcp activity, and seekopportunities to engage artists and designers who can contribute tothe development of itcp products and services.for the national academies16.organize a symposium series on frontiers of creative practice(paralleling the frontiers of science and frontiers of engineering series) to bring together a cross section of young artists, designers,scientists, and technologists working within itcp.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.15˘he benefits of information technology (it) extend far beyond productivity as it is usually understood and measured. not only can the application of it provide betterratios of value created to effort expended in establishedprocesses for producing goods and delivering services, but it can alsoreframe and redirect the expenditure of human effort, generating unanticipated payoffs of exceptionally high value. information technology can support inventive and creative practices in the arts, design,science, engineering, education, and business, and it can enable entirely new types of creative production. the scope of itenabled creative practices is suggested (but by no means exhausted) by a host ofcoinages that have recently entered common languageñcomputergraphics, computeraided design, computer music, computer games,digital photography, digital video, digital media, new media, hypertext,virtual environments, interaction design, and electronic publishing, toname just a few.the benefits of such practices have economic, social, political, andcultural components. itenabled creative practices have the potentialto extend benefits broadly, not only to economic and cultural elites(where they are most immediately obvious), but also to the disadvantaged, and not only to the developed world but also to developingcountries. and their impacts extend in two directions: just as theengagement of it helps shape the development of inventive and creative practices, so also can inventive and creative practices positivelyinfluence the development of it. see box 1.1. this report explores thecomplex, evolving intersections of it with some important domains ofcreative practiceñparticularly in the arts and designñand recommends strategies for most effectively achieving the benefits of thoseintersections.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity16¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥box 1.1the utility of information technologya common answer to the question, what good is information technology?, is that it enhancesproductivity. unquestionably, information technology (it) now helps one to perform many routine taskswith greater speed and accuracy, with fewer errors, and at lower cost. so computers and software productsare marketed as productivity tools, investments in it are justified in terms of productivity gains, andeconomists try (sometimes without success) to measure those gains. in this role, it is a servant.an additional claim, which can be justified in certain contexts, is that it enhances the quality of results.laserprinted documents not only are quicker and cheaper to produce than handwritten or typewrittenones but may also be crisper and more legible. the outputs of detailed computer simulations of systems maybe more reliable, and more useful to engineers, than the approximate, ruleofthumb hand calculations thatwere used in earlier eras. and a sophisticated optimization program may produce a better solution to anallocation problem than manual trial and error. in this role, it supports creative craftsmanship.a still stronger, but frequently defensible, claim is that it enables innovationñthe production ofoutcomes that would otherwise simply not be possible. scientists may use computers to analyze vastquantities of data and thereby derive new knowledge that would not be accessible by other means.architects may use curvedsurface modeling and computeraided design/manufacturing systems to designand build forms that would have been infeasibleñand probably would not even have been imaginedñinearlier times. and new, electronic musical instruments, which make use of advanced sensor and signalprocessing technology, may open up domains of composition and performance that could not be exploredusing traditional instruments. in this role, it becomes a partner in processes of innovation.perhaps the strongest claim is that it can foster practices that are creative in the most rigorous senseñscholarly, scientific, technological, design, and artistic practices that produce valuable results in ways thatmight be explained in retrospect but could not have been predicted. at this point, one might detect a whiffof paradoxña variant on platoõs famous meno paradox. unless it offers users a means to produce somethingthey already know they want, it is not helpful. but if someone produces something merely by running aprogram, the production process is predetermined and potentially standardized, so how can the result betruly creative?inventive and creativepracticescreativity is a bit like pornography; it is hard to define, but wethink we know it when we see it.1 the complexities and subtleties ofprecise definition should not detain us here, but it is worth making afew crucial distinctions.certainly, creative intellectual production can be distinguishedfrom the performance of routine (though perhaps highly skilled) intel1for a concise summary of attempts to define creativity within a variety of intellectual traditions, see carl r. hausman, 1998, òcreativity: conceptual and historicaloverview,ó pp. 453456 in encyclopedia of aesthetics, vol. 1, michael kelly, ed., oxforduniversity press, new york.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology, productivity, and creativity17lectual tasks, such as editing manuscripts for spelling and grammar, orapplying known techniques for deriving solutions to given mathematical problems. less obviously, creativity can be distinguishedfrom innovation; there are plenty of software products and businessplans that are (or were) innovative, in the sense of accomplishingsomething that had not been attempted before, without being particularly creative. and there are many original scientific ideas that turnout to be wrong. there is always something unexpected, compelling,and even disturbing about genuinely creative production.2 it claimsvalue, and it has an edge. it challenges our assumptions, forces us toframe issues in fresh ways, allows us to see new intellectual andcultural possibilities, and (according to kant, at least) establishes standards by which future work will be judged.3the implicit and explicit ambitions reflected in creative production tend to differentiate it from routine production. it often focuses onunexpected questions rather than those that have already entered theintellectual mainstream. it goes for high payoffs and is undeterred byaccompanying high risks. it seeks out big questions rather than opportunities to make incremental advances, and it looks for fundamentalchange. it is not bothered by rule breaking, boundary crossing, andtroublemaking. and it is characteristically reflexiveñengaged in reflecting upon and rethinking processes, not just applying them.creative production is not always positive and widely valued; onecan be creatively evil, and one can waste creative talents on crazyprojects that nobody cares about. but the products of creative science,scholarship, engineering, art, and designñeven creative basketballñcan bring immense benefits to society, as well as providing deepsatisfaction to their originators. so respect is accorded to creativeindividuals and institutions, and society is often willing to invest inprojects and programs that plausibly promise (though can never quiteguarantee) creative results.for plato, and later for the romantics, creativity was an ineffableattribute of certain mysteriously favored individualsña gift of thegods. you could cultivate and exercise it if you had it, but there wasnõtmuch else you could do about it. todayõs consensus (endorsed by thiscommittee on information technology and creativity) favors the viewthat creativity can be developed through education and opportunity,2hausman (òcreativity,ó 1998, p. 454) puts the point more technically, as follows:ònot just anything brought into being invites us to call it a creation, however. there is astronger or radical and normative expectation that what is brought into being regardedas having newness and (at least for the creator) value. the newness of the outcome ofsuch a radical creative act is a characteristic not simply of another instance of a knownclassña numerical newness, such as may be attributed to a freshly stamped penny or ablade of grass that has just maturedñbut an instance of some new kind. it is a thing thatis one of its kind that occurs for the first time, and being thus newly intelligible, isvaluable.ó3immanuel kant, 1781, critique of pure reason. see <http://www.arts.cuhk.edu.hk/philosophy/kant/cpr>. note that as this report went to press, all urls cited wereactive and accessible.there is alwayssomethingunexpected,compelling,and evendisturbingabout genuinelycreativeproduction.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity18that it can be an attribute of teams and groups as well as individuals,and that its social, cultural, and technological contexts matter. thecommittee tends to believe that it is possible to identify and establishthe conditions necessary for creativity, and conversely, that we riskstifling creativity if we get those conditions wrong. renaissance florence clearly provided the conditions for extraordinary artistic andscientific creativity, but it is easy to name many modern cities (we willavoid getting ourselves into trouble by doing so) that apparently donot.more precisely, creative practicesñpractices of inquiry and production that seek more than routine outputs and aim instead forinnovative and creative resultsñcan be encouraged and supported insome very concrete and specific ways. society can try to provide thetools, working environments, educational preparation, intellectualproperty arrangements, funding, incentives, and other conditions necessary to support creative practices in various fields.domains and benefits ofcreativityno intellectual domain or economic sector has a monopoly oncreativity; it manifests itself (often unpredictably) in multiple fieldsand contexts. but the manifestations vary in form and character, inassociated terminology, and in the types of benefits that result.in science and mathematics, the most fundamental outcome ofcreative intellectual effort is important new knowledge. generally,scientists and mathematicians are clear on the difference between suchknowledge and that which results from incremental advances withinestablished intellectual frameworks. groundbreaking discovery iswidely (though not universally) regarded as a product of great valuein itself, but it is also valued more pragmaticallyñas an enabler oftechnological innovation.in engineering, and in technologybased industry, creativity yieldstechnological inventions. such inventions can result in commerciallysuccessful products, in improvements to the quality of life (as, forexample, when motion picture technology enabled a new form ofentertainment, or when an innovative new drug provides a cure for adisease), and in the generation of income streams through intellectualproperty licensing arrangements. thus the social and economic benefits are often clearly identifiable and measurable. in recent decades,information technology has been a particular locus of technologicalinvention, the benefits of which need no elaboration here.4¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥4for an elaboration, see computer science and telecommunications board, nationalresearch council, 1999, funding a revolution: government support for computing research, national academy press, washington, d.c.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology, productivity, and creativity19an important manifestation of economic creativity is entrepreneurshipñbringing together ideas, talent, and capital in innovativeways to create and make available products and services. often, infields such as information technology and biotechnology, close alliances emerge between the institutions of technological innovation(e.g., research universities) and entrepreneurial activity; each one requires and motivates the other. this is particularly evident in fastmoving, hightech economic clusters, such as the information technology cluster in silicon valley or the biotechnology cluster of cambridge,massachusetts.cultural creativity manifests itself in the production of works ofart, design, and scholarship. like contributions to scientific andmathematical knowledge, such works are highly valued in themselves. nations and cities take immense pride in their major culturalfigures, their cultural institutions, and their cultural heritage. manyvalue the experience of producing as well as consuming art, design,and scholarship. not only high cultural practices, such as opera at themetropolitan in new york city, but also popular practices, such asamateur photography, may be valued for the participant experiencesthey provide.practices of cultural creativity also provide the foundation of thesocalled creative industries that seek profits from production, distribution, and licensing.5 one component of the creative industriesconsists of economic activity directly related to the world of the artsñin particular, the visual arts, the performing arts, literature and publishing, photography, crafts, libraries, museums, galleries, archives,heritage sites, and arts festivals. a second component consists ofactivity related to electronic and other newer mediañnotably broadcast, film and television, recorded music, and software and digitalmedia. and a third component consists of designrelated activities,such as architecture, interior and landscape design, product design,graphics and communication design, and fashion.there are some problems with the very idea of òcreativeó industries. creativity clearly is not confined to them, and much of what theyengage in could hardly be called creative in any sense. sometimes, aswhen they devote their efforts to churning out routine òcontent,ó theyeven seem actively countercreative. still, the creative industries doultimately depend on talented, original artists, designers, and performers to create the value that they add to and deliver, while manyartists, designers, and performers depend on the infrastructure of thecreative industries and are rewarded by their engagement with thecreative industries. the idea is problematic in some respects and there5the u.k. creative industries taskforce, in its 1998 report creative industries mappingdocument, defined the creative industries as òthose industries which have their origin inindividual creativity, skill and talent and which have the potential for wealth and jobcreation through the generation and exploitation of intellectual property.ó see <http://www.culture.gov.uk/creative/creativeindustries.html>.it is possible toidentify andestablish theconditionsnecessary forcreativity, andconversely,we risk stiflingcreativity if weget thoseconditionswrong.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity20fore should be treated with appropriate critical caution, but it remainsa useful one. and, in any case, the name òcreative industriesó hasstuck.the creative industriesthat the creative industries are now big business hardly needsemphasis. there have been numerous recent efforts to quantify thisintuition by measuring their economic contributions. according to anestimate developed by singaporeõs governmental workgroup on creative industries,6 the united states led the way in the creative industries in 2001, with the creative industries accounting for 7.75 percent ofthe gross domestic product (gdp), providing 5.9 percent of nationalemployment, and generating $88.97 billion in exports,7 with the unitedkingdom, australia, and singapore also exhibiting industry sectors ofsignificant size (representing 5.0 percent, 3.3 percent, and 2.8 percentof national gdp, respectively).8the united states has some important, major creative industryclusters,9 notably those of los angeles (with a particular emphasis onfilm, television, and music), new york (with a particular emphasis onpublishing and the visual arts), san francisco (with particular recentemphasis on digital multimedia), and some smaller, more specializedclusters in cities such as boston, austin, and nashville. in europe,many creative industry clusters, such as those of london, paris, andmilan, have developed at longestablished centers of culture. in australia, significant new clusters, based mostly on film, television, anddigital multimedia, have emerged in sydney, melbourne, and adelaide.a cluster oriented toward software tools and production has developed in canada, especially in toronto and montr”al. the value ofsuch clusters is obvious, so it is not surprising that there has beengrowing worldwide interest in the regional development strategy of¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥6workgroup on creative industries, 2002, creative industries development strategy:propelling singaporeõs creative economy, singapore, september, p. 5.7for core copyright industries only.8these numbers represent the percentages of gdp for different years between 1997and 2001, though the fundamental point remains validñthe creative industries represent a significant segment in each nationõs economy. see economic review committee,government of singapore, 2002, òthe rise of the creative cluster,ó creative industriesdevelopment strategy, p. 5. available online at <http://www.erc.gov.sg/pdf/ercsvscrechapter1.pdf>.9industry clusters are often defined as òconcentrations of competing, collaboratingand interdependent companies and institutions which are connected by a system ofmarket and nonmarket linksó (see definition of the department of trade and industry,united kingdom, available online at <http://www.dti.gov.uk/clusters/>).beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology, productivity, and creativity21encouraging creative industry clusters.10 in the united kingdom, forexample, each of the ten regional development agencies has focusedon the creative industries as a growth sector, and each local authorityis mandated by the department of culture, media and sport to produce a development strategy for the creative industries.11it is important to recognize that these creative clusters do not justconsist of large firms. they also encompass independent artists anddesigners, numerous small businesses, cultural institutions such asgalleries and performing arts centers, and educational institutions.many of those involved with the creative industries may play multipleroles; for example, artists and designers may combine independentpractice with teaching, and employees of large firms may òmoonlightówith small practices of their own.but the creative industries also have a strategic importance thatextends beyond regional economic development. in a progressivelyinterdependent world where culture tempers and inflames politics aswell as markets, strong creative industries are a strategic asset to anation; the predominance of hollywood movies, japanese video games,and swiss administration of fifa soccer are forms of soft power thathave global, albeit subtle, effects, particularly in countries whose bulging youth populations have access to television and the internet. movies, music videos, fashion, and design foster aspirations in the developed and developing world. it matters that teenagers in chinañorpakistanñidolize michael jordan. the ability to generate a culturalagenda via the arts, design, or media is a form of deep, pervasiveinfluence and is as integral to global leadership as trade policy ordiplomatic relationships.12 globally available cultural products serveas a kind of common social currency in an increasingly fractured andfractious world. to that extent, the reach and robustness of a nationõscreative practices can constitute a form of global leadershipñwhilealso, of course, potentially attracting charges of cultural imperialism.a nationõs creative practices can also provide valuable visibility andbranding, as with italian and finnish design.creative clustersencompassindependentartists anddesigners,numerous smallbusinesses,culturalinstitutions suchas galleries andperforming artscenters, andeducationalinstitutions.10see chapter 7 for further discussion.11see department of culture, media and sport, creative industries program, 2000,creative industries: the regional dimension, report of the regional issues working group,february. available online at <http://www.culture.gov.uk/creative/index.html>.12see shalini venturelli, 2001, from the information economy to the creative economy:moving culture to the center of international public policy, center for arts and culture,washington, d.c., available online at <http://www.culturalpolicy.org/pdf/venturelli.pdf>; and joseph s. nye, 1999, òthe challenge of soft power: the propounder of this novel concept looks at lloyd axworthyõs diplomacy,ó time, february 22, available online at <http://www.time.com/time/magazine/intl/article/0,9171,110799022221163,00.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity22interactions among domainsof creative activityfor some purposes it is useful to distinguish scientific, technological, economic, and cultural creativity, as discussed above. but it is alsoimportant to emphasize that these domains are often tightly coupled,and that activity in one may depend on parallel activities in others.this committee was charged and constituted to focus primarily oncreative practices in the arts and design, and their intersections withinformation technology, but it recognized that the coupling to otherdomains of creative practice could not be ignored.figure 1.1 illustrates the approximate nature of that couplingñeach broad domain of creative practice in twoway interaction withevery other. reflecting a national academies/computer science andtelecommunications board perspective, technological creativity isshown at the center of the diagram, which of course could also beredrawn to show any of the other domains at the center.consider, for example, some important interactions of technological creativity with other domains. scientific discovery sometimes drivestechnological invention, but conversely, the pursuit of technologicalinnovation often suggests scientific questions and ideas. similarly,technologicalcreativityeconomiccreativityscientificcreativityculturalcreativityfigure 1.1 domains of creative activity.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology, productivity, and creativity23entrepreneurial energy may motivate engineering and product innovations, but such innovations may also demand creative strategies forsuccessfully bringing inventions to the market. and newly inventedtechnologies may produce bursts of artistic and design creativityñaswith renaissance perspective, photography, film, radio, television,and computer graphicsñwhile the work of artists and designers maygenerate desire for technological innovations, shape the directions oftechnological investigations, and provide critical perspectives.the additional reciprocal relationships indicated by figure 1.1 areno less worthy of note. in the creative industries, innovative entrepreneurs develop new ways to produce and distribute creative products,while creative production often demands of businesses and institutions (such as museums, cultural foundations, and art and designschools) new distribution, curatorial, preservation, and other strategies. there is a subtle, complex, but undoubtedly important (in someperiods, at least) relationship between the intellectual frontiers of thecreative arts and the sciences. and there are even crossrelationshipsbetween scientific and economic innovationñas when physics ph.d.smoved to wall street and brought with them new tools and methodsfor the financial industry.13innovative design is often situated precisely at the intersection oftechnologically and culturally creative practices. on the one hand,designers are frequently avid to exploit technological advances and toexplore their human potential. on the other, they typically have closeintellectual alliances with visual and other artists. and innovativedesign can yield high economic payoffs; firms such as apple, sony,audi, and target have differentiated themselves and in some casesturned themselves around through innovative design. volkswagenremade its image, and refreshed its reputation for witty innovation,with the revived and redesigned beetle. bilbao put itself on the worldmap by building the highly innovative bilbao guggenheim museumña work that embodies many technological innovations and at the sametime is engaged with the frontiers of the visual arts. south korea hasrecently had great success with a national policy of emphasizing quality and innovation in the design of consumer products.these various interrelationships suggest the importance not onlyof specialized loci of creativity, such as highly focused research laboratories and individual artistõs studios, but also of creativity clustersñcomplexes of interconnected activity, encompassing multiple domains,which provide opportunities and incentives for productive crossfertilization. thus a laboratory director might seek to establish a creative,crossdisciplinary cluster of individuals and research groups at thescale of a small organization; a research university provost might seeka creative cluster of departments, laboratories, and centers at the scale13see, for example, òphysicists graduate from wall street,ó the industrial physicist,december 1999, available online at <http://www.aip.org/tip/inphfa/vol5/iss6/p9.pdf>.innovativedesign is oftensituated preciselyat theintersection oftechnologicallyand culturallycreativepractices.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity24of a campus; regional planners might try to encourage formation ofcreative industrial and institutional clusters within their jurisdictions;and national strategists might seek to do so at even larger scales.the importance of such efforts is increasingly widely recognized,and a related research and policy literature is emerging: economistsexplore the proposition that òeconomic growth springs from betterrecipes, not just from more cookingóñthat is, from the generation andapplication of innovative and creative ideas;14 planners analyze òcreative citiesó and òcreative regionsó that attract and retain talent, andthat provide environments in which creative practices flourish;15 theidea of a òcreative classó has quickly become popular;16 and the possibility of shifting from òthe information economyó to òthe creativeeconomyó has become a hot topic among policy makers from scotlandto hong kong.17the roles of informationtechnologyfigure 1.2 shows a more specialized version of figure 1.1, inwhich information technology replaces technological creativity at thecenter. information technology has important relationships to creativepractices in other domains. it benefits enormously from basic scientificand mathematical advances, and in return, it provides scientists andmathematicians with powerful new tools and methods. it providesentrepreneurs with a stream of opportunities to develop and marketnew products and services, while benefiting from the research anddevelopment investment that the prospect of successful commercialization motivates. it provides artists and designers with whole newfields of creative practice, such as computer music and digital imaging, together with tools for pursuing their practices in both new andestablished fields, while benefiting from the inventive and criticalinsights that artists and designers can bring to it. increasingly, thecommittee suggests, information technology constitutes the glue thatholds clusters of creative activity together.the effectiveness of information technology as glue is enhancedby its extraordinary capacity to apply the same concepts and techniques across many different fields. once content is reduced to bits, itdoesnõt much matter whether it represents text, music, scanned im14see paul m. romer, 1993, òeconomic growth,ó the fortune encyclopedia of economics, david r. henderson, ed., warner books, new york.15see charles landry, 2000, the creative city: a toolkit for urban innovators, earthscan,london.16see richard florida, 2002, the rise of the creative class, basic books, new york.17see john howkins, 2002, the creative economy: how people make money from ideas,penguin books, london.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology, productivity, and creativity25ages, threedimensional (3d) computeraided design (cad) models,video, or scientific data; the same techniques, devices, and channelscan be used for storing and transporting it. once you have a stream ofdigital data, whatever the source, you can apply the same techniquesto process it. once you have an efficient sorting algorithm, you can useit to order vast files of scientific data or to arrange polygons (digitalobjects) for hiddensurface removal in rendering a 3d scene. once youhave a library of software objects, you can use those objects as buildingblocks to quickly construct specialized software tools for use in manydifferent domains.furthermore, information technology can support the formationof nongeographic clusters of creative activity. in the past, such clusters depended heavily on geographic proximity for the intense facetoface interaction and highvolume information transfer that they required. (if you were in the movie business you wanted to be inhollywood, if you were in publishing you wanted to be in new york,and so on.) distance is not dead, and these things still matter, butefficient digital telecommunication now supports new types of clusters. architectural projects, for example, are now routinely carried outby geographically distributed team members who exchange cad filesover the internet and meet by videoconferencingñwith the advantagethat specialized talent and expertise can be drawn from a global ratherthan local pool. longdistance electronic linkages between local clusters, such as that between the film production cluster in hollywoodand the postproduction cluster in londonõs soho, are also becomingincreasingly important.businesspracticesinformationtechnologyscientificpracticesculturalpracticesfigure 1.2 information technology as glue.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity26and the growing integration of digital storage and processingtechnology with networking technology and sensor technology is evenfurther strengthening the role of information technology as glue. inmany domains, cycles of production, distribution, and consumptioncan now be endtoend digital. for example, the production and distribution of a photographic image used to entail a silverbased chemicalprocess for capture, halftoning followed by a mechanical process toprint large numbers of copies, and physical transportation to distribute those copies; now, capture can be accomplished by means of achargecoupled device (ccd) array in a digital camera, replicationbecomes a matter of applying software to copy a digital file, anddistribution through the global digital network can follow instantly.18finally, many argue that information technology is, by its verynature, a powerful amplifier of creative practices. because softwarecan readily be copied and disseminated, and because there can be anunlimited number of simultaneous users, software supports the dissemination, application, and creative recombination of innovations ona massive scaleñprovided, of course, that intellectual property arrangements do not unduly inhibit creative work. much of the currentdebate about intellectual property and information technology focuses on questions of how best to support, encourage, and rewardcreative practices.19in summary, information technology now plays a critical role inthe formation and ongoing competitiveness of clusters of creativeactivityñboth geographic clusters and more distributed clusters heldtogether by electronic interconnection and interaction. it is an important driver of the expanding creative industries. and, due to severalfactors, its role as glue is strengthening. first, the generalizability ofdigital tools and techniques across multiple domains makes themparticularly efficient and effective in this role; they can displacepredigital tools and techniques, as in the cases of cad displacingdrawing boards and drafting instruments and digital imaging displacing silverbased photography. second, the increasingly effective integration of diverse digital technologies is producing efficient, largescale, multipurpose production and distribution systems that caneffectively serve the creative industries. third, these systems supportthe formation of nongeographic clusters of creativity that can drawon global talent pools. and finally, the amplification effects that areinherent to information technology are likely to have strong (sometimes unexpected) multiplier effects; they may unleash waves of scientific and mathematical, technological, economic, artistic, and culturalcreativity.18ccd arrays consist of tiny light sensors that encode scenes as sets of intensityvalues. the larger the array, the finer the resolution of the picture. the development ofdigital cameras has been driven, generation by generation, by the release of successivelylarger ccd arrays.19see chapter 7 for an articulation of the important role played by intellectualproperty issues in information technology and creative practices.many argue that information technology is, by its very nature, a powerful amplifier of creative practices.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology, productivity, and creativity27the race for creativity in anetworked worldit seems to this committee that there is an emerging, global race toestablish effective, sustainable clusters of itenabled creative activityat local, regional, and national scalesñand at even larger scales, likethat of the european union. a number of studies and initiatives aredirected at this goal, such as the seoul digital media city project(south korea),20 the bridges international consortium on collaboration in art and technology (canada),21 the massachusetts museumof contemporary art (united states), the kitchenõs national art andtechnology network (united states),22 and the national endowmentfor science, technology and the arts (united kingdom).23 the rewards are high; such clusters are engines of economic growth, ofenhanced quality of life, and of cultural and political influenceñthatis, of soft power. success in launching and sustaining them dependson capacity to attract and retain creative talent, on establishing theconditions and incentives necessary for that talent to flourish, andñincreasinglyñon the effective exploitation of information technology.in the following pages, the committee focuses specifically on clusters of creative activity in the arts and design and their interactionswith information technology, as illustrated in figure 1.3ñwhich issimply a subset, but a crucial one, of figure 1.2. the interactionsbetween these two domains are important not only for their mutuallybeneficial effects, but also because they help to energize larger systemsof interconnected creative activity. this report provides more detailedanalyses of the conditions needed for creativity in a networked worldand recommends strategies for establishing and sustaining successfulclusters of itrelated creative activity in the arts and design. it asks thefollowing questions:1.how can information technology open up new domains of artand design practice and enable new types of works?2.how can art and design raise important new questions forinformation technology and help to push forward research and product development agendas in computer science and information technology?¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥20see <http://www.dmc.seoul.kr/english/why/overview.jsp>.21see <http://www.banffcentre.ca/bnmi/bridges/>.22see <http://www.thekitchen.org>.23additional information about the massachusetts museum of contemporary artand other initiatives is given in chapters 7 and 8.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity283.how can successful collaborations of artists, designers, andinformation technologists be established?4.how can universities, research laboratories, corporations, museums, arts groups, and other organizations best encourage and support work at the intersections of the arts, design, and informationtechnology?5.what are the effects on information technology and creativepractices work of institutional constraints and incentives, such as intellectual property arrangements, funding policies and strategies,archiving, preservation and access systems, and validation and recognition systems?roadmap for this reportthis chapter provides an introduction to the world of informationtechnology and creative practices (itcp) and outlines the benefits tothe economy and society from encouraging and supporting work inthis new domain. chapter 2 explores the systemic nature of creativityand how multiskilled individuals and collaborative groups pursuework. various factors, from differences in communication style andvocabulary to evolving work environments, influence how this workis carried out. information technology is the focus of chapters 3 and 4.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥businesspracticesinformationtechnologyscientificpracticescreative artsand designinformation technologyandcreative practicesfigure 1.3 information technology and creative practices.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information technology, productivity, and creativity29chapter 3 analyzes the role of it in supporting itcp work and offersobservations for the future design of improved it tools that wouldprovide better support of itcp. this role for itñin service to otherdisciplinesñis a wellappreciated one. chapter 4 challenges this traditional role to consider how the art and design influences of itcp canhelp to advance the discipline of computer science. chapters 5 and 6discuss the venues for conducting, supporting, and displaying itcpwork. a wide range of venuesñfrom specialized centers for itcp tomuseums and corporationsñis explored in chapter 5; itcprelatedprograms and curricula in schools, colleges, and universities are covered in chapter 6. institutional and policy issues such as intellectualproperty concerns, digital archiving and preservation, validation andrecognition structures, and regional planning are presented in chapter 7. in chapter 8, the policies and practices for funding itcp workare described and analyzed. the discussions from the chapters aresynthesized and findings and recommendations are articulated in thereportõs opening òsummary and recommendationsó chapter. althoughthese findings and recommendations are directed to particular decision makers such as university administrators, officers of fundingagencies, or directors of cultural institutions, many of the ideas areapplicable to multiple decision makers, given that itcp transcendscurrent institutional, disciplinary, and professional boundaries.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥eople are the engines of creative practice. to work withinthe realm of information technology and creative practices (itcp), individuals or groups need to be fluent inmultiple disciplines. some individuals can simultaneouslymaster multiple subject domains (modernday leonardo da vincis) asrequired, whereas others participate in collaborative groups of peoplewith complementary or synergistic expertise and skills. each approachpresents its own set of advantages and challenges. each approach alsobenefits from resources such as training tools and suitable workingconditions. this chapter explores how human creative capabilities canbe accessed, developed, and applied to itcp work.the first section briefly reviews what it means to be fluent in theitcp context and outlines the role that individuals and groups withsuch abilities play in producing itcp work. the second section discusses, and explores how institutions might enhance, the two basicapproaches to work in itcp: individuals alone (e.g., an independentartist), and collaborative groups of various types (e.g., a team developing a video game). the third section discusses key challenges that arisein crossdisciplinary collaborations. the final section outlines resourcesthat can support the human capability to create meaningfully.what makes people creativewhat makes one action ordinary and another creative? part of theanswer is personality, although there has been surprisingly little studyof creativity by psychologists.1 research points to a tendency for1a survey of psychological research on creativity, intended to motivate more attention, can be found in dean keith simonton, 2000, òcreativity: cognitive, personal,developmental, and social aspects,ó american psychologist 55(1): 151158.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices31creative people òto be independent, nonconformist, unconventional,even bohemian, and . . . to have wide interests, greater openness tonew experiences, a more conspicuous behavioral and cognitive flexibility, and more risktaking boldness.ó2 part of the answer is behavioral, including the extent to which deliberation and skill are involved.deliberation involves making choices about things that matter. òfasting,ó nobel laureate amartya sen has famously written, òis not thesame thing as being forced to starve. having the option of eatingmakes fasting what it is: choosing not to eat when one could haveeaten.ó3 other factors relate to context, such as the nature of oneõsexperiences, notably ò(a) diversifying experiences that help weakenthe constraints imposed by conventional socialization and (b) challenging experiences that help strengthen a personõs capacity to persevere in the face of obstaclesó4ñboth of which are characteristic of anemergent field in general and itcp in particular. interestingly, a factorin achieving diversifying and challenging experiences may be culturaldiversity; there is evidence that exposing a culture to alien influencesand experiencing marginality or even dissent are correlated with creativity.5 more generally, the start of a creative act is the escape fromone range of assumptionsña contextñoften with the aid of anothercontext seemingly at odds with the first but that provides a new wayof viewing what we already thought we understood. the arts do thisfor it, and it does this for the arts.6creativity can be linked to tools, which have been a constantfactor in the arts as well as in science and engineering. because itcp isdefined with reference to a set of toolsñitñit calls for an understanding of creativity as human complements to digital capabilities: theopportunity, knowledge, and skill to make disciplined judgments abouthow and when to use or not use those capabilities. although novicescan now enter many fields through interfacesñprovided by softwarepackagesñthat encapsulate and parameterize aspects of specializedtrades and crafts that previously took lifetimes to learn, learning to usea tool does not of itself make one a skilled practitioner.there is a difference between basic functional knowhow (e.g.,knowing a few words of a foreign language) and higherlevel skill, or2simonton, 2000, òcreativity,ó p. 153.3amartya sen, 1999, development as freedom, alfred a. knopf, new york, p. 75. thecommittee is indebted to mansell (2001) and garnham (1997) for their readings of sen interms of communication and media policy. see robin mansell, 2001, ònew media andthe power of networks,ó first dixons public lecture, london, october 23, availableonline at <http://www.lse.ac.uk/depts/media/rmlecture.pdf>; and nicholasgarnham, 1997, òamartya senõs ôcapabilitiesõ approach to the evaluation of welfare:its application to communications,ó javnostthe public 4(4): 2534.4simonton, 2000, òcreativity,ó p. 153.5simonton, 2000, òcreativity,ó p. 155.6allucqu‘re rosanne stone, in the war of desire and technology at the close of themechanical age (mit press, cambridge, mass., 1995), describes how technology canprovide prostheses, expanding and enhancing oneõs interaction with the world.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity32fluency.7 previous studies of fluency in the use of it have distinguished between general intellectual capabilities; itspecific but deviceindependent generic concepts; and a more contingent class ofspecific, devicedependent technical skills. in being fluent with information technology,8 important generic it conceptual capabilities areidentified, including algorithmic thinking, facility with principles ofknowledge representation, and adaptability to change.9 these conceptual capabilities represent a level of understanding that goes farbeyond how to use a given software package. relatively few artistsmay pursue true it fluency, since artists usually learn what they needto know, appropriate the necessary technology and materials, andmake their art, but some movement in that direction appears important for itcp.10early itcp has been associated with artistsõ frustrations with it,and ease of use for nontechnically expert or nonfluent artists anddesigners is a concern. yet highly creative performance by artists anddesigners has been associated with tools that are somewhat difficult touse,11 especially when the alternative is ease of use achieved throughpreprogrammed and therefore limiting or constraining features. creative people always struggle against the limits of their mediumñwood splits, musical instruments have limits to pitch and volume, andso on. the challenges presented by it have helped to stimulate somekinds of art and designñand artistsõ responses to those challenges,from seeking better tools to exploiting the flaws in or breaking thoseavailable as part of their art, should help to stimulate development ofnew forms of it.relatively few artists may pursue true it fluency, butsome movement in that direction appears importantfor itcp.7an emphasis on individual talent and resourcefulness is, of course, commonplacein the traditional arts. a novice musician can pick up an instrument and make sounds.skilled musicians, though, can make bad instruments sound sweet, and they alone havethe virtuosity to òpossessó great ones.8computer science and telecommunications board, national research council,1999, being fluent with information technology, national academy press, washington,d.c.9paul david, in a similar vein, discusses the importance of generic learning abilities,which must go beyond the acquisition of a specific repertoire of techniques, or even theability to cope with a need for constant updating of technical knowledge, to a òcapacityto understand and anticipate change.ó see paul david and dominique foray, 2002, òanintroduction to the economy of the knowledge society,ó international social sciencejournal (unesco) 171:9.10when artists try to learn skills for their art they are very well motivated. they seethe skills as a way to do an excellent job, to do exciting work (they like the results), andto distinguish themselves from other artists. they may become interested in the intrinsicqualities of the it, but this is more unusual. (bill alschuler, california institute of thearts, 2002, personal communication.)11of course, artists and designers do not like more difficult tools per se. instead, thecommittee is acknowledging the usual tradeoff between flexibility and advanced features with preprogrammed solutions and ease of use. for harold cohen, artistsõ toolsand instruments have to be òdifficult enough to stimulate a sufficient level of creativeperformance, and you donõt do that with something thatõs easy to use.ó for furtherdiscussion of this point, see chapter 3 in pamela mccorduck, 1990, aaronõs code: metaart, artificial intelligence, and the work of harold cohen, w.h. freeman, new york.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices33when people or groups are fluent in it and arts and designdisciplines, they may work at either of two intersections of information technology and creative practices. the first involves the use ofcomputational technologies as a medium for cultural practices (i.e.,viewing it as providing tools in support of the arts and design fields),stressing the continuities between it and older technologies and theneed for a malleable cultural informatics12that remains attuned totraditional practices such as reading, singing, painting, or dancing.the second stresses art as a form of research or knowledge productionthat is interwoven with the practice of research in it. there is a lothappening at both intersections, and, despite their superficial differences, the intersections are synergistic and might even be described asflip sides of the same phenomenon. these intersections serve as thebases for the committeeõs examination in chapters 3 and 4.in seeking to understand itcp and the people who do this work,the committee found it useful to examine not only the content of thework involved, but also the details of how it is organized, both sociallyand institutionally. as is further discussed in chapters 5 and 6, distinctive new institutional structures have appeared over the past century, combining studio or atelier creation with researchoriented knowledge production in educational, cultural, scientific, and businesscontexts. all these institutional contexts attempt to balance and support a variety of interests simultaneously. this hybridity is apparent inthe shifting roles individuals play both alone and in teams in suchsettings, be it as artist, designer, researcher, theoretician, entrepreneur,or technician. a similar hybridity was also evident in the artifacts thatthe committee considered best to exemplify the intersections of it andcreative practiceñrather than material objects, they tended to be processes (e.g., interactive works) with social and material aspects, whichspan boundaries and can be understood in different ways dependingon social context.these observations correspond closely to the social model of creativity proposed by mihaly csikszentmihalyi. in this model, creativityis a threepart social system made up of individuals (or groups ofindividuals), knowledge domains, and institutional structures. as illustrated in figure 2.1, individuals (or groups) produce new variationson inherited conventions stored in domains. these novelties are promoted or filtered in the field of social institutions, which select thegenres, theories, and technologies that become the new conventionsfor the continuously updated knowledge domains, and that thus arerecycled to form new sources for individual creativity. the field component implies that òcolleagues are essential to the realization of indi12cultural informatics is òa practice of technical development that includes a deepunderstanding of the relationship between computer science research and broaderculture,ó according to phoebe sengers (òpractices for machine culture: a case study ofintegrating artificial intelligence and cultural theory,ó surfaces, vol. viii, 1999).when people orgroups are fluentin it and arts anddesign disciplines,they may work ateither of twointersections ofinformationtechnology andcreative practices.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity34¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥vidual creativity, . . . because creativity does not exist until thosemaking up the field decide to recognize that a given creative productrepresents an original contribution to the domain.ó13 (see òvalidationand recognition structuresó in chapter 7.)framed in terms of this social model of creativity as a dynamicsystem connecting people, institutions, and knowledge domains, thecreative core common to it and the arts becomes easier to identify.creativity results from the interaction of these three systems. andbecause the systems perspective underscores the importance of a community of practice to sustaining creativity, it also demonstrates theimportance of understanding what it means to foster and sustain acommunity of practice, a goal of this report.it may be helpful to consider an example. the work of karimrashid in industrial design is an illustrative case (see box 2.1). theboundarypushing influence of itcp work on its fields of origin is arecurrent theme in the projects discussed in this chapter.how creative people workthe functional integration of the arts and design fields and itdepends on who is doing what work and how. the human resourcessocial systemculturefieldsocial organization of domaindomainsymbol systempersongenetic pooland personal experiencesretainsselected variantstransmits structuredinformation and actionproduces variation and changefigure 2.1 a systems view of creativity. this map shows the interrelationships of the three systems that jointly determinethe development of a creative idea, object, or action. the individual takes information provided by the culture andtransforms it, and if the change is deemed valuable by a field, it will be included in the domain, thus providing a newstarting point for the next generation of creative persons. the actions of all three systems are necessary for creativity tooccur. source: derived from mihaly csikszentmihalyi, 1987, òa systems approach to creativity,ó p. 326 in the natureof creativity. contemporary psychological perspectives, r. sternberg, ed., cambridge university press, cambridge, u.k.13simonton, 2000, òcreativity,ó p. 155.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices35box 2.1information technology and creative practices in an industrial contextindustrial design has been largely recreated by computer software, from threedimensional computeraided design and manufacturing (cad/cam) packages to databases that list new grades and alloys of metaland plastic, as well as factories themselves. products, from automobiles to can openers, have beentransformed (it is no accident that consumer goods started getting curvy and ergonomic at around the sametime that buildings did). but the process of industrial design has also changed fundamentally, because the timeand cost of prototyping have been radically reduced. designers can generate multiple concept models,honing them in an iterative, evolutionary fashion. but beyond prototyping, information technology has madeit possible for industrial designers to engage creatively on a different levelñat the level of the manufacturingprocess itself.an exemplar of this innovation is karim rashid, a highly acclaimed industrial designer whose workincludes everything from wastepaper baskets at bed bath and beyond to furniture in the new york museumof modern artõs design collection.1 rashidõs experiments with product manufacturing are possible becausemodern mass production is increasingly mediated by software. for instance, the apparatus that producedrashidõs curving metal napkin rings for manufacturer namb” (figure 2.1.1) is controlled by software thatregulates the circumference and length of each napkin ring. by programming the apparatus to vary theseparameters randomly, within a range, rashid was able to create thousands of unique objects, as opposedto thousands of identical objects. the idea of massproduced oneofakind productsñpostmodernmanufacturingñis possible because one talented individual can bridge the worlds of engineering andconsumer aesthetics, and because the technology exists to do so. in the process, the creative professionalõsrole becomes more abstract. it is less about designing objects, and more about designing the process thatmakes the objects, including the parameters that transcend the designerõs direct control. the end resultconflates the uniqueness of handcraft with the scale of industrial production.1further explanation and examples of rashidõs work can be found online at <http://www.karimrashid.com>.figure 2.1.1 napkin rings. photo by dick patrick.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity36can be obtained through the broadening of individual skill sets andthrough collaborations. some individuals involved in the arts anddesign are indeed expanding their knowledge and skills related to it,and, perhaps less obviously, some computer scientists and engineersare acquiring knowledge and skills in the arts and design (there aredistinctive bases in such subdisciplines as graphics and computermusic). collaborations, for all their difficulties, are frequently the preferred and sometimes the required approach, because they demandfar less individual investment in learning and therefore accelerate theprocess of experimentation in combining different kinds of expertise(which is especially important in the early stages of exploration because of the uncertain return from investing time in learning a newarea). another factor arguing for collaboration as a stimulus is thetendency of some crossdisciplinary work, in the absence of a diverseteam, to ossify within one discipline or the other. collaborations mayinvolve anywhere from two to hundreds of people and often areinspired and supported by nonprofit organizations or commercialenterprises. obviously, scale can change the experience and outcomeof a collaboration enormously, but while it may seem obvious tosuggest that òart,ó being associated with individuals, requires fewness, the networked nature of modern it may change that intuition.individuals with diverse expertise andskillsthere are some unusually talented people who can do it all, or doenough to create work that straddles more than one discipline andcreates new skill sets. this approach has a unique beauty and economy;as one reviewer of this report suggested, an individualõs work tends tohave a conceptual wholeness, whereas collaborations may produceòcamelsñhorses designed by committees.ó many artists prefer themodel of the multiskilled individual as the embodiment of the òmovefast and travel lightó style of work, which allows for a degree ofindependence in thinking and action that larger collaborative modelsmay not always offer. people who wish to diverge from the political oraesthetic mainstream may want both complete control over their products and independence from external funding and its possible contentrequirements. or they may be invested in developing a specific formof personal expression or crafting a concept or theory that they wish todetermine independently. these individuals may struggle with theabsence of standards in some ways but are able to make their ownrules and engage cuttingedge technologies in a personal way to transform an aspect of the world.there are many models for this style of working, ranging fromindividuals taking various approaches to the visual arts to novelists tothe independent inventor. growing numbers of artists are becomingskilled in software programming or hardware development, perhapsas a way to maintain a life of the imagination without interferencemany artists prefer the òmove fast and travel lightó style of work, which allows for a degree of independencethat largercollaborativemodels may notalways offer.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices37from a client, patron, or coworker. the acquisition of such skills is, ofcourse, an implicit acceptance of their value to artistic pursuits. somepeople, for instance, can write both computer code and music compositions or turn their code into sculpture. see box 2.2. such artists tendto be internally driven by artistic impulses or research interests, although they may benefit from institutional support.one beneficiary of such support is michael mateas, who, at thetime he described his work for the committee,14 was a research fellowin the studio for creative inquiry (an òart think tankó) at carnegiemellon university (cmu) as well as a doctoral student in computerscience.15 mateas combines cultural production with artificial intelligence (ai), two activities that normally have very different goals. ashe described it, cultural production is interested in poetics (the negotiation of meaning between the artist and audience), artistic abstraction, and audience participation and approval, whereas ai is concerned with task competence, realism, and objectivity. he engages inòexpressive ai,ó building novel architectures, techniques, and approaches. one of his pieces is terminal time, an interactive work thatconstructs documentary videos in real time based on both real historical events and the biases inferred from audience feedback.16 terminaltime encompasses a new model of ideological reasoning and a newarchitecture for story generation, combining the technical capabilitiesof it and the dramatic story structure concepts of the arts and humanities in a novel way.17 in mateasõs view, the project has influenced boththe technical research agenda and arts practiceñthus fitting nicelyinto the social model of creativity described above. see box 2.3.individuals who wish to become proficient in multiple fields faceat least two formidable challenges. one is the need to deal with enormous and increasing knowledge bases. trying to remain uptodate inonly one field is demanding enough for most people; the 20th centurywitnessed tremendous growth in knowledge and a proliferation ofdisciplinary specialization and narrow professional certification, witha corresponding growth in support structures consisting of professional associations, conferences, periodicals, and curricula. the adventof it, especially the internet, has further fueled this trend, especiallyby facilitating communication among those with niche interests, thuspromoting the establishment and maintenance of narrow specialtiesand interests. even individuals who already possess both artistic andtechnical skills may need to learn new ones or find specialists withcompatible aesthetic and intellectual views for particular projects.14he briefed the committee at its january 2001 meeting held at stanford university.see chapter 6 for further thoughts from michael mateas.15as discussed further in chapter 6, cmu seems to be unusually supportive of crossdisciplinary activities.16for further information about terminal time, see <http://www2.cs.cmu.edu/~michaelm/>.17for further discussion, see michael mateas, steffi domike, and paul vanouse, 1999,òterminal time: an ideologically biased history machine,ó aisb quarterly: specialissue on creativity in the arts and sciences 102 (summer/autumn):3643. individuals who wish to become proficient in multiple fields face at least two formidable challenges: enormous and increasing knowledge bases . . . and lack of a broad institutional support structure.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity38box 2.2combining sculpture, software, and hardware skillsjohn simon makes objectbased sculptures that combine the skills of painting, sculpture, computerhardware construction, and software development. the work is based on algorithmically generated andintricately cut interfaces between sheets of acrylic plasticña group of paintinglike objects on a wall, withconstantly changing patterns on liquidcrystal display (lcd) screens mounted on a structure that is a crossbetween a painting and a sculpture. see figure 2.2.1. the software varies the patterns on the screen so thatthey never repeat. the òpaintingó is constantly new and constantly changing. simonõs work is in the collectionof the solomon r. guggenheim museum and the print collection at the new york public library.simon on his approach and motivation:i take the screen and the processor from mostly used laptop computers, which i get from ebay or dealers.i am currently using apple g3 powerbooks with 14.1inch screens. i remove the case and mount the lcd screento a plastic housing of my own design. the cpu [central processing unit] is mounted on the back of the housing.i install my own software, which runs automatically when the computer is turned on. the images on the screenare constantly changing. this is a way to write software directly for a processor and not have it compete forattention with other things on your desktop. i sell these works through the sandra gering gallery, with whichiõve had a longtime association. iõm also using a computercontrolled laser to cut and engrave materials like acrylic.i am interested in how the lines and shapes from my algorithmic tools can be manifest in material form.11see <http://www.creativecapital.org> and <http://www.numeral.com/articles/atkins/decodingdigitalart>.figure 2.2.1 a work by john simon. photo courtesy ofjohn simon.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices39a second major challenge is the lack of a broad institutional support structure. after decades of experimentation and practice, newhybrid fields are emerging, but with lags in financial support.18 limited support, of course, results in limited growth for these particularfields. this is not necessarily bad, because the overall pattern of multiple hybridization results in a number of different intersections of thearts and design with computer science and engineeringñdifferentschools of itcp thought and different kinds of activityñwhich together span the range from the fine arts through design and craft.box 2.3terminal timeterminal time is a massaudience interactive work that constructs documentary histories in responseto audience feedback. the result is similar in style to a public broadcasting service documentary, except thatthe software constructs the documentary in real time, based on input from the audience. thus, radicallydifferent endings are possible.the work is produced in the following way. after a 2minute introduction, the audience is asked threemultiplechoice questions. the level of applause from the audience determines the òcorrectó answer to eachquestion, with the loudest response winning. the answers to this first set of questions are used to createa model of the audienceõs ideological perspective, which is then used to create a 6minute video cliprepresenting history from 1000 to 1750 a.d. after the first clip is presented, the process is repeated twoadditional times, each resulting in the construction of another 6minute clip, the first representing 1750ð1950 and the second 1950ð2000. the result is a film constructed in real time. one of the creators of terminaltime likens it to a genie running amuck, in that the machine infers biases from the audienceõs responses andthen constructs a reinterpretation of history based on exaggerating these biases.the software running the terminal time engine uses an artificial intelligence (ai) architectureconsisting of five parts: a knowledge base, a collection of ideology goal trees (goals held by differentideologues), a collection of rhetorical devices (narrative glue for connecting events), a natural languagegenerator, and a media sequencer. stored in the knowledge base are thousands of terms associated withhistorical events from the period 1000 to 2000 a.d. based on an audienceõs response to each series ofquestions, the goal trees select historical events from the knowledge base and slant them to accomplish therhetorical goals of the currently active ideologue. next, the slanted events are connected together into astory by searching for a sequence of events that can be connected together with the rhetorical devices. thenatural language generator then produces the text (based on the connectedtogether events) that will serveas the voiceover for the documentary. finally, the system selects and edits together video and audio clipsto create the finished documentary. to keep the audience engaged beyond the asking of questions, terminaltime uses a thematic sequence of rising action, crisis, climax, falling action, and denouement for eachcomplete film.cultural productions such as terminal time help to synthesize the metaphors of traditional ai, in whichthe emphasis is often on construction (e.g., to accomplish a particular goal), and art, in which the focus tendsto be on conversation (e.g., to create a lessdeterministic cultural product). clearly, this type of culturalproduction would not be possible without information technology, and computer scientists could notgenerate this type of content without some knowledge from the arts and humanities concerning how tostructure drama.18see chapter 6 for an extended discussion.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity40multiple hybridization also militates against the institutionalizing oftruly creative practice, as any institution formulated to support someparticular conception of creative practice will necessarily curtail movement beyond that paradigm (and increasingly, as the institution becomes established).the growth in crossdisciplinary computinginthearts curricula,which takes many forms, is likely to yield increasing numbers ofmultiskilled individuals capable of innovating in both technical andartistic/artsrelated fields (although at least for a while, their impactsmay be concentrated on the arts side, which appears to be morereceptive to this type of crossfertilization than does computer science). funding may remain a chronic problem, however, for professionals who work (either alone or in groups) outside the commercialsphere.19 the result is a certain amount of untapped creative energyor underemployment, which limits cultural production to a narrowerbandwidth than otherwise might be possible with more generousfunding. this situation constrains the breadth and spectrum of thetechnical syntax of itcp: absent more funding for more experimentalwork, itcp may become centered in a commercial, material core. itmay be more pronounced in craft and in design than in art, per se, orfundamental technical research.successful collaborationscollaborations in itcp may differ from other kinds of collaborations in that they may well not be symmetrical. given the differencesin training, objectives, and culture, it may be important to articulatedifferent goals between collaborators. a project can be successful andsynergistic even if the differing participants have completely differentgoals for the fruits of the outcome of the collaboration. for example, aparticular tool can be used in one way by a scientist and in anotherway by an artistñbut they may develop the tool together (e.g., see thelistening post project described below). further, quite different typesof relationships between the two communities are possible, each ofwhich embodies different values and therefore requires different techniques in order to achieve success and devise methods for measuringthat success.collaborations are intense, not superficial, relationships. less intense forms of relationships include communication (the sharing ofinformation) and cooperation (in which participants influence the decisions of other participants in a common effort). collaborations maytake place in various sizes and forms, ranging from a small project(e.g., academic researchers who agree to work together) to continuingactivities within the framework of an institution created for such apurpose (e.g., the studiolaboratories discussed in chapter 5), to large19because many artistic endeavors are driven by contentñartists have their ownvision and agendañrather than profit, they often struggle for support.absent morefunding for moreexperimentalwork, itcp maybecome centeredin a commercial,material core.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices41commercial enterprises with welldefined and profitmotivated products. what they share is the intention of creating something largerthan the sum of their parts. as once noted about the idea of artistsworking with engineers, òthe onetoone collaboration between twopeople from different fields always holds the possibility of producingsomething new and different that neither of them could have donealone.ó20noncommercial collaborations often cope with the same inadequate institutional support faced by multiskilled individuals. suchcollaborations may often involve people early in their careers who arenot yet highly invested in one field nor inhibited by professionalnorms. they have little to lose by pursuing work that the mainstreammight consider marginal. in some cases, radical ideas are the point.the critical art ensemble,21 for example, is a loosely organized collective of five artists who use òtactical mediaó to explore the intersectionsof art, technology, radical politics, and critical theory. starting out asstudents looking for a way of organizing that would provide enoughfinancial, hardware, and labor resources to have a cultural impact, thecollective now expands and contracts based on specific project needs;the members are geographically diverse and skilled across many disciplines. the results of the work take many shapesñweb sites, performances/installations, and booksñwhich emerge through a horizontal, distributed thinktank process of discussion and exchange amongparticipants. projects are funded through the participantsõ òstraightjobs,ó writing and speaking fees, and an occasional sponsor. 22some noncommercial collaborative projects are both inspired andsupported by institutions. an example is bar code hotel, an interactive installation by artist/programmer perry hoberman that wasamong nine virtual reality projects produced by the art and virtualenvironments project at the banff centre for the arts.23 in bar codehotel (see figure 2.2), òguestsó enter a room in which the walls arecovered with bar codes. the guests use a lightweight wand to activatethe black lines in the symbols and issue directives such as ògrowó oròfightó to virtual objects they create in a computerñsemiautonomousagents with their own personalities and behaviors. thus, the guestscreate a narrative that is partly predetermined and partly spontaneous; when the objects òdieó and the guests leave, the hotel returns to20from paul miller, 1998, òthe engineer as catalyst: billy klver on working withartists,ó ieee spectrum, july, available online at <http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/select/0798/kluv.html>. also see the work of project zero at the graduate school ofeducation at harvard university, available online at <http://www.pz.harvard.edu>.21see <http://www.criticalart.net/>.22see <http://www.lumpen.com/magazine/81/criticalartensembles.html>.23see <http://www.perryhoberman.com>. also see m.a. moser and w.d. macleod,eds., 1996, immersed in technology: art and virtual environments, mit press, cambridge,mass.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity42its original empty condition. bar code hotel was produced through ahybrid work model in which the artist developed the concept butaccomplished the work with help from others. the approach wassimilar to that of the film business (discussed below in this section) inthat it was hierarchical: a producer (banff) and a director (hoberman)worked with a team of programmers, sound designers, animators,and other technologists and equipment provided at the banff centre.24team members in such situations, while generally carrying out thedirectorõs concept, often provide essential ideas.a small but institutionally driven collaboration, this time involving participants acting as equals, produced the highly successful listening post, which monitors online activity in thousands of internetchat rooms and message boards and then converts these public conversations into a computergenerated opera. this project was instigated and supported by the brooklyn academy of music (bam),lucent technologiesõ nowdefunct pilot program in new media, andby the rockefeller foundation. a symposium was set up at whichartists and bell laboratories engineers and scientists each gave 5minute presentations on their work and then had the opportunity totalk with each other and find compatible collaborators. administration was handled by bam, which awarded $40,000 to each of three24for a comparison between hobermanõs directorial role in relation to programmersand other less partitioned team design in the banff centreõs art and virtualenvironmentõs project, see michael century and thierry bardini, 1999, òtowards atransformative setup: a case study of the art and virtual environments program atthe banff centre for the arts,ó leonardo 32 (4):257259.figure 2.2 bar code hotel enables guests to usecommands embedded in bar code symbols to interact with semiautonomous computergenerated objects and create a narrative. photo courtesy of perryhoberman.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices43projects. listening post was created by two peopleñmark hansen ofthe statistics and data mining research department at bell labs,whose crossdisciplinary research draws on numerical analysis, signalprocessing, and information theory, and ben rubin, an artist whoworks with interactive sound and image technologies. in listeningpost, bits of sampled text are presented as lightemitting diode readouts and variously pitched speech synthesized to form a screen ofvisual data accompanied by an òoperaó of spoken text. statisticalanalysis is used to organize the messages into topic clusters based ontheir content, tracking the ebb and flow of communication on the web.listening post demonstrates that collaborations not only draw onand assemble a wide variety of skills in newly developing areas ofdigital culture but also may alter creative practices themselvesñtheshape and nature of the way people work, and the way disciplines aredefined and categorized. the boundaries of practice here were alteredas a result of challenges that arose in the legal territories of intellectualproperty and licensing. rubin also explained that, as a result of thecollaboration, his òconceptual vocabulary has grown to include notions like clustering, smoothing, outliers, highdimensional spaces,probability distributions, and other terms that are a routine part ofmarkõs daytoday work.ó he added, òhaving glimpsed the worldthrough markõs eyes, i now hear sounds i would never have thoughtto listen for.ó hansen has expressed similar sentiments, saying: òthisinstallation, its physical presence as well as the underlying intellectualquestions, are new for me, as they are for ben. i suppose itõs the markof a genuine collaboration, that the participants are led in directionsthey could never have imagined apart.ó25at the other end of the spectrum of creative work models arelarger groupings. larger groupings tend to be structured according toeither the directorial model (which is more common among firstgeneration media artists) or the lowego model of distributed responsibility and anonymity (exemplified by the institute for applied autonomy). many groups have occupied some middle ground betweenthese two. longerrunning collaborations such as survival researchlaboratories have become a brand with a figurehead, a semipermanent core, and a tiered and fluctuating membership. larger, loosergroupings occur over the internet and have their own dynamics, allthe way up to large virtual communities.some of the more structured and betterfunded itcp collaborations are those found in commercial endeavors, such as segments ofthe architecture, movie production, and computer game industries. inthe film industry, for example, there is a clear hierarchy with welldefined jobs that form a pyramid of synergistic labor to carry out astandardized process of making a product with clearly defined parameters. such collaborations depend on conventions of practice, standard technologies, and infrastructures for distribution. these are alsocollaborationsnot only draw onand assemble awide variety ofskills in newlydevelopingareas of digitalculture but alsomay altercreativepracticesthemselves.25see <http://www.earstudio.com>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity44professional contexts in which collaborations are the norm, with builtin motivations and rewards for making the process succeed. a sharedgoal of generating some kind of product or service provides the extrinsic raison dõ’tre for collaboration, communication, and coordinationamong disparate types of people. the following descriptions of workmodels in these fields may provide some guidelines for future collaborations of computer scientists and artists and designers.architecturearchitecture is inherently a collaborative field. only the very smallest design and construction projects are conceived and executed byindividuals. projects of any scale and complexity are undertaken bylarge teams of specialistsñtypically including client representatives,architects, specialist engineering consultants, fabricators, subcontractors, and general contractors. the design architect plays a leadershipand overall coordination role, taking ultimate responsibility for thequality of a project, but any member of a design and construction teammay be called upon to help frame problems and to contribute to theirsolution. experienced architectural designers know that innovative,creative projects depend on harnessing the expertise, energy, andimagination of all team members, not just assigning them routinetasks.forms of collaboration have evolved as supporting technologieshave developed. medieval architects, for example, were not clearlydistinguished from builders, and they spent most of their time onconstruction sites rather than in separate design offices. under theseconditions, the interactions among team members mostly took theform of onsite, facetoface discussions, augmented when necessaryby the production of simple sketches and fullsize templates of detail.with the industrial revolution, a more formalized division of laboremerged: architects definitively separated from the constructiontrades, identified themselves as professionals, increasingly definedthemselves as knowledge workers rather than as master craftsmen,and spent most of their time in their offsite ateliers and drawingoffices. drawings on paper became the principal means of developingand recording design ideas, communicating among members of thedesign and construction team, and establishing construction contracts.within this new framework, drawings and scale models (rather thanonsite construction situations) became the objects of discussion. collaboration increasingly took place around the drawing board, or in aconference room.since the 1960s, digital technology has been transforming designand construction collaboration once again. computeraided design(cad) files have replaced drawings on paper as the primary recordsof evolving designs. electronic file transfer and joint access to onlinedatabases have increasingly supplanted the physical transportation ofdrawings as means of communication among design team members.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices45videoconferencing and groupware (software tools to support collaboration) play growing roles. as a result, design and construction teamsmay now be tied together electronically rather than by physical proximity in their interactions and collaborations, they may be distributedgeographically, and they may operate asynchronously across multipletime zones.26 whereas architecture was once a very local activity, it isnow globalizing.27 globalization, in this context, means that designand construction teams are not limited to the talent and expertiseavailable locally. they can draw on much larger, more diverse, andcompetitive talent pools. it is not necessary to go to the structuralengineer next door, for example; one can go to a leading internationalspecialist who has exactly the right skills and experience for the current project.the shift to digital modeling and fabrication based on computeraided design and manufacturing (cad/cam) also provides significantly greater design freedom. architects can now work, withoutdifficulty, with complex curved surfaces, nonrepeating compositions,and other elements that would have been completely unmanageablein the days of hand drafting. and they can use sophisticated software,applied to digital models of projects, to verify structural, thermal, andother aspects of performance. projects that would have been imaginable but infeasible in the past can now be pursued without muchdifficulty (see figure 2.3).28movie productionthe movie industry exemplifies cooperative creative practices,relying on collaborative processes involving artists and technicians tomake its magic. temporary task forces of actors, designers, electricians, animators, and many others come together for a single project,working intensely to build relationships and teamwork comparable tothat of a string quartet or baseball team.29 the director may work withwriters or composers to develop and revise the screenplay or score,designers and technicians may work together to make the sets, andfilm editors may rely on digital technologies to create special effects. a26similar processes have, of course, unfolded in manufacturing and other contextswhere artistic concerns may be less evident (other than in the design component asdiscussed above).27see jerzy wojtowicz, ed., 1995, virtual design studio, hong kong university press,hong kong; and jose pinto duarte, joao bento, and william j. mitchell, 1999, the lisboncharrette: remote collaborative design, isp press, lisbon.28see, for example, william j. mitchell, 1999, òa tale of two cities: sydney, bilbao,and the digital revolution in architecture,ó science 285 (august 6): 839841; or williamj. mitchell, 2001, òroll over euclid: how frank gehry designs and builds,ó pp. 352364in frank gehry, architect, j. fiona fagheb, ed., abrams, new york.29see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1995, keeping the u.s. computer and communications industry competitive: convergenceof computing, communications, and entertainment, national academy press, washington,d.c., p. 33.architects cannow work withcomplex curvedsurfaces, nonrepeatingcompositions,and otherelements thatwould havebeen completelyunmanageablein the days ofhand drafting.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity46hollywood production literally demands this vast array of talent andskill (witness the length and diversity of the credits on a typical film).then, when the project ends, the team dissolves and the individualsseek new employment elsewhere.30 movie production can also existon a smaller scaleñfrom the experimental to smallbudget independent films. these smallerscale efforts are also collaborative in nature,with profit or revenue as a less important consideration than it is formegahollywoodscale projects.movie production has embraced it. indeed, over the past twodecades, virtually every facet of movie making has been transformedby it. computergenerated imagery (cgi) is commonplace, from thedinosaurs in jurassic park to the òleglessó lieutenant in forrest gump30for economic analysis of the evolution of the formerly dominant studio system toone based as described here, see richard e. caves, 2000, creative industries: contractsbetween art and commerce, harvard university press, cambridge, mass.figure 2.3 guggenheim bilbao. photo courtesy of william j. mitchell, massachusettsinstitute of technology.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices47and gollum in the lord of the rings: the two towers. jurassic park madehistory by showcasing the ability to successfully model, render, animate, and composite threedimensional images at film resolution.31since that film was made, cgi has advanced to the point that, in thewords of titanic director james cameron, òanything is possible rightnow, if you throw enough money at it, or enough time.ó32 digitaltechnologies also extend to sound recording, sound production, andpicture editing.the smaller studio and independent film markets also have beentransformed by the advent of digital video. the increased scale andportability of cameras have changed shooting styles and are beginningto evolve new aesthetic possibilities. lower costs are expanding accessand the possibilities for experimentation. thus, niche markets aredeveloping for lowerbudget films and are causing an explosion oflowbudget production. desktop tools for postproduction in editingsound as well as animation and special effects are also creating accessfor a whole new generation of filmmakers. ironically, as this lowerbudget end of film making has achieved commercial viability, it alsohas tended to compete with the experimental and noncommercialarena of film making for resources, such as access to venues.animated work is now being digitized on the scale of featurelength films, as evidenced by the release of toy story in the mid1990s.what had been confined to special effects or short demonstrationssince the late 1970s has reached a level of maturity able to convinceaudiences at the subtlest level of expressionñcharacter animation,long believed to be beyond the capacity of computer animators. a newoscar category has been created for òbest animated pictureóñand thehonorees are just as likely (maybe more likely) to be digital artists astraditional cartoonists who draw characters by hand. in fact, manycartoonists are losing their jobs; membership in the screen cartoonistsunion has dropped by almost 50 percent in the past 5 years.33 ofcourse, computersystem animators and cartoonists alike have seen aconsiderable volume of their work become industrialized, given thedivision of labor associated with producing a contemporary theatricalfilm. this does not necessarily spell the end of individual artistry,however, although there is the risk that such artistry is migrating toother realms. some predict a resilient market for the warmth of traditional animated characters; there may also be new avenues for individual creative practice as the costs of digital workstations fall.34 experimentation with short works designed for web distribution provides31scott mcquire, 1999, òdigital dialectics: the paradox of cinema in a studiowithout walls,ó historical journal of film, radio and television, august, available onlineat <http://www.findarticles.com/cf0/m2584/319/55610007/p1/article.jhtml?term=+>.32cited in mcquire, 1999, òdigital dialectics.ó33see claudia eller and richard verrier, 2002, òanimation gets oscar nod as industry redefines itself,ó orlando sentinel, february 12.34see eller and verrier, 2002, òanimation gets oscar nod.ódesktop tools forpostproduction inediting sound aswell as animationand special effectsare creatingaccess for a wholenew generation offilmmakers.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity48an outlet for creativity in animation, while the definition of òanimationó itself is evolving: time remapping and digital compositing onexisting footage extend the notion of animation into territories withinfilm, and in some ways, computergenerated imagery has made all offilm into a form of animation.computer gamestodayõs game industry, which produces interactive media forpersonal computers, game consoles (i.e., playstation 2, xbox, andnintendo game cube), and online games, is an increasingly important force in youth culture and the economyñvideo games make moremoney than the hollywood box office.35 even more than film, computer games require a close marriage between the practical aspects ofcode and art, and between programmers and artists, at every stage ofproduction. it is not just that different skills are required to producethe end result. rather, it is the constant state of communication amongart, technology, and design that has to be maintained from beginningto end, in order to ship a product.there are three groups of people involved in the production of agame: designers, programmers, and artists. designers are responsiblefor the structure of the experience and the dynamics of interactionbetween players, or between players and the game world. programmers are responsible not only for the code that makes this interactionpossible, but also for the tools that are used to build the worldñunlikefilm or architecture, most games are built with custom tools becausethe technology changes so fast. artists are responsible for the surfaceof the gameñthe topography and texture of the world, the way characters look, the animation that occurs when the player takes any kindof action. in the course of production, from concept to completion,these three groups have to work to achieve an almost spousal level ofunderstanding, because their jobs are so interdependent. designershave to work with programmers to shape the toolkit, to ensure thatplayer interactions will be technically possible. artists have to talk toprogrammers, so that they will have enough polygons (or digitalobjects) to do what they want as well as suitable textural and procedural complexity and character development. designers and artistsmust collaborate closely because look and feel are inextricably intertwined. all three groups contribute to the development of game òengines,ó36 which can be reused to develop different games. game en35according to a report by the npd group (as reported in khanh t.l. tran, 2002,òu.s. videogame industry posts record sales,ó wall street journal, february 7, p. b5),sales of video game software were $9.4 billion in the year 2001, while u.s. boxofficereceipts totaled an estimated $8.35 billion. also see khanh t.l. tran, 2002, òconsolesoutrun computers,ó wall street journal, april 19, p. a13.36a game engine supports the basic software elements needed to develop a game,which include rendering, support for sound handling, and other elements and can bereused for other games.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices49gines have become sufficiently sophisticated that their development isemerging as a category of problems addressed in computer scienceresearch.37if the game is played online, all of these groups have to work witha fourth technical group, which oversees the network platform thatsupports online interaction; this group is responsible for the databases, server arrays, network security, bandwidth allocation, and soforth. although multiplayer online games may be constrained bynetwork architecture and capabilities, they also may inspire new research and development in these areas. even something as simple as aplayer looking through a doorway requires multiple forms of expertise: can the player see other people outside? if so, that informationhas to be streamed onto the playerõs computerñand if there is a crowdoutside, performance may suffer. perhaps there is a way to limit thefield of vision (a conversation between programming and design) orcompress the graphics files (compromises among art, design, andengineering). can the other people see the player? (this involves thesame issues and more database work.) instead of segregating tasks,development teams conventionally tackle crossdisciplinary problemsby assigning òstrike teams,ó composed of an artist, a programmer, anda designer, to specific problems: artificial intelligence, ingame resources, and so on. highlevel, crossdisciplinary collaboration is adaily fact of life. see figure 2.4.this level of collaboration exists in part because game technologyis a moving target. the medium is evolving so rapidly that manygames solve problems that did not even exist a year before, becausethe tools were not there to solve them. the creation of custom tools totake advantage of leadingedge capabilities means that such teams areworking on the edge of what is technically possible, to make a greatexperience for the player (unlike film, which leverages standardizedtechnologies to a larger degree). game companies do not have research and development (r&d) departments because every product isa collection of (applied) r&d that eventually has to work, one way oranother. in the words of one lead designer, òevery game is a moonshot.ó38a concept from this industry that may be applicable to other itcpactivities is the leveraging of user talent (not unlike the audienceparticipation in terminal time and bar code hotel). the computergame industry is an example of cultural production as a technology37gameengine development has been the focus of doctoral dissertation work at thenaval postgraduate schoolõs moves institute, for example (personal communication,michael zyda, naval postgraduate school, march 2002).38of course, it is worth noting that not every game pushes the technology envelope.some games, for example, exploit new ideas about social and storytelling approachesthat may or may not involve challenging technological problems to solve. and othergames may be mostly derivative in nature, using only wellestablished technology andtechniques.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity50¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥and market driver, where software engines and authoring tools areregularly made available to endconsumers who use them to redesignor extend the core product, often in directions unanticipated by thepublisher. even something as seemingly reductive as quake, a firstperson shooter, has been reconfigured as a lowtech animation engineñplayers use the gameõs editing tools to build environments andcharacters, which are then manipulated as virtual actors. this is not amarket the publisher would have envisioned, much less approached.on the technical side as well, player innovations have driven theartificial intelligence component of the game forward, resulting insmarter code that drives not only sales of the endproduct but alsocommercial licensing of the underlying technology to thirdparty publishers. essentially, the flexibility of quakeõs tool set has transformedthousands of players into a selforganizing market research and r&dforce driven by its own creative imperatives and social incentives.figure 2.4 development teams for computer games. illustration created by jennifer m.bishop, computer science and telecommunications board staff.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices51cultural challenges in crossdisciplinary collaborationswouldbe collaborators from different disciplines can encounter anumber of obstacles, including difficulties in accessing appropriatefunding sources, differences in vocabulary, the absence of frameworksfor evaluating nontraditional work, and the long time periods required for projects to gel.39 further, it may seem intuitive that thegreater the differences between the disciplines involved, the higherthese barriers become; one could argue that it and the creative artsregister a high score on this scale. yet, some claim it is easier to getartists and engineers to work together as a team than it is to getindividuals from either group to work with their own colleagues inthe same field. that observation has been applied to both computerscience and various arts and design fields. sometimes competition inthe same (or a similar) area of expertise is more difficult to deal withthan combining different skill sets to attain a common goal.when adequate resources are available, as is sometimes the case inthe corporate world, people can be formally taught skills that areconducive to collaboration. the committee made a site visit to pixaranimation studios,40 a successful company that offers a number ofcreativityenhancing activities. corporate universities, per se, are notnew; for example, the disney studio offered art classes in its heydey ofthe 1930s and 1940s.41 but there is something unusual about pixaruniversity, a part of the company that has its own òdeanó and offerscourses in every aspect of filmmaking for pixar employees (the classesinclude both technical and artistic òstudentsó). the curriculum includes many forms of studio art (e.g., sculpture, painting, drawing),improvisation, storytelling, and even juggling. pixar cofounder andpresident ed catmull says a course in improvisation is the closestthing there is to a class in how to collaborate. perhaps the strongeststatement that can be made about these offerings is that they send asignal, coupled with enabling resources and management support,that creativity matters, is encouraged, and may be rewarded, and thatit can involve moving beyond oneõs starting skill set, whether on anindividual basis or in combining people with different starting skillsets into teams. in addition, pixar university contributes to thecompanyõs human resources policy by promoting employee retention.unlike other major studios, pixar tends to keep its teams together39see national research council, 2000, strengthening the linkages between the sciencesand the mathematical sciences, national academy press, washington, d.c.40see appendix b for a listing of pixar participants.41see frank thomas and ollie johnston, 1981, the illusion of life: disney animation,abbeville press, new york.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity52between projects, rather than laying them off. there are downsides, ofcourse, to any strong internal culture, even one designed to promotecollaboration and creativity. a selfcontained organization withoutlinks to external perspectives may encourage homogenous values andan insular view of the world, discouraging the criticism or controversythat often is useful in itcp work.42even if specialized training is not an option, general awareness ofkey issues that arise in collaborations may help projects to succeed.the overall challenge in collaboration is to transcend traditional roleboundaries to exploit different perspectives and skills and create newideas and products that are somehow greater than the sum of theirparts. doing so may involve assessing the multiple dimensions of eachrelevant disciplineñwhich affects its interfaces to othersñand theongoing processes of change affecting each discipline. specific obstacles to be overcome at the intersection of it and creative practicesare discussed in the following subsections.overcoming preconceived notionsabout computer scientists andartists and designersperceptions about artists and designers and computer scientistscan often be formed through popular or anecdotal accounts, ratherthan through actual encounters. such perceptions can inhibit mutualrespect in collaborations, at least at the outset. the challenge of overcoming such stereotypes permeated the personal accounts of thosewho briefed the committee and of committee members themselves.43although there are exceptions to and disagreements about stereotypes, some generalizations are useful here for bringing an importantissue to light, even at the risk of oversimplification.some scientists and engineers exhibit a sense of superiority, if notoutright hostility, toward those in the arts and design. or, put anotherway, òartists see science; they donõt understand it; they think it isbrilliant. scientists see art; they donõt understand it; they think it isdumb.ó44 part of the problem may be the connotations of òcreativityóin some contexts. creativity is often cloaked in an aura of mystery,which suggests that the work results from spontaneous creative insight without rigorous or repeatable methodology, from epiphanies42however, companies that wish to keep their work confidential until public releasedo have reasons for constraining external communication, or at the least, not encouraging it fully.43of course, such perceptions do not exist in every collaboration. however, testimony to the committee, a review of published literature, and the experiences of most ofthe committee suggest that the lack of such perceptions is indeed the exception.44based on discussions at the committeeõs meeting at stanford university, january2001. a reviewer of this report observed that òsentiments here attributed to scientists areseldom encountered among european scientists, probably because u.s. scientists areoften unfamiliar with cultural practices.óbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices53when alone rather than as a result of sustained discussion with peers;it downplays the analysis, struggle, debate, or committed engagementwith pressing social or technical problems. it is very difficult to compare forms of creativity, or sometimes even to recognize them. somescientists and engineers can also view the arts or other cultural perspectives as luxuries, things that might be supported or pursued astime and resources permit.such attitudes may be traceable in part to disparities in fundingand, accordingly, some notion of status.45 the xerox palo alto research center (parc) artistinresidence (pair) program, for example, received a certain amount of attention for its attempts to integrate artists with computer scientists and others.46 although thisprogram may well have helped xerox parc to sustain its creativity,constraints on social integrationñaccentuated by pay differencesñmay have limited the creative output.47 although people can (and,given discussions within the committee, clearly do) interpret compensation disparities in different ways, national employment statisticsshow significant differences among workers in the arts and those intechnical fields such as computer science; different occupations, evenamong technical fields, have different earning power, for a variety ofreasons that derive from the structure of the economy (and professional conduct).48 the marked contrast between compensation levelsfor computer scientists and for artists, other things being equal, issignificant for the intersection between it and the arts inasmuch as itaffects collaboration and education. across organizations, and evendepartments in a university, compensation levels affect patterns oftime use, expectations for research and for infrastructure, and so on.similarly, the arts establishment sometimes regards technologysuspiciously, as if it lacks a worthy lineage or is too practical to becreative. this attitude was evident in early committee discussions,coming out most strongly in contrasting perspectives on the potentialfor creative practices within industry. because of their experience in45as michael mateas, creator of terminal time, told the committee: òpower is a bigissue . . . . certainly in our society thereõs a power asymmetry between technocratsñscientists and technologistsñand artists. technocrats are . . . in the driverõs seat rightnow in our society.ó46the context is a research laboratory that had already blended a variety of scientistsand engineers and a small group of social scientists.47as characterized to the committee at its january 2001 meeting at stanford university, the pair program when it was launched included òcreativeó people from the artswith a lot of experience who were paid less than some technical student interns, andwho disparaged the scientists as suburban bourgeoisie.48according to economist richard caves, creative professionals earn less, on average, than their human capital might suggest, in part because their commitment toproducing creative output may lead to different activity and output than would asimpler commitment to satisfying consumers. see richard e. caves, 2000, creativeindustries: contracts between art and commerce, harvard university press, cambridge,mass.; and james heilbrun and charles m. gray, 2001, the economics of art and culture,cambridge university press, cambridge, u.k.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity54deriving research inspiration from practical problems, the technologists found it easier to see creative potential in industry than did theartists, who found more cause for concern about motivations or constraints based on commercial imperatives.49 skepticism about technology was also evident in the early days of ònet artó (art using theinternet), which took off in 1994 when the mosaic browser was firstdistributed and people realized that the web was a fertile canvas forart making. net art was ignored as unimportant at first by art institutions, museums, galleries, art magazines, and funders. (now that ithas gained credibility, some suggest that internet art may in fact be themedium that best reflects the transformations of the information revolution, the same role that photography and film played in the industrial revolution.50) this type of cultural bias can undermine respectand communication, unless the participants are aware of their differences and are willing to modify their behavior appropriately. although the committee context forced the process of articulating andovercoming such differences among its members, accommodation wasneither rapid nor easy, an insight that is important for planning forother contexts.one concern arising from some quarters of the arts world is that acelebration of the potential of itcp not become a dirge for moretraditional forms of art.51 one is not a substitute for the other; bothshould be viewed as complements. nor should itcp be viewed asprivileging popular forms, such as design, over the fine arts. althoughthe direct pop culture, because it is so pervasive and so easy to learnand transmit through media, has pushed developed art to the margins, both ends of the spectrum need each otherñthe direct end torevitalize points of view and connect with basic feelings, the other toreveal much more about an idea (and about ideas) than was firstsupposed.the challenge of maintaining respect across disparate fields is anextension of the frequent differences in attitude encountered within afield between researchers in the more theoretical and the more appliedareas. more generally, every social context has a prestige and statushierarchy, standards of excellence, standards of language, and modesof expression. it is too late to establish social contexts for itcp de novoso that everyone is socialized ab initio into shared norms, goals, andexpectations. hence it is important to foster social contexts that recognize explicitly that people come from different cultures and explicitlywork to bridge those differences. establishing strong common goalsand simultaneously ensuring individual work satisfactionñthe support of individual goals within the groupñis one strategy for cross49this perspective is likely to be more common among studio artists than, forexample, commercial artists who work in advertising or industrial designers.50based on a presentation by mark tribe to the committee in november 2000 in newyork city.51this theme emerged in the review process for this report, for example.cultural bias canunderminerespect andcommunication;overcoming suchdifferences wasneither rapid noreasy, an insightthat is importantfor planning forother contexts.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices55disciplinary communication. creating an atmosphere of equal valueamong members is another tactic. dissension flourishes in an atmosphere of inequity; the collaborative process requires an atmospherethat allows for relaxed exchange.perceptions of teamwork in the arts have, in the past, centered oneither identical roles (i.e., people working together as equals) or clearlyunequal ones (e.g., one person is òin controló and the other is thetechnician or helper). these models are changing in the wake of newpractices such as those used by the critical art ensemble, discussedabove. differentiations between òtechniciansó and òprofessionalsóshape computer scientistsõ views of collaborations, too, especially in acrossdisciplinary context. because people play different roles in teams,assigning credit can be difficult. a major impediment to crossdisciplinary collaborations is the traditional academic focus on isolateddisciplines, the organizing principle for departments, journals, and thereward system for teachers and researchers.52 new technological artforms require new ways of organizing, which can take decades tostabilize, as was true for cinema and perhaps for emergent forms suchas virtual environments.53minimizing communications clashesalthough the arts and sciences are not completely separatespheresñindeed, some see them as intricately relatedñthey do speakdifferent languages. during the writing of the present report, for example, committee members and staff with it backgrounds had difficulty understanding the nonlinear concepts and writing style of thosewith art and critical studies backgrounds. similarly, a stanford university computer science professor reported difficulty in collaboratingwith art historians because they were unfamiliar with data and models.54 simply recognizing the barriers posed by jargon, terms of art,and localized practices goes a long way toward bridging such gaps.the textile museum in washington, d.c., for example, took a straightforward approach in demystifying its exhibition of textile art madewith digital printing and/or digital weaving techniques, which òallowthe artists to investigate traditional textile concepts with a new flexibility and range of creativity.ó55 because casual visitors might have haddifficulty understanding either the art pieces or the advantages offered by technology, the museum provided a glossary of textile termssuch as òwarpó and òweft.ó5652see chapter 6 for a detailed discussion.53see brenda laurel, rachel strickland, and rob tow, 1994, òplaceholder: landscape and narrative in a virtual environment,ó acm computer graphics quarterly28(2):118127.54personal communication from marc levoy, stanford university, march 29, 2000.55see òtechnology as catalyst: textile artists on the cutting edge,ó 2002, textilemuseum, washington, d.c.56see òan introduction to textile terms,ó 1997, textile museum, washington, d.c.new technologicalart forms requirenew ways oforganizing, whichcan take decadesto stabilize, aswas true forcinema andperhaps foremergent formssuch as virtualenvironments.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity56¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥communicationñnot only the words but also the styleñis animportant issue for collaborators. education and training shape expectations for communication; they can also factor into receptivity to thevocabulary and styles of others. in a productive architectural process,roles are flexible and the many actors can cross professional boundaries and interact in ways that enable creative things to happen. if anarchitect knows something about structural engineering, and a structural engineer knows something about architecture, they can performtheir specialized roles at a sophisticated level of discourse. for instance, the architect can tell the engineer that a column is oversizedand know, without being told, that it could be cut in half. they knowenough about each otherõs jobs to communicate across role boundaries. thus, mechanisms such as crossover books (books that are intended for nonspecialist audiences) can be useful; such books boildown the essence of an area for the intelligent and interested novice.however, these adaptations must not be so diluted that real insightsare obscured by superficialities.it is no secret that scientists and artists have widely differingcommunity standards with regard to language and modes of expression and the types of questions to explore. as noted by michael mateas,for example, the scientist seeks abstract and objective knowledge,whereas the artist seeks an immediate perceptual experience for theaudience.57 accordingly, it can be difficult for them to reach consensus on common problems and topics and to establish common understandings.58 yet there are also rapid changes redefining practice thatare blurring previously rigid boundaries, as collaborators find ways toaccommodate their differences. as noted by a reviewer of this report,successful collaborations involve mutual respect and friendship: eachknows enough about the otherõs field for meaningful conversation totake place, but respects the otherõs expertise enough to leave specialized decisions to that collaborator. shared goals, group dynamics, andpsychological maturity are more important than complete coverage ofrequired expertise.57although scientists and artists may have different motivations, and public appreciation may play a relatively greater role in artistsõ visibility and income, in both casesprofessional advancement depends heavily on the judgment of peers.58see denise caruso, 2001, òlead, follow, get out of the way: sidestepping thebarriers to effective practice of interdisciplinarity,ó white paper, hybrid vigor, see<http://www.hybridvigor.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices57resources that supportcreative practicesskills trainingwork in itcp not only demands new capabilities from many of itspractitioners, but also offers novel avenues for learning these skills.that is to say, it can be exploited both to help technologists and artistslearn skills and methods and gain access to tools, and to motivate andeducate others, including young people, who might one day becomeactive in the field. this last point is important, because children naturally possess both the experimentalism and the fascination with computers that drive success in this field. online vehicles are alreadysupporting distance education, including instruction in new methodologies in general and the use of specific tools. organizations thatproduce tools are increasingly turning to the web as the medium ofchoice for providing educational material, supporting userdirectedlearning.there seem to be more resources offering it skills training andtools than offering arts education, paralleling what some see as anasymmetry in the motivation of artists and technologists to òcrossoveró into the other domain. there is a belief that, in general, artistscan learn it faster than technologists can learn art, in part becauseartists are more motivated to use it as a way to do exciting anddistinguished work (e.g., in computer animation). technologists generally have little general education in art and tend to see the beauty offinding and solving problems in programming and mathematics astheir art; in addition, they are paid well in their chosen profession andhave less motivation to learn art or design.59an important resource in the mid to late1990s was open studio:the arts online,60 a national initiative of the benton foundation andthe national endowment for the arts that provided internet accessand training to artists and nonprofit arts organizations. according topromotional materials, open studio empowered the arts communityto ògive the internet a soul,ó helping artists and arts organizationsgain powerful new opportunities to network, strengthen ties to communities, and build new audiences, while ensuring that the onlineworld is a source of creative excellence and diversity.technology plays a role in education at eyebeam atelier, wherethe goal is to expose broad and diverse audiences to new technologiesand the media arts while simultaneously establishing and articulating59based on a personal communication from bill alschuler, school of critical studies,california institute of the arts, 2002.60see <http://www.openstudio.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity58new media as a significant medium of artistic expression.61 eyebeamaccomplishes this objective through three core outlets: education, exhibition, and an artistinresidence program. the education programsfocus on exposing youths, families, and the general public to newmedia art using the atelier method, in which an emphasis is placed onstudiobased education augmented by technology, and through oneonone instruction and mentoring. the new artistinresidence program connects artists with òtechnology partners,ó primarily forprofitfirms, that provide the technology needed by the artist. the partnersshare a common goal of exploring the technologyõs potential in theprocess of making art.62relevant online resources are not focused exclusively on the technology side of the itcp equation. practitioners can learn elements ofartistry as well. for example, mh2o provides the software and samples(short loops of beats, instruments, and vocals) for anyone to create andrecord music. it also offers a variety of resources including digitizedclasses with master musicians. for example, users can select from fivelessons (on topics such as the òdoodle systemó and the òooo bahsystemó) with clark terry, a master of the trumpet and flugelhorn,who teaches form, phrasing, articulation, riffing, and other elementsof the blues to a group of students at a high school in connecticut, aproject organized by the greater hartford academy of the arts.advances in it can enable new modes of learning. for example,maestro pinchas zukerman held a videoconference chamber musicdemonstration and discussion using internet2 networks and peer networks, canarie, and nysernet. zukerman led the class from ottawa to a talented young string trio in new york. audience membersat columbia university as well as observers on the internet couldwatch the session in real time. a questionandanswer session washeld for both inperson and internet observers.63work spacesappropriate work spaces are an essential ingredient in creativeproduction.64 people need a comfortable setting offering access totheir tools and collaborators. most discussions of it work spaces assume the conventional form factor of computing: a screen, a keyboard, and a mouse. add in all of the normal peripherals of scanner,61see <http://www.eyebeam.org/about/profile.html>.62see <http://www.eyebeam.org/artists/index.html>.63see <http://www.columbia.edu/acis/networks/advanced/zukermaninteractive>.also see cultivating communities: dance in the digital age, internet 2, university ofsouthern california, october 29, 2002, <http://apps.internet2.edu>.64òit is easier to enhance creativity by changing conditions in the environment thanby trying to make people think more creatively.ó see mihaly csikszentmihalyi, 1996,creativity: flow and the psychology of discovery and invention, harper collins, new york,p. 1.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creative practices59printer, telephone, and so on, and the space suddenly needs a deskand a chair. then information has to be stored in folders, files, drawers, and shelves. suddenly the work space is an office. is the artist/designer studio of the future really a conventional office?contemporary work spaces are in flux. during this time of change(or evolution), itcp practitioners might be best served by flexible andopen designs that allow for new configurations to alter the flow ofwork and communication. wired spaces (in which there are distributed communication systems for internet or broadband access) andwireless spaces (areas set up for pervasive access to wireless communications for access to the internet and to people or devices within thearea) are a new part of this landscape. the rethinking of design forknowledge sharing, through both physical proximity and electroniccommunication, is an important part of creating new work processesand has to evolve hand in hand with space planning. how can theseprocesses be facilitated in ways that allow for the flexibility and crosspollination that are desirable in facilities for research and creativeproduction? how can environmental adaptability, and signaling thatcolleagues are available, be achieved without the suggestion of a surveillance culture? does electronic networking really reduce òonepersonðone computeró isolation? how is it possible to create spatialconfigurations that reduce isolation and foster or enhance discussion?in the future, devices will get tinier and interfaces will becomemore complex. the world will have more buttons to push, moregadgets to carry, and/or more systems embedded in the environment(physical or natural) that provide services without direct human interaction. or perhaps there will be systems for direct input to or outputfrom human brains, possibly through implanted devices. simply imagining something with visual or physical form could spark an entiresequence of events to occur in the physical world. the boundaries ofthe real and the imaginary could become obscured. there might be noneed for a physical workplace, at least for utilitarian reasonsñalthough there may be essential social needs that are unfulfilled in avirtual workplace. one might just imagine a workplace, and it wouldappear just as imagined. early indicators of such phenomena can befound in experiments with virtual worlds, although virtual and augmentedreality technologies engage a broader range of senses for inputs and outputs than those accessible to ordinary office or homecomputing systems.65the desktop will most likely have to change to enable a moresophisticated dialogue with digital media. a variety of technologiesoffering threedimensional graphics, voice and touch input and output, rapid macrofabrication capabilities, and terabytes of storage allpoint to a potential diversification of tasks involving it and an in65see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1997, more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nationõs informationinfrastructure, national academy press, washington, d.c.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity6066see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2002, broadband: bringing home the bits, national academy press, washington, d.c.crease in activities that seem to be more versatile and challenging. inthe end, environments have to be engaging on many levels for users tohave the necessary impetus to respond with impassioned contentñtobe creative.virtual spaces can be architectures for collaborations that allowmultiple users to talk and share work and work space across geographical territories. these capabilities are changing the nature ofcollaborative work as well as the markets and audiences for it. theability to access and work with a niche group that is broadly distributed geographically allows for new kinds of practice to evolve. skillsthat were previously determined locally no longer need be, and audiences that once had to be concentrated at a local level to make theactivity economically viable can now be spread over a wide geographical area. these practices and methods of communication arebeginning to generate new tools and work methods as well as newterritories of content. academic institutions and research facilities canbecome leaders in this area, empowering people to experiment in anonprescriptive way.as one example, the entire economy of music production has beentransformed by digital technologies. large commercial studios andstudio musicians are vanishing as the home studio becomes the standard for production in both the commercial and noncommercialspheres. these studios can now access a level of technology previouslyunavailable to the individual and will certainly produce new forms ofsound design. but technology and social infrastructures have to bedeveloped carefully to avoid jeopardizing social interactions, in whichpeople learn how to play with each other in groups. access to toolsand to other musicians through electronic networks has tremendouspotential. it is possible to think of situations, in academic and researchinstitutions as well as in commercial and nonprofit production facilities, in which musicians and composers can collaborate both physically and electronically, or virtually, with enhanced potential for discussion and research. a convention of distributed performance hasdevelopedña concert with some players at one site and some atanother, or people waving across videoconferencing systems. but theincreasing diffusion of broadband technologies66 has begun to suggesta more complex and sophisticated set of possibilities for multisiteperformance, including collaborative production and developmentand new methods of distribution.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.61ˆow can computer scientists support new artistic and design practices? how is computer science (cs) researchand development being stimulated and altered by emerging practices at the intersection of information technology(it) and the arts and design? what are the prospects for new researchdirections that are interesting and useful for both computer scienceand the arts and design? answering these questions requires a closelook at the relationship between it and the arts and design. thatexamination begins with this chapter, which focuses on the design,applications, and implications of the tools of it from the perspective ofthe arts and design worlds, and it continues in chapter 4.strange bedfellows?one of the more obvious ways in which it and the arts and designinteract is in the use of technology to extend the expressive range ofand modes of access to existing genres of the arts and design: examples include webbased art and hypertext, opera staging using newsensing and video technologies, musical compositions that featureboth newly created instruments and interaction styles, and textiledesign and production based on digital weaving techniques. givenexperimentation to date, it is clear that new tools developed by computer scientists can be immediately applied by artists and other creative practitioners within a wide array of contexts.but there are further important implications of information technology and creative practices (itcp) for computer science researchand development. box 3.1 provides context on the nature of thatresearch for those who may be unfamiliar with it. rather than usingcomputational technology as black boxes for arts and design applica¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity62box 3.1computing, computer science, and researchcomputing is rooted in the discipline of computer science,1 which studies information and computational processesñincluding the representation, implementation, manipulation, and communication ofinformation.2 there are relatively few inherent natural limitations in computer science, as compared withother science and engineering fields such as physics, chemistry, and mechanical engineering. this means thatthe definitionsñand, by extension, the capabilitiesñof computing and it often do not have an obvious finiteupper bound for expansion. there are, however, practical constraints on the available capabilities ofcomputer hardware and software. in addition, the growing reach and complexity of computers andnetworks (such as the internet) have heightened the risk and impact of system failures and createdformidable challenges in areas such as security and the management of intellectual property. efforts toimprove computing capabilities are central to it research. the key intellectual themes in computer scienceand engineering are algorithmic thinking (i.e., about rules for processing information), representation ofinformation, and computer programs.3 some it research lays out principles or constraints that apply to allcomputing and communications systems; other studies focus on specific it systems, such as user interfaces.1the history of computing (which involves other fields such as electrical engineering) has been widely documented;see, for example, computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999, funding arevolution: government support for computing research, national academy press, washington, d.c.; and the publictelevision documentary triumph of the nerds, transcript available at <http://www.pbs.org/nerds>.2these aspects of computer science will be discussed in the forthcoming report of the committee on thefundamentals of computer scienceñchallenges and opportunities, computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council.3see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1992, computing the future: abroader agenda for computer science and engineering, juris hartmanis and herbert lin, eds., national academy press,washington, d.c.tions, some are engaging in it research as a form of art and designpractice itself. this activity is less like historical arts research and morelike computer science research, although it asks radically differentkinds of questions and introduces a variety of methodologies generally unfamiliar to computer scientists. in certain areas of research,particularly humancomputer interaction and artificial intelligence,there may be a convergence developing between new trends withincs research and the work of òoutsidersó who bring in fresh perspectives. unlike the use of computers for particular applications, thisintersection of art and design and it research leads to some deep andfundamental rethinking of cs research and what it is about in the firstplace. the intended outcomes go beyond making new tools for art anddesign practice, though that may be one outcome, to arrive at a fundamentally new way to do researchña true hybrid.both of these perspectives on interaction are important for thefuture of itcp. in practice, they are intermingled. on the one hand,developing tools for new kinds of practices can lead to fundamentalinsights into the tooldevelopment process. on the other, artists anddesigners who get their hands dirty in fundamental cs research arebeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology63able to build new tools and applications that can be useful for the artsand other creative domains.the implications of this new medium for artistic and design practice run deeper than simple application. in previous communicationsrevolutions, a new medium that was widely adopted not only addednew possibilities for artistic and design expression, but also changedthe way older media were used.1 communication media influence therelationship between sense and bodily skill, and they alter the way inwhich artists and designers reason or feel about time and space.if one were to think of such a shift as a radical break, in which adeveloping medium brings an entirely new art form into existencewith little relationship to historical precursors, the nałve response forcomputer science researchers would be simply to generate as manynewmedia forms as possible as a way of advancing the opportunitiesfor art and design practice. one technically oriented current in thecontemporary avantgarde has indeed sought to push technology forward, in order to discover new expressive possibilities and genres thatcan be conceived only with the help of advanced technologies. technological advances exert a strong pull, challenging artists and designers to conceive new expressive forms that can take full advantage ofeverincreasing processing speeds and bandwidth rates. both this pushon and pull of new technologies focus on the new possibilities createdby those technologies, rather than on the needs and perspectives of artand design practices using òoldó (and by implication outofdate)media.it is a mistake to overemphasize the entirely new digital worldsthat are uniquely possible using computers, as though the adaptationof already existing content or art forms to the new medium were onlya lesser, transitional stage on the way toward the more significantdiscovery of purportedly new, essentially digital art forms.2 whattends to be overlooked, both by the modernist artistõs and designerõstechnology push and the information technologistõs pull for advancedcontent, are the subtle and by no means trivial processes of changeoccurring in the traditional art and design forms as they adjust to andbegin to find their own responses to information technologies. see box3.2 for an overview of how technology has influenced music whiletraditional activities have persisted.precisely because these developments are less visible, whetherjudged by criteria of radical artistic and design novelty or technical1the rise of broadband continues that phenomenon. for example, one recent studyfound that, because of internet use, 37 percent of broadband users watched less television, 31 percent spent less time shopping, and 18 percent spent less time readingnewspapers; nearly 90 percent said that the internet had improved their ability to learn.see <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?report=63>.2see j.d. bolter and r. grusin, 1999, remediation, mit press, cambridge, mass., pp.4850. note that this situation may differentiate the arts from various practical activities(e.g., office and factory work), where early mechanization was, indeed, a step towardbroad reconceptualization of different activities. tradition and continuity are recognized across the arts.the nałveresponsefor computerscienceresearcherswould be togenerate as manynewmedia formsas possible for artand designpractice.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity64box 3.2technology, music, and the evolution of expectationsconsider the history of music. early music was not writtenñthere was only the performance. theevolution of the musical score, a standardized interface between the composer and the performer, madeit possible for the composer to achieve wider visibility by having his music performed numerous times bydifferent groups. one tradeoff for this wider distribution was limited scopeñonly music that correspondedto this standard score could be written down (excluding all but western music). another was that theperformance was still transient. it is said that bach and mozart were wonderful performers, but records arepreserved mainly in listenersõ accounts, and in the occasional attempts by both masters to notate transcriptsof their more spontaneous fantasy.with the advent of recording, the performance itself could be captured. and the relationship betweenthe composer and performer shifted. more improvisational styles such as jazz, blues, and rock can now becaptured as a performance, not as a score, and the performer of current popular music is expected toperform his own music, not òcoveró the music of others. we are back to the era of bach or mozart, butwith global scaleñthe benefits of wider distribution now extend to other forms of music that cannot bewritten down. in turn, recording technology also enabled a new form of musicñmusic that was created inwhole or in part with synthesized, recorded, electronic signals, defying both transcription and performance.thus, the introduction of recording raised new questions about music as a creative process and the definitionof a live performance. there is something incongruous about attempting to trigger all the pleasure andexcitement of a live gathering of an audience to look at a computer and a bunch of speakers up on stage.to some extent, of course, this is because we know that there will be no spontaneity in the performanceñthat creativity has already happened. this is what recording did to the creative aspect of music.the computer is now doing much more. first, the computer can now be the performer. digitaltechnology allows composers to craft their own instruments and to create a performance using only thecomputer. computerdriven pianos now replay a performance with many of the nuances of the originalpianistõs keystrokes. interactive computer programs can participate in the performance, producing andmanipulating sounds in response to a performerõs actions. digital technology, through interactivity, helpedbring spontaneity back into the performance of electronic music. what seems to be evolving is aremodularization of the creative process, the resolution of which is a creative act in its own right, and onethat cannot escape the feedback and interaction with the listener. the role of the listener, the audience,illustrates how advances are gated by a social process.secondly, the computer can capture a performance and make it permanent. what the recordingindustry did for music, the computer can in principle do for a more dynamic and multimedia creation.consider also the emergence of the disc jockey who does a live remix of preexisting music (includingelectronic music): this seems to be a reassertion of the persistent value of the spontaneous process ofperformance, involving realtime feedback between the performer and the audience. here, again, questionsarise about how to view the òdilemmaó of the computer as a part of the creative process.progress, they receive less attention than more obviously glamorousshowcases do. but these subtle developments are no less important forthe longterm ecology of digital culture, suggesting limitations of, anddifferent possibilities for, the development of technology as a medium.for example, tacit knowledgeñunformalized and probablyunformalizable knowledge such as design methodologies or embodied skills such as drawing or dancingñhas always played an imporbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology65tant role in the arts. yet it has by its nature had severe difficultycodifying the most subtle and refined of such artistic practices. theineffable human feel can be simulated acceptably through clever tricks,but the danger all too often is that consumers of technology, includingartists and designers, will accommodate themselves to the reducedexpressive bandwidth afforded in easytouse interfaces, as discussedbelow.3 the emerging research paradigm for embodied interaction inhumancomputer interaction (hci) is one opportunity for a differentstyle of interface perhaps more compatible with highly skilled artpractice.4tools needed to supportcreative work:hardware and softwarecomputer and communications hardware and software are thetools of itcp and the means by which almost all digital media arecreated and manipulated. these tools can do many things,5 each andall of which may be embraced in itcp. a simple list of gross capabilities would include:¥automation of processes such as drawing, composing, editing,and so on (assorted software);¥handling, representing, and displaying or performing information (databases, browsers, displays and speakers, printers, projection systems, and so on);¥analysis of information and phenomena (visualization andsonification, modeling and simulation, artificial intelligence and learning systems);¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥3for sociological analysis of creative effects of the commoditization of musicalinstruments in digital forms, see p. th”berge, 1997, any sound you can imagine: makingmusic/consuming technology, university press of new england, hanover, new hampshire.4embodied interaction has been a theme in digital arts at least since myron kreugerõsvideoplace of the early 1970s. see p. dourish, 2001, where the action is: the foundations ofembodied interaction, mit press, cambridge, mass.; and p. dourish, 1999, òembodiedinteraction: exploring the foundations of a new approach to hció (see <http://www.ics.uci.edu/~jpd/publications>). an example of a new bodycentered interfacefor art is described in steven schkolne, michael pruett, and peter schrıder, 2001,òsurface drawing: creating organic 3d shapes with the hand and tangible tools,ó pp.261268 in proceedings of chi 2001, acm press, new york.5broad interpretations include not only components and artifacts but also theirtheoretical underpinnings and digital content. the computing research repository, forexample, lists 34 subject areas; see <http://xxx.lanl.gov/new/cs.html>. the computing research repository is an online archive of computer science research results thatuses the internet to allow access to technical reports, conference papers, and other workon a nearrealtime basis.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity66¥connection to the physical world (sensors, microphones, digital cameras, actuators, robots, human interfaces, systems forinteractivity); and¥communications (telephony, television, the internet, and assorted underlying capabilities, from wireless to broadband connectivity).ultimately, it acts on information typically associated with productsof the human mind (pictures, music, and ideas), although it must alsoaddress data and information in less processed, intermediate states.66this concept is derived from computer science and telecommunications board,national research council, 1992, computing the future: a broader agenda for computerscience and engineering, juris hartmanis and herbert lin, eds., national academy press,washington, d.c.box 3.3one set of itcp technologiesone perspective on technologies relevant to itcp work is provided by carnegie mellon universityõsentertainment technology center (etc), which offers a masterõs degree jointly conferred by the collegeof fine arts and the school of computer science. entertainment technology òrequires a fluid definition,necessitated in large part by advances in technology that are making possible evernew entertainmentexperiences and venues. what was meant by the phrase entertainment technology as recently as a year agorequires redefinition in light of recent developments in both technology and entertainment.ó1 nevertheless,the following listing is provided:¥networked and freestanding interactive computer games¥avatar creation and utilization¥massive multiplayer online games¥digital entertainment¥specialty venues such as theme parks¥motionbased rides¥console and pc interactive game design¥creation of unique input devices¥virtual reality utilizing headmounted displays¥other forms of virtual reality technology¥wearable computing for entertainment purposes¥massive immersive display environments¥interactive robot animatronics¥synthetic interview technology¥speech recognition¥augmented reality¥telepresence for entertainment and education purposes¥digital production and postproduction¥sound synthesis, surround sound, threedimensional sound, and streaming audio¥development of haptic devices (e.g., force feedback)¥entertainment robotics.1see <http://www.etc.cmu.edu/about.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology67humancomputer interaction specialist ben shneiderman argues thatit for creativity support falls into eight categories: searching, visualizing, consulting, thinking, exploring, composing, reviewing, and disseminating.7 because the currency of it is bits, it tools can handle anymode or medium, and they can integrate any combination of mediañalthough sophistication has costs in complexity and dollars, and fortechnical and/or economic reasons, not all desired effects are possible(see òeconomic realitiesó below). for a concrete illustration of a toolset inspired by entertainment applications, see box 3.3. lists like theseshow the broad range of it that may be linked to some aspect of thearts or design through itcp; no list conveys all the creative possibilities inherent in the use of it.by definition, tools are supposed to be helpful, but like other tools,it tools have shortcomings. the insights into the nature of it thatcollectively constitute fluency, as described in chapter 2, include anunderstanding of the limitations of the tools and the constrained nature of the typical software design. the pervasive hype about it in themass media may, by contrast, feed unrealistic expectations. althoughartists and designers share frustrations with other user groups, theirperspectives, like those of other users, may help illuminate new pathsfor it research and development. this situation was recognized in arecent special issue of a leading computer science journal:many significant advances in research on human creativity haveoccurred, yet todayõs tools often contain interface elements thatstymie creative efforts. a discontinuity exists between technologytools and our ability to interact with them in natural, beneficial, andmost importantly, for this discussion, creative ways.8tools vary in terms of the computing and programming skillsrequired to use them. as long as the tools required to produce computermediated work are programming tools, the result will be programmercreated design. that is not a bad thingñand in some casesthe result(s) can be wonderful. but it does mean that an investmentmust be made in learning, which is somewhat like the requirement tomaster other tools used by artists, but also different, because of factorssuch as the range of features and capabilities available from softwareand the relatively rapid change in technology. there is a great distancefrom the paintbrush or piano to programming in c++. as emphasizedin chapter 2, fluency can provide a middle ground between simpleacceptance of a tool and expertise in programming.9 although the7see ben shneiderman, 2002, òcreativity support tools,ó communications of the acm45(10): 116120.8winslow burleson and ted selker, 2002, òintroduction (special issue: creativityand interface),ó communications of the acm 45(10): 8890.9of course, new approaches to programming that simplify it may be helpfulñassuming that the results do not present the same concerns that software packages doabout builtin constraints.there is a greatdistance from thepaintbrush orpiano toprogramming inc++.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity68discussion in this chapter focuses on software and to a lesser extenthardware for creating artifacts and performances, it should be notedthat other tools consist of content (images, sounds, text, and so on)repositories. there the concerns center on the accessibility of the contentñinvolving indexing, permission to use (or ease of obtaining same),and so on. yet still other tools support public access.10hardware and software tools: a mixedblessinginformation technology has obviously proved useful and accessible enough to give rise to itcp in many guises. in the process, anumber of observations have emerged about the nature of it and theadaptations that artists and designers make in using it. the concernsgleaned from artists and designers help to explain why it takes a longtime to integrate a new technology into the making of nontrivial art ordesign work.because all computers are universal machines, more advanceddesigns can replace simpler ones, providing improved performancewithout changing the basic functionality of computation. software iseven more mutable in that it has almost no physical constraints. because of rapid changes in hardware capabilities, software rarely matures to a stable configuration. on the positive side, this pace ofchange provides frequent opportunities to incorporate improved support for creativity in new systems. but for most users, especially inrelatively resourcepoor areas such as the arts and humanities, thisconstantly changing tool set is difficult to master. for well over adecade, it has been the lament of artists and designers that the intellectual and financial demands of constantly updating tools and playingtechnological catchup results in lowquality work and burnout.11smart artists, observed a reviewer, resign from the mooreõs law ratrace. these conditions suggest that it is reasonable to expect a widerange of willingness and ability among artists and designers to retrainand to upgrade their tools; how this will affect itcp remains to beseen.developers of software tools that can support creative practiceshave a number of variables to consider, all of which may affect the10see tool characteristics in sharon l. greene, 2002, òcharacteristics of applicationsthat support creativity,ó communications of the acm 45(10): 100104.11an anecdote shared by a reviewer featured a senior colleague who reported thatwhen he discovered the amiga computer, he felt sure he had found the tool with whichhe would make his magnum opus. after several years of learning about and constantlyupgrading his amiga tools, he had become an amiga expert but as yet had produced nowork. much to his chagrin, the machine then became obsolete. more generally, in themid1990s a committee of media arts faculty prepared a document, colloquially referredto as the òôburnoutó document, that outlined the new and unrecognized loads on mediaarts faculty. it was endorsed by the college art association, intersociety for theelectronic arts, and special interest group on computer graphics and interactivetechniques.it takes a longtime to integratea newtechnology intothe making ofnontrivial art ordesign work.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology69ways in which users interact with the toolsñand through the tools,their own workñand the ease with which users can produce originalor even groundbreaking works with those tools. to name just a few,tool developers dictate the user conceptual model (or metaphors)exposed by their tools, the amount of structure supported or imposedon the work process and product, the number and kinds of differentpresentations and representations of content supported, the kinds ofmanipulations directly implemented, the openness and extensibilityof the tool at various levels, and the levels of abstraction afforded. thedevelopersõ decisions often reflect attempts to make the system easy touse,12 or simplifying assumptions about what users want, but they canalso greatly affect what users produce.13 very little research has explored the relationships between these design decisions and the fitness of the tool for various kinds of itcp workñwhat follows aresome observations made by the committee.in an effort to get work done, it is only natural to follow the path ofleast resistance established by the tools that are available, so thesetools play a very important part in how users conceptualize their workand assess their options. the tools may also leave traces: architectsmay look at a building and detect which design tools were used, andmusicians may hear new pieces and detect which composition toolswere used.14 thus, it may act as a flywheel in at least some contexts ofits use. artists with it fluency recognize these practical realities andtheir roots in the values and procedures of computer science; theywork with or around the limitations of the tools.in the popular style known as objectoriented programming, aprogrammer creates a new kind of object (concretely, a data structurethat describes something) and defines the operations that other programmers can perform on it. other programmers that use the objectcannot get at the data structure itself, but only at the operations thatthe objectcreator defined. this gives the objectcreator the ability tocome back later and change the actual data structure (perhaps to makeit more efficient) without having to coordinate with any other pro12an early illustration in a number of (nonartistic) fields was statistics; statisticalsoftware (and later spreadsheets) popularized and helped to disseminate a variety ofquantitative methods used in different applications. more recently, software packageshave begun to implement neural networks, face recognition, data acquisition, or imagedisplay. because these functions can be technically difficult to create, careful packagingcan allow others to use advanced technology with less effort.13for example, the literary theorist has written, with reference to hypertext authoringenvironments: òthe strength of metaprograms is that they take away most of the paininvolved in programming an application from scratch; . . . [their] weakness is that theylimit the programmer by presenting a predefined range of operations that the programmer must use. . . . this may be compared to premodern modes of authorship, in whichthe author could use predefined paradigms to produce a genre text, without muchcreative effort.ó see espen j. aarseth, 1997, cybertext: perspectives on ergodic literature,johns hopkins university press, baltimore, maryland, p. 173.14in other contexts, such as education, people have noted how the presentationsoftware powerpoint shapes and constrains their choice of content and organization forpublic speaking.tool developersdictate the userconceptualmodel (ormetaphors)exposed by theirtools.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity70grammers. the drawback is that the user can perform only the operations the objectcreator thought of. if the user wants to add a newoperation, he or she cannot, if doing so requires getting at the basedata representation. it is much easier to design a tool for a welldefined task than for nondeterministic, creative work, which cannotbe reduced to a set of tasks.as one example of how these design decisions can affect the utilityof tools, consider an imageediting program that provides a òblurófeature with a capability for òmoreó and òlessó control. technically,this is a simple mathematical convolution on the image, but the tooldesigners chose not to expose the numeric parameters for this operation. the benefit is that an operation assumed to be commonñblurring an imageñis simplified. the tradeoff is that other convolutionsñwhich might prove interesting or useful to a userñare impossiblewithout some other software mechanism.one design point that provides good support for explorations ofitcp is to use a small number of concepts in a general and flexible waycombined with openness and interoperability with other tools. a goodexample is the interactive music language òmax,ó a full visual programming environment that has developed a community with at leastthree ranks of creative users. the least technical of these would be aperformer who develops skills as an interactor with a particular set ofpatches (configurations), much like a musical performer would practice her instrument. users may then learn to make their own programs, by patching together already existing objects in unique ways.such patches then become instruments that permit a high degree ofvirtuosity for use within particular genres (like technomusic or interactive dance).creating a good tool requires an understanding of the problemarea and often experience at the cutting edges of artistic and designand technical disciplines, just to understand the underlying conceptsand representations that the tool will address. tool making also canbenefit from combining technical expertise in designing and implementing software with a healthy dose of common sense to arrive atsomething general enough to be useful but simple enough to be used.15problems sometimes arise when tool design assumes too much separation of idea from expression.1615people familiar with computer science might consider donald knuth as an earlyexplorer of itcp. venerated for his understanding of software, knuth has done work onfonts and electronic composition that is recognized broadly.16wright points out that the separation between idea and expression in softwareñwhich can degenerate to the software supplying all the ideasñis one example of a moregeneral problem with creative software tools. these tools most commonly òaim tomirror internal creative process by organizing it into an external data process or structure. the software is a system of menu commands and options which seeks [is designed] to match an internal model of creativity as a process of decision making thatseeks to approximate an ideal artistic goal.ó but artists and designers òdo not know inadvance what they want before they startñthe creative process is actually a process ofit is much easierto design a toolfor a welldefined task thanfor nondeterministic,creative work.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology71a tool may offer just the right functionality, but not at the rightcomponent level. for example, an image can be manipulated throughthe use of a comprehensive interactive application such as photoshop,or by typing a command to run a specific program such as one of theunix ppm utilities,17 or by calling a function in an image processinglibrary. a software library is of little use to a nonprogrammer, whereasa fullblown application is of little use in creating a custom softwareprogram. sometimes, a fullblown application can be made to performlike a custom software program through scripting, and sometimessoftware libraries or other components can be integrated with anapplication via a plugin capability (see below). more could be accomplished with tools designed to suit a range of different tasks. ensuringthis flexibility calls for either a variety of tools or a hierarchical structure that allows access to tools at various levels of abstraction, permitting a migration path from intelligent enhancement at the novice levelto customization for experts (as illustrated by the language òmaxódescribed above).because creativity is associated with novelty, comprehensive toolsfor creative work will be neither possible nor necessary to develop,any more than it is necessary for a pencil to include all functions fordrawing. it will always be the task of the innovator to create new toolsfrom components, to create new applications, and to create new artifacts by using tools in unanticipated ways. in this respect, itcp willdraw from both artistic and design and computer science traditionswith experimentation. small professional communities that share experiences and talent often develop effective toolsñthis phenomenonis evident in the growth of computational science and the development of the web by and for physicists, and it has been observed inhumanities fields as well.18 many small tools are developed by individuals or small teams that are able to keep their tools focused andcoherent.design choices related to tool extensibility may be particularlyimportant for broadening participation in itcp and tool development.programming language extensions (also called scripting languages)allow end users to customize applications. for example, computermusic and animation programs often use textbased scripts or scoresto describe music and images. users can create scripts either by editing text directly or by writing programs to generate scripts. anotherway to customize tools is with a plugin, which is a software compoplaying and ôvisual thinkingõ that leads to a variety of interim ôsolutionsõ and modifications of the original ôproblemõ . . . .ó see richard wright, 1999, òprogramming with apaintbrush: a study in the production culture of the moving image,ó filmwaves, issue12.17these programs perform a wide range of imageprocessing tasks including formatconversion, scaling, filtering, and color adjustment.18see american council of learned societies, 1998, computing and the humanities:summary of a roundtable meeting, occasional paper no. 41, available online at <http://www.acls.org/op41toc.htm>.comprehensivetools for creativework will beneither possiblenor necessary.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity72nent that extends an application by implementing a new functionñamuch simpler approach than writing an entirely new application.plugins are common for image and audioprocessing programs; theyexist for such popular design tools as photoshop and autocad.19although commercial image and video editors may not support functions desired by researchers, artists, and designers working at thecreative frontiers, a plugin architecture enables users to extend editors with new custom functions. note that this capability presents itsown challenges to implement: a program like photoshop that allowsother programmers to create plugins has to reveal a lot of its internalstructure. this allows more thirdparty creativity (by those who havethe programming skills), but it constrains the maintainers of photoshopto preserve all this internal structure as they move from revision torevision. balancing these tensions is an act of creativity in appliedcomputer science. generalizing from the discussion of plugins, creativity can be supported by systems that are extensible, a feature thatis often associated with a modular design (a plugin is a module), tosupport a broad range of users and their tasks. modular designsrequire software òhooksó to which new capabilities can be added.recently, however, as programs have grown to help users accomplishmore tasks with less expertise, they have tended to hide their innerworkings and to inhibit flexibility to do things that were unanticipatedby the designers of the program.open application program interfaces, scripting languages, andplugin architectures are no panacea, however. decisions about whatto expose (the level of abstraction, the set of functions, access to data,and so on) will still influence the ways in which users can extend atool. also, taking advantage of these forms of extensibility requiresexpertise in programming. research could illuminate alternative approaches, exploring how to make extensibility and alternative configurations more costeffective and how to implement virtual tuningknobs that allow artists and other users to make various adjustments.in the hardware area, sensors20 often require significant engineering expertise and are difficult to interface with popular operatingsystems. readytouse designs, circuit boards, and specialized operating systems can simplify the use of hardware sensors in many interesting applications,21 and there is evidence that at least elements of a19an example is the realone player (by realnetworks) for downloading and viewing video segments on the internet. see <http://www.real.com>. other examples include plugins that allow browsers to read proprietary files, such as those in portabledocument format (pdf).20sensors can be applied in many contexts relevant to itcp work, as described insubsequent sections of this chapter.21see, for example, information on prefabricated robot microcontrollers, such as thehandyboard, at <http://www.handyboard.com/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology73relevant tool base are emerging in it research circles that may bevaluable for itcp.22inasmuch as artistsõ needs depart from commercial offerings, orinasmuch as specialized tools are kept proprietary, as with some instances in the competitive animation arena, artistsõ work in itcp mayrequire support for experimentation in tool development. new software tools could be developed that would enable users to build theirown software toolsñcollaboration between artists and designers andcomputer scientists could aim at a metatoolkit that would offer easeof use plus flexible, extensible results, and an internetaccessible repository of available software and hardware tools as well as guidanceon what it takes to use them would broaden access and experimentation.23 support for programming by people lacking fullfledged programming skills could be part of this kit.24 for effective developmentto take place, it is important to understand what shape the desireditcp software will takeñwhat interfaces it should provide, whatfunctions it should support, and so on. hence, building research prototypes would be a reasonable first step; such prototypes are going tobe built by motivated practitioners or researchers rather than by commercial software developersñwho may, of course, transform attractive prototypes into products.as with other instances of usergenerated it tools or the broaderphenomenon of popular culture finding new purposes for tools,25itcp tooldevelopment efforts may prove to have broader appeal.the rationale for encouraging this activity echoes the rationale forencouraging research on usability: steps designed to benefit a smallconstituency (e.g., people with various disabilities) may prove tobenefit users in general.26 research oriented to enhancing creativity ishighleverage.22see, for example, the tinyos work based at the university of california at berkeley.it aims at developing an open experimental software/hardware platform for networkembedded systems technologyresearch that will dramatically accelerate the development of algorithms and services and their composition into challenging applications.small, networked sensor/effectornodes are developed to ground algorithmic work inthe reality of operating with numerous, highly constrained devices. see <http://webs.cs.berkeley.edu/tos/>.23rhizome.org, for example, has incubated an opensource software archive forartists (artists can submit opensource code to an online database, download code,discuss it, and so on).24there may be capabilities to borrow from the education community, such as logoand its derivatives, or from efforts aimed at broadening use of the web. or there may beinsights to glean from other kinds of tools. for example, mathematica is a program toperform mathematics. an important component of mathematica is its programminglanguage, which allows tedious tasks to be automated, presumably freeing up some ofthe userõs time for more exotic pursuits. see <http://www.mathematica.com>.25as william gibson puts it in neuromancer (ace books, new york, 1984), the streetfinds its own uses for things.26computer science and telecommunications board, national research council,1997, more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nationõs informationinfrastructure, national academy press, washington, d.c.collaborationbetween artistsand designers andcomputer scientistscould aim at ametatoolkit thatwould offer easeof use plusflexible, extensibleresults.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity74support for flexibility, experimentation,and playit facilitates the rapid design and creation of digital artifacts andtheir equally fast refinement.27 creative design is often an iterativeprocess in which many ideas are considered. sometimes a sketchpadis much more effective than a computeraided design (cad) toolbecause the precision and detailed specification required for cad arenot needed in the early stages of design. the computing literaturegives a number of examples of òsketchy interfacesó that allow designers to make rough prototypes to explore a design space rapidly. thereis also evidence that òsketchyó designs tend to elicit more higherlevelcomments (òwhy do you need this function?ó as opposed to òi donõtlike the color schemeó). these and other examples illustrate how tooldesigners vary the kinds of structures imposed on the work processand product in their tools, often to facilitate experimentation, improvisation, and flexibility. see box 3.4.box 3.4sketchy interfacesòsketchyó interfaces provide the ability to describe objects with ambiguous types, sizes, shapes, andpositions quickly. the ambiguity encourages a focus on larger concepts, rather than details such as font sizeor precise alignment. james landay has developed a tool called òsketching interfaces like krazyó (silk) thatallows designers to create prototypes of interface designs by sketching. the difficulty with previous interfacetools is that they have required designers to specify color, shape, size, and orientation of the elements ofan interface precisely from the start. this requirement focuses the designerõs and his or her test usersõattention on aspects of the design that are irrelevant in the early stages of design. as a consequence, manydesigners prefer oldfashioned paper sketches. based on a survey of interface design practices, silk attemptsto combine the positive imprecision of paper sketches with the benefits of storage, searchability, andinteractivity that information technology can provide. designers can roughly sketch and storyboard theirideas on a sketch pad, while silk automatically makes the sketches interactive, allowing them to be usedfor testing.11for further discussion on silk, see <http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/~landay/research/publications/chi96/video.html>or james a. landay, 1996, interactive sketching for the early stages of user interface design, ph.d. thesis, carnegie mellonuniversity, computer science department, available online at <http://reportsarchive.adm.cs.cmu.edu/anon/1996/abstracts/96201.html>. also see <http://www.computer.org/computer/homepage/march/covfeat/0301silkside.htm>;james a. landay and brad a. myers, 2001, òsketching interfaces: toward more human interface design,ó ieeecomputer 34(3): 5664; and james a. landay and brad a. myers, 1995, òinteractive sketching for the early stages ofuser interface design,ó pp. 4350 in proceedings of chi ô95, denver, colo., acm press, new york.27òsupport painfree exploration and experimentation (a ôsandboxõ mode). thereshould be an easy way to undo and redo all or part of oneõs work. there should be nobig penalties for mistakes, and there should be meaningful rewards for success. thereshould be immediate and useful feedback for oneõs actions, promoting a sense ofcontrol.ó see ben shneiderman, 2002, òcreativity support tools,ó communications of theacm 45(10): 102.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology75in the right hands, the right computer tools can enable improvisation, which is an important expression of creativity in response to adynamic situation. just as a jazz musician improvises by listening andresponding to a dynamic musical context, all artists improvise withmedia in creative ways; on the computer science side, the syntheticnature of software implies that improvisation played a role in itsdevelopment. at least for some artists and designersñand for manycomputer scientists and other scientists and engineersñcomputerscarry out computations to explore òwhat ifó scenarios. such computerbased experimentation inspires new ideas, driving the interplay amongdesign, simulation, surprise, and creation. tools support improvisation when they offer interactive design, revision, and elaboration ofpartial specifications. doing this successfully requires careful consideration of the tradeoffs between imposed structure and cleansheetapproaches, among other design parameters. a highly structured musical tool with a rich model of tonal music may be excellent for certainkinds of improvisation and experimentation, but not for others, forexample. see box 3.5.the internet and the webthe internet28 is particularly useful in itcp work because of several unique features that set it apart from traditional communicationssystems, such as the public switched telephone network and the cableand broadcast television systems.29 the internetõs design encouragesinnovation at the edges by users, allowing a relatively unrestricted setof applications to run over it. by contrast, traditional networks arecentrally developed and managed and historically have limited whatusers can do with them. connection, interconnection, and innovationin facilities and services are relatively easy with the internet, making itpossible to use the underlying communications infrastructure moreefficiently and inexpensively. these factors have generated a patternof innovation in internet technologies and uses associated with aculture of cumulative knowledgebuilding. thus, not only are personal computers and larger computer systems attached to the internet,but so also are televisions, telephones, personal digital assistants, and28the internet has both computing and communications components. the networksthat constitute the internet are composed of communications links, which carry datafrom one point to another, and routers, which direct the flow of communicationsbetween links and, ultimately, from senders to receivers. routers are computer deviceslocated throughout the internet that transfer information from a source to a destination.and of course, users access the internet from a computing device, which may be in aform other than a conventional computer.29for the history of the internet, see the home page of the internet society at <http://www.isoc.org>. see also katie hafner and matthew lyon, 1996, where wizards stay uplate, simon and schuster, new york; and computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council, 1999, funding a revolution: government support forcomputing research, national academy press, washington, d.c.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity76box 3.5improvisatory interactivity in musicin his briefing to the committee, george lewis described his work with improvisational systems.1improvisation characterizes much of human activity, but it has not been explored nearly as much as relatedactivities such as engineering, design, and even creativity generally. at its most basic level, improvisation isa series of reactions to situations, often intuitive, expressive, and spontaneous. improvisation is about findingstructure, not imposing it. in spite of the informal and unplanned nature of improvisation, it can be conductedwith consummate artistry, and great improvisers develop their skills over a lifetime of work. improvisationis an interesting metaphor for humancomputer interaction.current technology, as practiced in computer music systems, has a long way to go before it will beconsidered highly skilled, intelligent, or creative. in fact, it can be argued that present systems are successfulbecause of the skill of human performers. humans can form plans at many time scales, from millisecondsto minutes, and humans are uniquely equipped to listen to and evaluate music as it is created. in contrast,machine musicianship is generally weak and at best skillful in a very narrow range of situations. however,there are interesting and humanly impossible tasks that computers can perform, creating some veryinteresting musical possibilities.what does it mean, technologically, to build an improvisation system? first, any interactive system musthave sensors and analysis functions. second, the system must have some method of making highlevel musicaldecisions and generating music. third, the system must have performance skills, that is, the ability totransform musical information into realtime commands controlling pitch, amplitude, vibrato, and otherexpressive parameters of sound. finally, the system must generate sound from this control information, alsoin real time.sensing can be accomplished using a microphone to òlistenó to the human performer. signal processingcan detect pitch, amplitude, brightness, and other features, although this is currently restricted tomonophonic instruments, those that produce only one tone at any given time. sensing can also use nonacoustic means, such as optical or electrical position sensors in electronic keyboards, accelerometers,optical sensors, and even a standard computer keyboard and mouse. once lowlevel sensor data is acquired,the system must interpret the data in musical terms.2 the system might parse the data into phrases, buildhistograms of pitch (indicators of keys and modulation), estimate tempo,3 or use statistical classifiers todetect emotion,4 style,5 or other musical information.once processed into some abstract representation of music, sensor data become an input to theimprovisation process. the system performs decision making and planning at this stage based on input fromsensors, memory of past events, and builtin knowledge.6 for example, george lewisõs voyager programis capable of generating music without any input or interaction, but when it senses certain trends in thehuman improvisation, it can modify its own performance to either go along with, or contrast with, the humanmusician. this aspect of the improvisation system often draws on formal theories of music and computerscience. for example, the system might use markov models to generate chord progressions, or 12toneserial techniques to generate melodies. rule systems are often used to react to sensor data, generatingdecisions and plans that in turn modify the music generation process.as highlevel representations of music are generated, the music must be performed in real time.performance can include such things as voicing and orchestration, that is, deciding which syntheticinstruments will perform which notes of the music, expressive modulation of various control parameters,and at the lowest level, scheduling accurately timed parameter updates to the music synthesizer. somerecent advances in the understanding of emotion in music, for example, allow a stream of music events tobe transformed in ways that express anger, calm, happiness, or sadness.7the final stage is the actual generation of sound. early improvisation systems often relied on offtheshelf synthesizers to generate sound from lowbandwidth musical instrument digital interface (midi)8control information. now that laptop computers can generate rich sounds in real time, many computermusicians have been attracted to the possibilities of direct control over sound at the signalprocessing level.systems often transform acoustic input from the human performer, giving the improviser a much moreintimate and direct connection to the generated sound. in this case, the improvisation might focus more onbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology77the character of the sound (timbre) rather than on abstractmusic structures of pitch and rhythm (figure 3.5.1).many interesting problems arise in interactive improvisation systems. how do improvisers build on local,almost reflexive decisions to create masterful form at amore global level? can this process be modeled in thecomputer to create a musical companion?9 human perception of music includes sophisticated recognition of patternsand motives. can systems be extended with better modelsof perception? improvisers study and learn. can computersystems also learn to improvise? whether discussing biological or silicon systems, computation must take place atmany time scales. a jazz drummer produces events withvery high timing resolution relative to the speed of highlevel cognitive processing. similarly, computer systemsmust simultaneously deliver lowlatency, hard, realtimesignal processing while simultaneously performing highlevel decisions at a more relaxed time scale.10current systems have not solved all of these problems, and they are generally weak at forming plans, performing highlevel perception and recognition tasks, and offering sophisticated composition skills. nevertheless, interactive computer music systems incorporating improvisation have established a new genre ofcontemporary music. these systems offer a model for humancomputer interaction driven by shared goals,highlevel taskoriented communication, and creative, situated decision making by both human andcomputer.1see george lewis, 2000, òtoo many notes: computers, complexity and culture in voyager,ó leonardo music journal 10; georgelewis, 1999, òinteracting with latterday musical automata,ó contemporary music review 18 (part 3): 99112 (with accompanying cd);kristin palm, 2001, òmaking a pointó (review of interdisciplinary, multiartist project at the point loma wastewater treatment plant insan diego, including a sitespecific interactive videosonic installation by george lewis), metropolis (august/september); guy garnett,2001, òthe aesthetics of interactive computer music,ó computer music journal 25(1); todd winkler, 1998, composing interactive music:techniques and ideas using max, mit press, cambridge, mass.; ben ratliff, 1997, òimprovisers meet the machinesó (review of òvoyager,ócd recording featuring the computer music of george lewis), new york times, october 14; and joel chadabe, 1997, electric sound: thepast and promise of electronic music, prenticehall, upper saddle river, n.j.2see robert rowe, 2001, machine musicianship, mit press, cambridge, mass.3see masataka goto, 2001, òan audiobased realtime beat tracking system for music with or without drumsounds,ó journal ofnew music research 30(2): 159171.4see a. friberg, e. schoonderwaldt, p.n. juslin, and r. bresin, 2002, òautomatic realtime extraction of musical expression,ó pp.365367 in proceedings of the international computer music conferenceñicmc 2002, international computer music association, sanfrancisco, calif.5see roger b. dannenberg, belinda thom, and d. watson, 1997, òa machine learning approach to style recognition,ó ininternational computer music conference, international computer music association, available online at <http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rbd/bibstyleclass.html#icmc97>.6see todd winkler, 2001, composing interactive music, mit press, cambridge, mass.7see r. bresin and a. friberg, 2000, òemotional coloring of computercontrolled music performances,ó computer music journal24(4): 4463.8see joseph rothstein, 1995, midi: a comprehensive introduction, 2nd ed., ar editions, madison, wisc.9see belinda thom, 2001, a customized, interactive melodic improvisation companion, ph.d. thesis, carnegie mellon university,computer science department, technical report cmucs01138, pittsburgh, pa.10see roger b. dannenberg and patrick van de lageweg, 2001, òa system supporting flexible distributed realtime musicprocessing,ó pp. 267270 in proceedings of the 2001 international computer music conference, international computer music association,san francisco, calif.figure 3.5.1 andrew schloss improvises with an interactivecomputer music system, using a radio drum and foot pedals.image courtesy of the banff centre.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity78other devices; the future is likely to see many other devices emerge(e.g., music, medical, and kitchen appliances) that will be directlyconnected to the internet, opening up many intriguing possibilities foritcp work.30 of course, traditional media, such as television, are alsoexpected to evolve, partly in response to the internet and partly ontheir own.31 because the internet is a transnational system, albeit withdistributed management, it offers the potential of a worldwide forum.global digital telecommunication establishes new ways of aggregating expertise and accumulating creative capital, thereby allowingpeople with similar interests to communicate with each other andshare resources.the world wide web, which served to popularize the internetbeginning in the 1990s, has an obvious attraction: it allows media to bedistributed at low cost without any special organizational support,and the content can be viewed from anywhere in the world. the webis quite flexible, offering the capability to publish text, images, sound,and video and to organize the presentation of material in creativeways. in the literary arts, for example, the combination of increasinglypowerful desktop computers and the development of the web hascreated unparalleled opportunities for people to engage in collaborative work at sites where, for example, hundreds of novice writers maycontribute to a narrative. such opportunities have led to an increasingamount of creative literature on the web. that said, there are fundamental aspects of the design of the web that constrain creative work.for example, the client/server model limits interactions either to following links or to performing computations at the server. in addition,the web browserõs distinctive interface containing back and forwardbuttons works well for some types of work, but not for others, such aswork trying to convey complex ideasñanother example of the importance of the tradeoffs related to imposed structure. given that a certainkind of creativity is inspired when faced with limitations, it may bethat the limitations of the format can provide a framework for creativework, much as the traditional form of the classical symphony did forclassical and romantic music, acting as a structure to both work withinand rebel against.other models of web programs suitable for itcp work are possible. it is not that difficult to program networked applications that30this paragraph is drawn primarily from computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2001, the internetõs coming of age, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.31for example, new roles for public broadcasting (and for broadcasting more generally) may become possible. television stations in the united states are required by lawto convert to digital transmission and program production by december 2006. initially,it may well be the case that programs are simply converted to digital format in toto.however, the creative integration of digital technology and content may enable manynew possibilities for itcp work. see lawrence k. grossman and newton n. minow,2001, a digital gift to the nation, century foundation press, new york, available onlineat <http://www.digitalpromise.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology79operate away from the biases and constraints of back and forwardbuttons and that are not subject to the biases and constraints ofhypertext markup language (html) and flash (a multimedia plugin). more computational power is generally available locally, so highlyinteractive systems such as computer games run on a personal computer. multiuser games can combine communication over the internetwith local computation. one could even imagine hybrid systems using cable tv, satellite, or telephone communication channels combined with the internet and local computation. the development ofgrid infrastructures and applications32 provides additional capabilities for distributing and sharing capacity and activity, as do twowayprotocols like those sponsored by the universal description, discovery, and integration (uddi) project.33 the client/server model is evolving into a manytomany, dynamic infrastructure.recent experience with napster and other peertopeer systemshas motivated experimentation among researchers and other creativecommunities in uses of the internet for producing and distributingwork. peertopeer computing holds enormous promise for leveragingthe intellectual and cultural resources of millions of people by allowing connections to be developed independent of centralized servers.34significant proposals include those from scientific researchers, such asthomas ray working in the field of artificial life, for research projectsto run in the background on computers that are otherwise underused,for example, during the nighttime hours at most large organizations.notwithstanding constraints on napster, projects that do not involvecopyright issues can still take advantage of peertopeer software tocarry out research, share information, and share computing resources.35technologies such as peertopeer networking also can challenge basicnotions of exhibition or participation.36 multisite performances ingames like everquest, with persistent virtual realities that endure overdays and months, allow participants to create complex virtual societies and emergent dramas. how might conventional museum exhibitions incorporate (or complement or compete with) such new applications of it?32a grid infrastructure is hardware and software infrastructure that supports widescale distributed computing, which enables highperformance applications.33the project creates a platformindependent, open framework for describing services, discovering businesses, and integrating business services using the internet, aswell as an operational registry, according to the project web site at <http://www.uddi.org>.34peertopeer networking as a technology is not so new per se. the growth of thenumber of internet users across diverse segments of society provides the basis for newapplications for itcp work.35peertopeer: harnessing the power of disruptive technologies (oõreilly, beijing andcambridge, mass., 2001), edited by andy oram, gives a good overview of these possibilities.36other efforts that may benefit from peertopeer computing include scholarlyresearch to which amateurs have made significant contributions, for example in wideranging areas such as meteoritics (the study of meteors and mapping of the strewnfields of meteorites), civil war history, and biography.technologies suchas peertopeernetworking canchallenge basicnotions ofexhibition orparticipation.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity80the question is how creative practice can really leverage the capability of the internetñgoing beyond pretty pictures on web sites toaddress the real issues and opportunities that lie on the other side ofthe (fire)wall. the listening post project (which characterizes internettraffic using sound) described in chapter 2 represents one of the fewitcp initiatives that delve into the it infrastructure. as napster,seti@home, icq,37 and countless multiplayer games have proven,peopleñeven millions of peopleñwill take 5 or 10 minutes to download an application if it is sufficiently compelling. there are manyopportunities for further work here.but the commercialization of the web and associated business andproduct developments place pressures on web technology. for example, a break with earlier versions of a software package means thatthe authors of creative works must spend literally thousands of hoursretrofitting those works when a few changes would have made itpossible to avoid this tedious labor. this situation is similar to otherswhere backwards compatibility has not been maintained; the largerissue of how vendors choose what features to add or drop reflectswhat economists refer to as market power, which influences the degree to which consumers have an effective voice. although othergroups of users would also have been inconvenienced by disruptiveproduct changes, that artists and designers complain is a reflection oftheir comparative lack of financial and technicalsupport resources tohelp in adapting to change. a contrasting example of best practices inthis context is rob kendallõs development of html authoring software, done in close cooperation with the people who are most likely touse it.38 see the section òstandardsó below for a discussion of standards setting.given their roles as contentgenerators, artists and designers havea special interest in the internet as a vehicle for content. the web offersready access to stored documents, access to which has often required aphysical presence (e.g., to view tax rolls, government archives, materials in libraries, and the like), but these materials can increasingly beaccessed easily by any web publisher.39 the ability of virtually anyoneto publish on the web enables producers of itcp work to contactaudiences more directly. userprovided content plays an importantrole in the computing and internet culture, thus offering a unique37icq (pronounced as òi seek youó) is an online instant messaging program developed by mirabilis ltd. that is similar to aol time warnerõs buddy list and instantmessenger programs.38see the word circuits connection muse, available online at <http://www.wordcircuits.com/connect/index.html>.39the electronic documents on the web are formatted in special languages (e.g.,html) that accommodate multiple media (text, graphics, audio, video), enabling thedevelopment of creative applications ranging from online games to virtual museumsand galleries. these documents also can be linked to other pages so that users can easilyaccess more information.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology81market for innovators. a problematic issue with regard to web content is how to manage it all. how does one assess and even cope withthe amount of information available? how does one access what onewants? how do people know when information is valid? will peoplerely on information retrieved for them, or will they still want to develop internal knowledge to be used for judgment? how does oneredefine and control search engines? how do people ensure that searchengines are objective without being trapped by gluey sites? how dopeople filter the results of searches to suit personal needs? new cultural models of editorial sensemaking have been defined technicallyand to a certain degree tested: for example, collaborative filtering,òslashdotóstyle social intelligence applied to a common editorialbase by combining a group rating, the social status of contentevaluators, and user interface design. these approaches are good examplesof hybrids requiring strong arts and humanities skills in the contentdeveloping, shaping, rating, expression, and design, and strong it todeliver effective new platforms sensitive to the communitycontentcoevolution.40 the engagement of artists and designers in the design discussionsfor new technologies can help ensure that the technologies are aspowerful and thoughtful as possibleñwhich is in the interest of everyone (see box 3.6 for one possibility). however, engagement is a twoway street: technologists need to be receptive to the input from artistsand designers, and artists and designers must take the initiative tobecome engaged with technologists (e.g., by participating in mainstream technical conferencesñand not only those related to animationor graphics).economic realitiesa key factor that shapes the development of tools for creativework is the economics of software. software is expensive to developand inexpensive to distribute. therefore, it is most profitable when itappeals to many people, especially to nonexperts (including the massmarket), and competition places a premium on being first to market,another factor driving design compromises. the widespread use of asoftware application can provide a return on the investment requiredto create complex software systems. of course, many hardware andsoftware tools developed initially for niche groups eventually findtheir way into much broader, usually unanticipated, markets. indeed,some of the bestknown information technologiesñfrom the spreadsheet to the webñwere designed initially for narrow purposes. butniche groups, including artists, have little luck in demanding specialcapabilitiesñeven when they have good connections to vendors. for40there is a welldeveloped, relevant literature in information retrieval, informationfiltering, information seeking, information organization, and related areas.software isexpensive todevelop andinexpensive todistribute. it ismost profitablewhen it appeals tomany people,especially to nonexperts.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity82box 3.6databases and artistsdatabases touch nearly every aspect of daily life. they present opportunities that artists are onlybeginning to explore.1 countless activities, such as using a credit card, visiting a physician, withdrawing cashfrom a bank, or accessing web sites, involve a database that mediates the transaction. the operation of thesedatabasesñhow (your) information flowsñis largely invisible to the general public. one function that artcan perform extraordinarily well is to make things visible. a cookie, for instance, is merely data flowingbetween computers. imagine how an artist might be able to depict this flow to communicate to the generalpopulation what exactly is being transferredñand possibly even some of the implications of the transfer.figure 3.6.1 an artistõsperspective on databaseprivacy. illustration created by jennifer m.bishop, computer science and telecommunications board staff.1see victoria vesna, 2002, òdatabase aesthetics: of containers, chronofiles, time capsules, xanadu, alexandriaand the world brain,ó ai and society, october 29, available online at <http://time.arts.ucla.edu/aisociety/vesnaessay.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology83example, a leading photographer who has achieved acclaim in digitaland conventional photography has spent years working with corporations such as adobe, apple, canon, epson, and kodak but reports thatthere are limits to what the software engineers understand about hisartistic needs. he attends seminars with vendor engineers and asks forfeatures he needs for his art making. he teases that the problem mightbe too hard for the engineers, hoping to harness their pride, recognizing that his goal is to get a new feature that is needed by only a veryfew users.41nonprofit institutions and cooperative groups develop some ofthe best tools for creative useñboth in computer science and in artisticand design contexts. this is true to a large extent because this softwareis simply not viable commercially and does not appear in that sector.many good tools are noncommercial and opensource (see chapter7), developed and maintained by a number of programmers whocoordinate their work through the internet. this approach allowsusers to contribute capability directly, makes the software freely available, and allows users access to the inner workings of the software sothat creative modifications and customization are possible. see box3.7. but it is not a panacea: opensource tools tend to depend onvolunteer efforts and often reflect the design effort of one or just a fewprimary implementers. as with closeddevelopment/proprietary commercial products, users may not always get the features or designchanges they need. software robustness, documentation, and supportmay not reach commercial levels.42 support and documentation tendboth to benefit from and to attract a larger user community. small,specialized projects often have the feel of òwork in progress.ósubsidies are a way to encourage the development of creativetools. this approach is exemplified by the studio for electroinstrumental music (steim), a center in amsterdam that helps many musicians create new instruments using sensors.43 by subsidizing the engineering costs of sensor systems, steim has enabled the exploration ofmany novel electronic musical instrument designs. the engineeringresources established by steim have attracted artists from around theworld who otherwise would have no access to this technology. thisapproach seems to resemble that seen in computational science in the1980s, when centers providing access to specialized computing resources were created. more generally, government (or philanthropic)support for research, including the development of prototypes andtestbeds (see chapter 8), is a way of subsidizing the development ofcreative tools that the market, all other things being equal, is not likelyto develop in a timely manner. whether induced through market41personal communication between the photographer and a reviewer, summer 2002.42there are important counterexamples such as the linux operating system, whichis often used in critical server applications.43for further information, see <http://www.steim.org/steim>.nonprofitinstitutions andcooperativegroups developsome of the besttools for creativeuse.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity84box 3.7opensource toolstools that support itcp workpython is a programming language created in the early 1990s by guido van rossum, who is still itsprincipal author. python has gathered a large following, finding important applications in graphics includingalice (see below), gaming, web services, teaching, collaboration support, and research. python iscopyrighted but is free for use and distribution, and versions are owned by the centrum voor wiskundeen informatica (national research institute for mathematics and computer science in the netherlands), thecorporation for national research initiatives, and beopen.com. in 2001, zope corporation and otherssponsored the formation of the python software foundation, a nonprofit corporation set up to own theintellectual property of the most recent versions of python. conferences and workshops devoted to pythonhave been held since 1994, and in 2002, python conferences were held in both the united states and europe.python users actively develop extensions and support for python, including graphical programmingenvironments and debugging tools, a reimplementation in java (another popular programming language),and many new modules that support such things as internet access, the xml language, linear algebra,encryption, and multimedia.1portaudio is an example of a much smaller opensoftware effort. portaudio is a crossplatform librarythat supports audio input and output. it began with discussions about the need for such a library on aninternet mailing list, musicdsp.2 hosted by the california institute of the arts, portaudio was developedprimarily by ross bencina and phil burk, who jointly control its design and distribution. more than 30contributors have fixed bugs, offered expertise on the use of specific systems and hardware, and adaptedportaudio to new systems and devices. a dozen or so commercial and noncommercial applications areimplemented using portaudio.3in both cases, it is interesting that many of the developers and contributors have never met facetoface. designs and work plans are discussed via email and the community is informed of recent developments,forces or supported by other resources, the research in directionsdiscussed here for hardware and software can be a powerful investment in the future.standardsa review of hardware and software would be incomplete withouttouching on the perennial issue of standards, which can both limit andsupport creativity. they obviously establish some constraints, butthey also can allow various programs to interoperate in new andcreative ways, and they are typically associated with stabilizing amarket, lowering costs, and facilitating training.44 although perhaps44this situation is exemplified by consumer electronics, but it also applies to variousforms of it (and nonit products).1see <http://www.python.org> for more information.2see <http://shoko.calarts.edu/~glmrboy/musicdsp/whatis.html>.3see <http://www.portaudio.com> for more information.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology85more obvious in it, standards are common in arts and design arenas,from the dimensions of a violin to the pantone color system. standardscan emerge from a standardssetting body or de facto from a leadingsupplier (as a consequence of competition within the marketplace). agood example for itcp is digital images and associated software.digital images are basically just arrays of pixels, yet they can beproduced, stored, and manipulated in many ways. with standardrepresentations for digital images, many programs and devices caninteroperate, including cameras, digital editors, web browsers, opticalcharacter reading (or other scanning) software, and graphical interfacetools. but what should be standard? an image can exist in severalformsña set of highlevel instructions for rendering, a set of polygons,or an array of pixels. a pixel representation may be a universal standard, but it forces the loss of highlevel information. a highlevelstandard may be more complex to define, and to agree to, but it canproblems, and solutions through electronic bulletin boards. most of the contributors work withoutmonetary compensation. in both examples, it is important to have a relatively small group to coordinate andintegrate various contributions in order to maintain a coherent product.opensource tools for learningpython, based on early lisplike languages, is excellent for art and design education because of its simpleand powerful syntax. an example of looking ahead to new models for languages is the design by numbersproject at the massachusetts institute of technology,4 which includes a simple language for graphicalexpression (called dbn), distributed freely over the web, as a means to teach programming to visual artistsand designers. this system is currently in use in more than 25 schools worldwide, with a sequel called theproce55ing project that introduces twodimensional and threedimensional graphics concepts to visualdesigners.5individual tools available online include alice,6 a threedimensional (3d) interactive graphics programming environment for windows built as a publicservice project by a research group at carnegie mellonuniversity. the intent was to make it easy for novices to develop interesting 3d environments and to explorethe new medium of interactive 3d graphics. alice is primarily a scripting and prototyping environment for3d object behavior, not a 3d modeler, but it does read many common 3d file formats. by writing simplescripts, alice users can control object appearance and behavior, and while the scripts are executing, objectsrespond to user input via mouse and keyboard. the current version of the alice authoring tool is free toeveryone and runs on computers that are commonly available for reasonable prices. worlds created in alicecan be viewed and interacted with inside a standard web browser once the alice plugin has been installed.the alice core distribution includes a large library of textured models. the alice plugin does not allowauthoring, but it does allow viewing of any alice world.4led by john maeda at the mit media lab. see <http://dbn.media.mit.edu>.5proce55ing, an electronic sketchbook for developing ideas and a context for learning fundamentals of computerprogramming within the context of the electronic arts, was initiated by ben fry and casey reas at the mit media laband by the interaction design institute ivrea. as of november 2002, the software is in a prerelease stage, but bug fixesare being made in preparation for a more complete 1.0 release. proce55ing will be free to download and use. see<http://proce55ing.net/>.6see <http://www.alice.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity86preserve the ability to perform highlevel operations. another example is the musical instrument digital interface (midi) standard.midi was created to connect music keyboards to synthesizers, but itwas soon realized that midi could allow computers to control synthesizers. the availability of lowcost synthesizers that are more or lessinterchangeable has been critical to any number of creative computermusic systems.the rise of itcp raises questions about the standardssetting process and the opportunities for artists and designers, as users, to haveinput. it is not uncommon for user groups to be on the sidelines ofvendor efforts to set standards; artists and designers are not beingsingled out. and as recent attempts by nonprofit organizations toexplore how to inject òpublic interestó voices into it standardssettingdemonstrate, it is not easy for people with less technical depth, fewerfinancial resources, and different conversational norms to participateeffectively in various it standardssetting cultures.45 that said, a constructive step would be for specific communities of practice within theartsdesign/itcp world to try to determine for themselves a consensus view of the kinds of features or qualities they would like to see. aconsensus statement would carry more weight with standards settersthan would input from lone individuals or representatives of small orniche groups. as suggested above, research prototypes could aid infostering consensus by demonstrating what a standard may lead to inpractice.selected areas for the development ofhardware and software that wouldpromote creative workprecisely what the future holds is uncertain, but based on currentexpectations and trends,46 the capabilities available for work in itcpwill become far more powerful and diverse in the coming years. thetiming of the present report is therefore propitious. among notableresearch trends, nanotechnology is becoming a reality.47 computers,45for example, the advocacy group, the center for democracy and technology, hastried an experiment in the last couple of years to see how it might participate in internetengineering task force (ietf) standardssetting activities (john morris, a lawyer, wasthe groupõs participant). the ford foundation also fostered discussion of standardssetting in its digital media forum. of course, since the early days of computing therehave been various user groups that tried to influence the product designs of majorvendors.46raw computational power has been rising exponentially for years. a popularyardstick is mooreõs law: for the last 40 years, computing capability per dollar hasdoubled every 18 to 24 months, equivalent to a 100fold improvement every 10 to 13years, reflected in both rapidly increasing performance and declining price. internettraffic has been growing by a factor of about two annually, outstripping the growth incomputing speed.47nanotechnologies are generally defined as having structures in the size range of 1to 100 nanometers (billionths of a meter). technologies of this size often exhibit novelproperties. see, for example, information on the national nanotechnology initiative at<http://www.nano.gov/>.researchprototypes couldaid in fosteringconsensus bydemonstratingwhat a standardmay lead to inpractice.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology87sensors, and other devices are becoming ever smaller. new sensors forsound and light combined with faster and cheaper digital signal processors will make largescale system sensing increasingly practical.48the synthesis of materials to meet defined requirements means thatthe manufacture of devices will be simplified. in the near future, anumber of specific changes are envisioned. computing speed willbecome so great (10 gigahertz in a handheld device) that operations ascomplex as realtime voice recognition without a learning curve couldbe commonplace. there is also likely to be enhanced machine intelligence and capability for seeing, hearing, and speaking.49 and manydevices will likely be considered disposable.thus, although some excellent tools for itcp work are available,there are many opportunities for improvement. the committee identified a handful of areas that could exert considerable leverage in promoting itcp, because such tools often enable the widespread adoption of new technologies.distributed controlone area in need of support is distributed control. software thatcoordinates multiple computers is among the most difficult of programs to write. this is true even for commercial business systems, butthe problem is more acute in creative contexts because programmingresources tend to be much more limited there. tools can providesimplified protocols for communication between networked computers, including wireless devices.the essentially sequential nature of software systems has made itdifficult to envision a plausible distributed control paradigm. muchresearch in the related area of parallel computation was curtailed inthe 1990s due to the evolution of the conventional microprocessorfrom the megahertz to gigahertz speed range in only a decadeñtherewas no need to make computer programs run faster when the computer itself had become faster in a matter of months. distributedcontrol has taken center stage once again, not as a potential means toincrease the speed of computation but as a way to handle the difficulttask of coordinating computation across multiple computing units.there is a simple impediment to advancing the state of the art in thisarea; namely, programming methodologies for asynchronous computing are not in place, even in highend systems. software systemdesigns inherit a legacy similar to that of the automobile industry inthat only incremental, evolutionary changes are adopted instead ofthe kind of revolutionary advancements needed to write more sophis48from computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2001, embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embeddedcomputers, national academy press, washington, d.c.49see, for example, john markoff, 2002, òtechnology gives sight to machines, inexpensively,ó new york times, june 17, available online at <http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/17/technology/17visi.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity88ticated programs that take advantage of multiprocessor and multisystem interactions.sensors and actuatorsanother area deserving attention is sensors and actuators. artistsand designers and scientists alike often want to collect data in the realworld and to control mechanical devices using computers. advancedsensing technologies and actuators exist, but without tools to simplifytheir use, these technologies remain out of reach of most individualswho are not specialists. sensors and actuators that can be used by nonexperts can promote creative endeavors (see, for example, box 3.8).note that the area of motion control and robotics is experiencing arenaissance in computer science: advances in component technologies and artificial intelligence moved the field along considerably inthe 1990s, and research in the area is expected to thrive.a subtle reason for recent advancements in this area can be associated with the development of the web. oncedifficulttoobtain catalogs or obscure parts listings that were available only to hacker communities are now easily found on the web with a quick search.interfacing with these parts was once also difficult, requiring access tothe relevant technical community. now most of this knowledge ispublished and easily accessed on the web. interfacing information,sample projects, and even advanced research can easily be found bythe curious builder.in addition to the challenge of using sensor and actuator technologies, there is the problem of interfacing them to computers, especiallyif they are nonstandard. this situation might be alleviated by thedesign and distribution of software and hardware that take advantageof serial interfaces such as the universal serial bus (usb) and the ieee1394 multimedia standard.50 there have been several attempts at developing generalpurpose sensor systems and input/output boxes inthe arts, such as the icube system and notably, michael rodemerõsezio board, designed at the art and technology department of theart institute of chicago in the mid1990s and now commercially available.the success of the parallax inc. basic stamp microcontroller as alowcost platform for educational experimentation has changed thepublicõs access to embedded computing. ample documentation, complete technical information, and welldocumented sample projects have50one interesting effort is the development of òphidgets,ó or physical widgets, at theuniversity of calgary. phidgets are building blocks that assist in the development ofphysical user interfaces. phidgets consist of a hardware device, software architecture forcommunication and connection management, a welldefined software application programming interface (api) for device programming, a simulation capability, and anoptional component for interacting with the device, as described in òan overview ofphidgets,ó available online at <http://www.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/grouplab/phidgets/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology89made this the platform of choice for many budding òphysical computingó courses nationwide. once one is versed in the basic stampmicrocontroller, it is easy to move to more economical systems bygoing one level deeper into the inner workings of the basic stamp toits central controller, the òpicó chip. a wide variety of pic chips, andcompetitor singlechip computers such as avr inc.õs line, have madeit possible for anyone to easily build a sub$10 computer for embedded control. any art education program should find it attractive thatplatforms priced at less than $10 can be budgeted for as easily as anyother art supply like paint, canvas, or a brush.with respect to interfacing the various devices that are emergingtoday, one challenge is the speed and reliability of data transfer. recently buses such as the can bus have emerged as highspeed standards for the robotics community, and the consumerclass usb andieee1394 technologies are continually giving rise to faster versionslike usb2 and firewire2.51 yet at some point the rapid progress inthese standards can lead to confusion in the general population. whateconomists call the cost of switchingñhaving to relearn a technologythat one had finally felt comfortable with but then learned had suddenly become pass”ñcan deter or slow adoption of technology, aswell as influence standardssetting tactics.video and audioextensive editing and processing tools exist for timebased media(including video and audio), but these tools assume a particular styleof workingñnamely, that the product will be a linear video or audiorecording. in addition, most tools do not support realtime processing.these limitations hamper artists who want to work with video andaudio media in interactive performances, take other approaches tointeractivity, stream material over the internet, or use scripts to process or generate video.standards continually emerge and compete in this arena such asapple quicktime, macromedia flash, and real video. a commondifficulty for all of these standards is to maintain compatibility acrossthe multiple platforms they support. often the same version of anysystem, such as flash, will display a file properly on a pc but not on amacintosh. these inconsistencies are rarely addressed, and contentcreators must simply work around these known problems. the standards are constantly upgraded, solving some problems yet introducing others. for an emerging field, like digital media or itcp generally,standards that lack reliability are a serious problem. it is as if the art offilm were emerging in an era when the film you might have shownjust once might suddenly dissolve before your very eyes.51buses enable data transfer among the different components of a computer.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity90box 3.8ghostcatchingthe fruit of a collaboration between multimedia artists paul kaiser and shelley eshkar and dancer/choreographer bill t. jones, ghostcatching1 is a virtual dance performance that makes use of motioncapture technology. envisioning a blend of performance, filmmaking, drawing, and computer composition,the artists used lightsensitive sensors attached to 22 key points of jonesõs body and eight cameras to capturehis movements. roughly 40 sequences of jonesõs movement were recorded digitally. the resulting òcapturedataóñwhich represented a record of only the movements of the sensors and not of jonesõs body per señwere then used as the raw information for kaiser and eshkarõs creative application. see figure 3.8.1. jonesõsòmovements were then manipulated electronically and rechoreographed on a computer screen to makean original virtual performance.ó2the results include an 8minute digital projection, 13 still images taken from the dance, photographsthat describe the artistsõ process, and a soundtrack consisting of jonesõs own sounds: òchanting, humming,singing, talking, grunting, and more.ó3 commissioned by the cooper union for the advancement of scienceand art,4 the installation opened at the cooper unionõs arthur a. houghton jr. gallery in new york cityand ran from january 6 to february 13, 1999.1for more information, see <http://www.cooper.edu/art/ghostcatching/ghost/exhibit.html>.2zoe ingalls, 1999, òusing new technology to create ôvirtual danceõ,ó chronicle of higher education 45(21): a29a30.3ingalls, 1999, òusing new technology to create ôvirtual danceõ.ó1. improvising2. wearing motioncapture markersbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology915. òhanddrawnó lines modeled asmathematical curves3. markers optically recorded and convertedto digital threedimensional files4. motion files applied to kinematic model of the body6. sampled charcoaled strokes applied and rendered asa final drawn bodyfigure 3.8.1 ghostcatching. images courtesy of bill t. jones, paul kaiser, and shelley eshkar; available for download at<ftp://ftp.eshkar.com/ghostcatching/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity92generative processesfrom both a computational and an artistic and design standpoint,an attractive feature of computers is that they enable generative processes. rather then creating each note or brush stroke by hand, anartist or designer can design a process that generates material automatically. of particular interest are fractals, chaotic systems, and systems exhibiting nonlinear dynamics. these have strong connectionsto natural processes, can be explored only by using computers, andoften create interesting and unpredicted output. a programmer couldset up a generative process relatively easily, but tools are needed thatcan encapsulate these processes to make them more accessible toartists and designers. generative processes are interesting to contemplate for a few reasons. first, the associated computer models dependon assumptionsñand to ensure that the models do not present thekinds of constraints criticized above, it will be important for artistsand designers to have some understanding of the modelsõ inner workings, which in turn depends on comfort with quantitative analyses.second, some of the earliest explorations of itcp were generativeprocesses. a notable instance is harold cohenõs work with the artificial intelligence drawinggenerating program, aaron.52 more contemporary simulation models, some of which explore òartificial life,ó havebeen used by biologists and other scientists to understand evolution,yielding a new understanding of its pacing and realization. the santafe institute led the development and use of these models, providingtraining in modeling methods, and it also has reached out to the artscommunity. the rise of computer games that feature artificial worldssuggests but one of the more obvious potential itcp connections.artificialworld development is also being explored outside the gamecontext.53when computing was young, the most natural form of creativeactivity on the computer was programming. this led to some landmark work by researchers at bell labs, such as ken knowlton, whowere versed in programming but in addition had a penchant for visualart. the idea that forms can emerge from programming echoes complex processes in the physical world where the result is something youcannot expect. more recently with the rise and proliferation of digitaltools, programmatic approaches to form have become less popular.for itcp to advance, a fundamental shift is needed from computationor mathematics based on numbers to that based on symbols.52see <http://www.umcs.maine.edu/~larry/latour/aaron.html>.53see the world generator/the engine of desire by bill seaman with gideon may.the work enables the construction of virtual worlds in real time in an interactiveenvironment. although the work is artistic, it has been featured in a number of itstudies and has potential for many design and interactive tool applications. for furtherinformation, see <http://faculty.risd.edu/faculty/bseamanweb/web/texts.html> and<http://www.nada.kth.se/erena/pdf/d12.pdf>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology93reliable, lowlatency communicationover the internetartists and designers have common cause with a wide range ofusers in their interest in reliable, lowlatency communication over theinternet.54 higher bandwidth and/or qualityofservice guaranteescould enable new levels of interaction, distributed concerts, twowayvideo, and other creative activities that necessitate specific levels ofnetwork performance. as some observed to the committee, were artists able to stream their own bandwidthdemanding work out, it wouldyield greater diversity of voices and stimulation to creativity. this isthe crux of the broadband dilemma: broadband users are twice aslikely as dialup users to have their own web sites, with nearly 60percent becoming creators and managers of content in this manner,according to a report by the pew internet & american life project.55but pervasive broadband deployment in the united states will requirebillions of dollars in investment;56 subscriber levels, while growing,fall far short of the potential, given existing deployment, and thereforewidespread use is not expected soon. that said, in the academic world,the internet2 project and complementary federal research infrastructure programs provide highbandwidth service on and between manycampuses because of its potential to support cuttingedge applicationresearch. music performance over the canadian equivalent, thecanarie network, illustrates the general proposition that these facilities could be valuable itcp vehicles. recent advances in lowlatency ultravideoconferencing have been carried out by musicianresearchers at mcgill and stanford universities.57as in other communities, opinions in the arts world about thevalue of broadband differ. to some, a benefit of everincreasing processor speeds has been the development of mediarich simulationsand other works, stimulating demand for broadband services. yetothers find such digital spectacles less compelling than new socialmodels for peertopeer cultural production. from this standpoint,advanced content should be focused not on creating volumes of traffic54the internet is based on besteffort policies that make no guarantees for the timelydelivery of information. reliability is achieved by retransmitting data when a loss isdetected, but this recovery introduces delays. see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2001, the internetõs coming of age, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.55mike snider, 2002, òfaster connection allows users to do more,ó usa today, june23, available online at <http://www.usatoday.com/life/cyber/tech/2002/06/24/broadband.htm>. see also the broadband difference: how online americansõ behaviorchanges with highspeed internet connections at home, available online <http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?report=63>.56see computer science and telecommunications board, 2001, the internetõs comingof age, p. 45.57jeremy cooperstock, an engineer at mcgill university, and chris chafe, a composer at stanford university; see <http://www.cim.mcgill.ca/~jer/research/rtnm/>.internet2 and canarie are discussed further in chapters 5 and 8.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity94that can fill up fat data pipes, but on infrastructural advances thatwould allow a wide public access to and control over digital objects,although with the recognition that there are certainly legitimate andproductive needs for greater capacity.58 this perspective shifts thefocus to thinking of how to increase the range of interpersonal connection and personal expression distributed across society.one issue relating to broadband is that the quantitative increase inbit traffic makes possible qualitative change in digital expression.however, this potential is confounded by a tendency for capabilitiesto fluctuate with it innovations: after the initial emergence of digitalmedia serving smaller amounts of kilobytes, higher amounts of datacould be conveyed through the cdrom media, only to go back tosmaller amounts of kilobytes over the (narrowband or dialup) web,and then up to large capacity again via dvdrom and now to broadband. looking across this series of innovations, they have not beenassociated with an intrinsic change in content for the betterñperhapsbecause of uncertainty associated with the fluctuations, or perhapsbecause experience with any one technology has been too abbreviated.tool design and humancomputerinteractionthere is a great deal of work to be done in understanding theramifications of the tradeoffs that occur every day in the design oftools. the discussion above includes examples of how the tool designersõ choices in areas such as abstraction, extensibility, and metaphorcan affect the practices within a field and the results obtained throughthe use of the tool. insufficient work has gone into understanding howto leverage this relationship to better support creative practices. thisgoes far beyond the usability studies once typically associated withhumancomputer interaction research. questions to be addressed include these: when does embodying domain knowledge in a tool help?what is the impact of supporting multiple metaphors in one tool?when are constraints good inspirations, and when do they causeexcessive perspiration? when can implicit assumptions help, and whencan they be hindrances? how much and what kind of openness yieldsopportunity, and what yields frustration? in other words, what is therelationship among information, its representation, presentation, andmanipulation, and the range of work encouraged? researchers anddevelopers have produced a small number of data pointsñmore workin understanding this area can have deep ramifications for encouraging itcp.58a canadian task force concluded a series of consultations with the arts and culturalcommunity with a report entitled filling the pipe: stimulating canadaõs broadband contentindustry through r&d, available online at <http://www.canarie.ca/press/publications/broadbandreport.pdf>.a quantitativeincrease in bittraffic makespossiblequalitativechange in digitalexpression.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advancing creative practices through information technology95programming languagesfinally, some areas of great interest to artists are not well servedby programming languages, which tend to be driven by science, engineering, the web, and more commercial application areas. some of thetopics discussed above, especially distributed control, video and audio processing, and generative processes, could be supported betterby languages. languages are particularly important for specifyinginteractive behavior and generative processes, an area not well supported by commercial software. because a great deal of creative activity involves combining existing concepts in new ways, and becauseprogramming languages provide the glue for assembling softwaretools and libraries into applications, languages are critical to innovation. progress has been achieved in making programming languagessimpler for novice programmers, but this work needs to be adapted tosupport more creative work.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96˙¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥nformation technology (it) as a medium for the work ofartists and designers is discussed in chapter 3, whichpoints out that there are many ways for computer science(cs) to support new tools and applications for the artsand design disciplines, in service to cuttingedge and more mainstream practitioners alike. these tools and applications offer the potential for beneficial developments in information technology andcreative practices (itcp). but there are further, more profound implications of the intersection between it and the arts and design, andthese are the focus of this chapter, which views art and design practices as forms of cs research and development. this perspective on csis more subtle, more challenging, and more fundamental than thetools orientation of chapter 3. it involves a nontraditional and perhaps unfamiliar kind of art and design practice. it also involves rethinking cs in ways that many computer scientists would find nontraditional.beyond toolsthe information artswriting in 1993 during the takeoff of the wired boom of the 1990s,veteran commentator stewart brand pondered whether òtechnologyhas swallowed art, and so is art gone now?ó1 in fact, if art is understood as the making of unique individual objectsñsuch as paintings,sculptures, and drawingsñor the result of traditional approaches to1stewart brand, 1993, òcreating creating,ó wired, 1.01 march/april.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d97the performing arts, then, for some newmedia artists, the answer maybe yes. they take information technologies for granted, but their art isnot fixated on the computer as a medium, as if it were paint or a violin,or even the sound artistõs turntables or the scenic artistõs optical instruments. as stephen wilsonõs recent encyclopedic compendium of contemporary intersections between art, science, and technology shows,the information arts range across the life and space sciences,nanotechnology, robotics, and other new materials, as well as it itself.2 this style of practice does not use technology to create newartworks so much as it uses artistic practice to manage and interpretinformation at the cusp of technological and scientific research.this new kind of art and design practice looks increasingly liketechnical research, but it is done from an artistic or design rather thana scientific perspectiveñit asks different kinds of questions and usesdifferent kinds of methods to search for answers. generally speaking,technical research focuses almost exclusively on new technical possibilities: what new things can be done? how can they be done faster ormore efficiently? by contrast, artistic and design work tends to focuson the social and cultural meaning of the technology that is underdevelopment. this aspect differentiates the approach from that ofconventional cs, which does not tend to address explicitly such implications of decisions about system design and implementation, andwhich may look askance at approaches that have a social scienceflavor. while a traditional work of art can be thought of as a representation of an artistic concept, the information arts often ask what technologies themselves (perhaps unintentionally) express and how theyought to be reconceived.3artistsõ questioning can be a powerful, constructive force. in particular, since the mid19th century artists have often personified theòuser to comeó for new cultural technologies. many media technological advances have arisen in the arts and design fields or have beenmodeled there, a decade or a generation ahead of the industrialacademic curve; see box 4.1. for alvy ray smith, the prominentcomputer graphics expert, artists are most valuable as òexplorers atthe edge of our culture,ó and he looks to them to òtell the rest of uswhat [computation] really is.ó4 thus, the information artist functionsas an archetypal knowledge worker: someone able to òpenetrateconventional organizations to which their continuing attachment to anôexternalõ knowledge community represents a valuable asset.ó5 itcp2see stephen wilson, 2001, information arts, mit press, cambridge, mass. also seelinks to online resources at <http://online.sfsu.edu/~infoarts/links/wilson.artlinks2.html>.3the catõs meaow lecture series at new york university, for example, was framedaround such questions; see box 6.1 for details.4alvy ray smith, 1998, òthe stuff of dreams (25 years = 100,000x),ó computergraphics world 21(7): 2729.5see paul a. david and dominique foray. 2002. òan introduction to the economy ofthe knowledge society,ó international social science journal (unesco 171) 54:2537.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity98box 4.1far from unprecedented:influences of art and design on information technologythe role of artists in defining technology is well established in history, though this history is often notwellknown, as least by modern pundits and chroniclers of information technology (it). for example, louisdaguerre, often cited as one of the pioneers of photography, was neither a chemist nor an optics professor;he was a painter of sets for the opera (and the inventor of daguerreotype).1it is instructive to consider the history of electronic and digital musical instruments. from the pointof view of composers, the critical discussions were about timbre, scales, and compositional techniques andinfluences, thus shaping how electronic and digital music instruments were imagined, used, and developed.the instruments, performances, and means of distribution were all codeveloped between artists andengineers.2 the artistsõ work was a precondition to commercial exploitation (in the direct and indirectsenses).such a process is contrary to the traditional historical accounts of engineers (or the military) drivingthe development of technology and the artists following by finding òcreative applications.ó instead, it is oftenthe artists who make the initial investment. the investment of artists is critical to this innovation, as it is artistswho are motivated to explore alternatives beyond what has already been framed as acceptable, often longbefore major commercial applications can be imagined (e.g., the hammond organ is the direct applicationof patents filed by a musician before the miniaturization of electronics).why are such observations on the way to innovation often omitted from histories of technologyevolution? first, art critics often do not òdo technologyó; art critics and curators, because of their educationand expertise, generally do not have much acquaintance with technological concepts, technologies, ortheoretical tools for technosocial interaction. second, because commercial success has become thedominant measure by which to evaluate and justify technological and scientific research, less attention isaccorded systematically to noncommercial applications.1see òdaguerre, louis jacques mandeó at <http://www.rleggat.com/photohistory/history/daguerr.htm>.2see david dunn, 1992, òa history of electronic music pioneers,ó an essay written for the catalog accompanyingthe exhibition òeigenwelt der apparatewelt: pioneers of electronic art,ó ars electronica, linz, austria, curated bywoody and steina vasulka. also see trevor pinch, 2002, analog days: the invention and impact of the moog synthesizer,harvard university press, cambridge, mass.makes apparent the value of the artist as mediatorñsomeone who isincreasingly intercommunicatingñaddressing itrelated process andcontext and expanding beyond the traditional artistõs focus on content.for an example from the world of design practice, recall the workof karim rashid (presented in chapter 2). the software that controlsthe variations in each of the napkin rings produced is integral to thecreative process. without such software control, the rings would beidentical as the outputs from a mass production process. in bothinstances (with and without the intervening software), the initial design involves creative practice. however, the introduction of rashidõssoftware into the production process offers an additional opportunityfor creativity. in this sense, the reach of the information artist extendsbeyond product design to process design.the reach of theinformation artistextends beyondproduct design toprocess design.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d99modeling disciplines: frommultidisciplinary to transdisciplinarythe relationship between it and the arts and design as discussedin chapter 3 can be described using a multidisciplinary model. eachdiscipline (e.g., architecture) is represented as a circle; the area wherethe circles overlap is the area of intersection (e.g., itenhanced architecture). one implication of this representation is that the nonoverlapping areas do not change. each discipline provides some piece ofits practice or theory that is compatible, useful, or mutually beneficialto other disciplines without any change in the way the discipline itselffundamentally works (see figure 4.1a).6 this kind of representationconveys how aspects of alreadyexisting genres, methods, or theoriesare applied in different contextsñin the case of this report, how it canbe applied in the arts and design areas.but in another possible model (figure 4.1b), the circles do notintersect but instead share a common frame. each discipline maintainsits own knowledge and methodologies but is fully, not partially, opento the other disciplines.7 in this second model, the disciplines not onlyapply their methods in a new context but also are receptive to fundamental changes in knowledge and methodology based on their interaction. what is crucial to enable this kind of interaction is the òframeósurrounding the disciplinesña mutual awareness and understanding,especially a historical understanding, of one another and their relationship. the shared frame may be only a transient phenomenonñthedisciplines may come into contact, engage in some fruitful exchange,and then continue to develop separately and move apart, as contrasted with the multidisciplinary approach sketched in figure 4.1a. intransdisciplinary research,8 the point is not just application of givenmethodologies but also implicationña result of imagining entirely newpossibilities for what disciplines can do.6it is worth noting that areas such as òthe artsó cannot be reasonably containedwithin a circle implying that what is òinó can be distinguished easily from what is òoutó(or even that an òinó versus òoutó categorization is useful). the use of a circle torepresent disciplines is, of course, a heuristic for purposes of exposition.7disciplines can be relatively open or closed in various ways. one way to assesswhether a discipline is open is through the use of tools from bibliometrics. one can, forexample, employ citation analysis to determine the frequency with which a disciplinecites articles in (certain) other disciplines. those disciplines with a higher percentage ofoutsidediscipline citations could be characterized as more open than disciplines withlower percentages. standards (and representational structures more generally) can alsobe examined in their role of affecting openness. standards (e.g., html) can serve aswonderful contributions to work at the intersection of disciplines, but at the same timecan be the source of resistance to change in the home discipline.8margaret a. somerville and david j. rapport, eds., 2000, transdisciplinarity: recreating integrated knowledge, eolss, oxford, u.k.intransdisciplinaryresearch, thepoint is not justapplication ofgivenmethodologiesbut alsoimplicationñaresult ofimaginingentirely newpossibilities forwhat disciplinescan do.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity100 abcab c (b) transdisciplinary model:new context of applicationtransaction space requires understanding ofown and other disciplines¥new common space created specifically from interpenetration of disciplines¥boundaries are shown as perturbed,and they adjust to accommodate the reflection from other circles¥intensity of communication betweendisciplines becomes context for implicationñexpansion beyond context of immediate application to òanticipatory visionó of future possibilities¥transaction space may be transient,leaving separate circles reconstituted basedon a single transactionñor sustained overtime, leading to a durable merging(a) multidisciplinary model: new context of application¥mixes knowledge of disciplines a, b,and c for a common purpose, but each disciplinekeeps its former shape¥intersected area creates new context forapplication of alreadyexisting concepts and methodsñit as a means to replicate, automate,speed up, and/or reduce the cost of prior analogpracticesñart as post hoc òbeautificationó ofseparately conceived functionality stylingfigure 4.1 models of the relationship between information technology and the arts and design: multidisciplinary versustransdisciplinary. source: adapted from margaret a. somerville and david j. rapport, eds., 2000, transdisciplinarity:recreating integrated knowledge, eolss, oxford, u.k, pp. 248249.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d101the project on internet data sonification (introduced in chapter 2)involving a lucent technologies statistician and a media artist/composer illustrates the differences between the two models. broughttogether through an ad hoc, shortterm artistinresidency effort cosponsored by lucent technologies and the brooklyn academy ofmusic, neither the scientist nor the artist had a preexisting hypothesisor conception of how to combine musical gesture and statistical modeling of data. the outcome was a prototype listening station thatconveys the dynamic properties of internet communication flows (e.g.,newsgroups and chat communities) through sounds: melody, texture,and rhythm. this common object resulted from reciprocal learningabout the implications of each field for the other. beginning with a lessjoint or problem definition, a multidisciplinary outcome would havebeen different from thisñand arguably less innovative. for example, acomposer or a painter might have interpreted the abstract patternsrevealed by the data flows; that kind of approach has been seen in artinspired by data visualization. or the statistician might have proposedto a designer the production of an elegant display of quantitativetables.the listening post research prototype has spawned several sequels, each realized in the separate worlds of the scientistõs and theartistõs ongoing work. mark hansen, the scientist, defined applications relevant to the operation of lucent networkmonitoring facilities; ben rubin, the artist, continued to present datadriven networksonification in musical and gallery contexts. the team has, in fact,endured longer than the initial pilot.9 two coauthored papers on theresults of the experiment address different specialist readers, accounting for the collaboratorsõ contribution symmetrically.10 intellectualproperty agreements unique to the dynamics of the project were developed after some difficulty; they recognized that the artistic contentand the invented intellectual propertyñtogether constituting theproject outcomeñare inextricably merged and are coowned.11in the intersection of multiple disciplines described above, theroles of artists and designers and computer scientists are clearcut.artists and designers have needs that computer scientists can fulfill.engaging in a fruitful exchange requires conversations to identifythose needs and to determine how computer scientists can best fulfill9through the sponsorship of the rockefeller foundation, their collaboration continues as of this writing: the òben rubin and mark hansen: listening postó exhibition isrunning at the whitney museum of american art from december 17, 2002, throughmarch 9, 2003; see <http://www.whitney.org/information/press/87.html>.10ben rubin and mark h. hansen, 2000, òthe audiences would be the artists andtheir life would be the arts,ó ieee multimedia 7(2): 69; mark h. hansen and benrubin, 2001, òbabble online: applying statistics and design to sonify the internet,ó pp.115 in proceedings of the 2001 international conference on auditory display, espoo, finland,july 29august 1.11in 2002, mark hansen joined the faculty of the university of california at losangeles. interestingly, hansen developed two presentations for interviewsñone forfaculties of science and one for faculties of art and design.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity102them. in a transdisciplinary situation, however, artists and designersare not clients of computer scientists but instead interact with them aspeers. bringing to the exchange their own disciplinary methodologiesand value systems, artists and designers have their own opinionsabout what research ought to be pursued and how it ought to be done.one result is a fundamental rethinking of how research into information technology might be conceived.implications for computer sciencefor computer science work, the advantages of being open to theperspectives of the arts and design disciplines are potentially large.computer science already has a productive tradition of drawing onother disciplines, from mathematics to physics to cognitive psychology, to advance its own work by exploring new problems and thinking about new potential solutions to those problems.12 similarly,responding to disciplines from the arts and design worlds opens thepossibility of discovering new methodologies for and solutions toproblems that, until now, have been beyond the reach of the computerscience field to solve or perhaps even articulate. often the effects of itresearch have proved profound (and sometimes unintentionally so),13and itcp serves as a way for those with primarily technical intereststo communicate with those more interested in the social, cultural, andpolitical aspects of technology.the perspectives of the information arts are particularly interesting in cases where cs research itself is already moving toward theperspective embodied by art and design practices. one example ofsuch a shift is in the field of humancomputer interaction (hci). in thelast 10 years, the field has moved gradually from focusing largely onthe hardware and software of humancomputer interaction (e.g., development of the mouse and graphical interface) to paying more attention to human psychology (e.g., what mental models of software areconstructed by users) and social interaction (e.g., how software cansupport project collaboration). more recently, hci has begun to drawmore broadly on the social sciences, especially ethnography (the rigorous, qualitative study of human use and contexts of technology), inorder to design systems that better fit into the lives of human users.simultaneously, the connections have deepened between hci and thedesign community, which approaches humancomputer interaction inmore openended ways.14 these shifts in hci as a field bring it closer12see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1992, computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering,juris hartmanis and herbert lin, eds., national academy press, washington, d.c.13for example, it is clear that the developers of transmission control protocol/internet protocol were not looking to challenge the music recording industry, or toenable the wide distribution of technical information on making inexpensive bombs.14see, for example, terry winograd, john bennett, laura de young, peter s. gordon,and brad hartfield, eds., 1996, bringing design to software, acm press, new york, n.y.,and addisonwesley, reading, mass.one result is afundamentalrethinking of howresearch intoinformationtechnology mightbe conceived.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d103to the information arts and suggest that there is now a potential forsynergy between the two.one such area where the methodology and attention to social,cultural, and political context typical of the information arts maybenefit hci is the use of technology outside of work contexts. workapplications tend to focus on efficient, problemsolving functionalityfor which we now have wellunderstood design and evaluation techniques. applications for everyday life, however, suggest the importance of aspects that are less understood and are hard to quantify, suchas quality of experience, meaningfulness, personal values, identity,and appropriateness to social and cultural contextñareas for whichthe perspectives of the information arts may be particularly appropriate. this concern with the human element can already be seen inconsumer electronics, which have a history of drawing on marketresearch and human factors analysis and which often depend ondesign for competitive advantage; the broader uses of it envisionedwith increases in the embedding of computing and communicationscomponents implies a broader and often rather different set of personal and other nonworkfocused technologies in the future. hciresearchers are realizing that there is a need to do some fundamentalrethinking of hci methods to understand what these assumptionsare, to analyze the extent to which they are applicable to the newcontexts of everyday life, and, in cases where they are not applicable,to invent new methodologies that are more appropriate.15 this kindof rethinking is an endeavor for which the information arts can behelpful; concrete examples where interaction may be particularly fruitful are discussed further in the section ònonutilitarian evaluationóbelow.similar shifts are occurring in other areas of computer science. inartificial intelligence (ai), for example, there has recently been a focuson lifelike computer characters or believable agents, with a great dealof interest in incorporating approaches from drama and the arts intoagent design.16 the development of algorithms for information retrieval on the web has underscored the need to combine theoretical15see, for example, recent publications of the acm press, including the proceedingsfrom the chi 2002 workshop on funology, the hci 2002 workshop on understandinguser experience: literary analysis meets hci, and the chi 2003 workshop on designing culturally situated technology for the home; also bill gaver and heather martin,2000, òalternatives: exploring information appliances through conceptual designproposals,ó pp. 209216 in proceedings of the chi 2000 conference on human factors incomputing systems; acm press, new york; debby hindus, scott d. mainwaring, nicoleleduc, anna elisabeth hagstrım, and oliver bayley, 2001, òcasablanca: designingsocial communication devices for the home,ó pp. 325332 in proceedings of chi õ01,acm press, new york; and jon oõbrien and tom rodden, 1997, òinteractive systems indomestic environment,ó pp. 247259 in proceedings of the 1997 conference on designinginteractive systems, acm press, new york.16see, for example, clark elliott and jacek brzezinski, 1998, òautonomous agents assynthetic characters,ó ai magazine 19(2): 1330; and joseph bates, 1994, òthe role ofemotion in believable agents,ó communications of the acm 37(7): 122125. also see box4.2.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity104computer science with an understanding of the social structure of theweb17 and raises potential connections to the cultural politics of webinformation,18 an area in which the information arts are working. forareas like these, in which purely technical solutions do not seemadequate to fully address the problems of interest to computer scientists, interaction and engagement with information arts could be beneficial to computer science.because the information arts are inherently transdisciplinary, theyhold the possibility of motivating more than just the straightforwarduse of information arts for computer scienceõs ends or simple collaboration between information artists and computer scientists. instead,there can be a mingling and repositioning of each interacting discipline. from the perspective of computer science, this implies a moveto more qualitative, rather than quantitative, research methods; agreater incorporation of political, social, and ethical considerationsinto computer science research; and more focus on intuition and aesthetics.19 given the movements that have already taken place on thearts and design side, productive crossfertilization and a broader basefor itcp will depend on the flexibility and openness of individualresearchers, research communities, departments, universities, and professional societiesñthe institutions and organizations that define academic computer science.20 as detailed elsewhere in this report, thereis both movement in that direction21 and resistance to such movement.promising areasduring the course of its deliberations, the committee identified anumber of promising areas for transdisciplinary work. several haveattracted fairly active interest, whereas others are just emerging. theyopen the possibility of fruitful discussion and collaboration in these17see j. kleinberg and s. lawrence, 2001, òthe structure of the web,ó science 294(5548):18491850.18richard rogers, ed., 2000, preferred placement, jan van eyck akademie, maastricht,the netherlands.19for a compelling example of how ai research can be rethought to incorporatecritical thinking from the humanities, see the discussion of critical technical practices inphilip e. agre, 1997, computation and human experience, cambridge university press,cambridge, u.k. for a similar integration of critical thinking and hci, see paul dourish,2001, where the action is, mit press, cambridge, mass.20see chapter 6 for discussion.21sometimes movement may occur in teaching, as opposed to research, the focus ofmost of the examples in this report. for example, robert coover developed òcavewriting,ó a course at brown university that brought together english students, artistsfrom the rhode island school of design, and computer scientists from the brown csdepartment. they explored the creative potential of the cave, a highend virtual realityenvironment for text and related digital media elements of sound and image in virtualspace.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d105areas between computer scientists and artists and designers engagedin computersciencelike work. the discussion below focuses on areasthat the information arts are particularly well suited to address basedon the following factors: the areas involve the social context orpolitics of computing; they raise difficult ethical issues that need to beaddressed in the context of technical research; they have high public orsocial impact; and/or they suggest fundamental rethinking of computer science. although the following compilation is neither comprehensive nor predictive of the most promising areas, it does give anidea of the breadth of possibilities for productive engagement between the information arts and computer science.mixed realitymixed reality is a new, interactive medium in which computing istaken off the desktop or headmounted display and linked with realworld objects and places to become part of everyday, physical lives. inthese approaches, it development and other creative practices aresynergistic. on the one hand, it provides a new medium for creativeexpression, opening up a space of possible developments to be explored. design and media art practice, on the other hand, offer abroader functional and aesthetic perspective. an art and design perspective introduces a cultural awareness that is essential in the development of devices that not only are functional but also contribute tothe quality of life in a less direct, but often more profound, way.22in one classic design, durrell bishopõs marble answering machine,each message is represented by a marble (see figure 4.2).23 when amessage is taken, the machine produces a marble.24 the marble can bepicked up and put back into the machine in order to play the message.placed on a matching phone, the marble causes the phone to dial theoriginal caller. messages are deleted by recycling the marble in themachine. the marble answering machine speaks to humansõ physicality.25approaches to mixed reality include tangible media and augmented reality. in tangible media, physical objects like bishopõs marblesfor areas inwhich purelytechnicalsolutions do notseem adequate,interaction andengagement withinformation artscould bebeneficial tocomputer science.22considerations beyond the utilitarian are pervasive and dominant in developedeconomies: the design and production of myriad products and services, from automobiles and clothing to news services and computer systems, incorporate many featuresthat are not strictly necessary from a functional perspective.23gillian cramptonsmith, 1995, òthe hand that rocks the cradle,ó i.d., may/june,pp. 6065.24the movie minority report (produced in 2002 by 20th century fox and starringtom cruise) employs a similar marble to announce the names of the victim(s) andperpetrator(s) of crimes that will take place in the future.25dag svanaes and william verplank, 2000, òin search of metaphors for tangibleuser interfaces,ó 2000 conference on designing augmented reality environments, association for computing machinery, new york.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity106have computational properties. augmented reality is an alternative tovirtual reality in which virtual images and data are projected onto andthereby incorporated with the physical world. for example, one canlook through augmentedreality binoculars mounted in the atriumlobby of the center for art and media (zkm) in karlsruhe, germany,to see the heart of the building, overlaid with labels explaining what isdone on the different floors: reality plus.26 both augmented realityand tangible media have their roots in mark weiserõs vision of ubiquitous computing.27technical issues in mixed reality include the maintenance of correspondence between realworld and virtual objects, standards forinterobject communication, perception (including vision processing,video tracking of objects, plan recognition, and integration of multipleforms of sensory data), spatial reasoning, and learning and adaptation. but designing and constructing mixedreality devices that arefunctional, useful, interesting, and desirable are not only technicalchallenges, but also artistic and practical challenges. university envic. recycle old messagesa. pick up new messagesb. play messagesc. recycle old messagesa. pick up new messagesb. play messagesfigure 4.2 a conception of durrell bishopõs marble answering machine. when a new message is left, the machinedeposits a marble in the upper tray (a) for the recipient to find. the marble can then be placed on the lower indentation (b)to play the message. when the message is no longer needed, the recipient recycles it by dropping the marble into the hole(c). illustration created by jennifer m. bishop, computer science and telecommunications board staff.26work by jeffrey shaw; see <http://www.zkm.de>.27a vision in which processors are embedded in everyday objects and networkedtogether would integrate computation invisibly and seamlessly into daily life. see markweiser, 1991, òthe computer for the 21st century,ó scientific american 265(3): 94104.ubiquitous computing is discussed further in the section òmobile and ubiquitouscomputing,ó below.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d107ronments are one venue where the relevant expertise and aspirationsare brought together.at georgia institute of technologyõs graphics, visualization, andusability center, for example, computer scientist blair macintyre andmedia theorist jay david bolter collaborate on the sweet auburnproject, crossinforming augmentedreality technology and contentdevelopment. they are developing applications to support tours ofatlantaõs historic auburn district, in which òghostsó from auburnõspast appear superimposed over the landscape and address users withtheir stories.28 at the mit media laboratory, hiroshi ishiiõs tangiblemedia group integrates art, design, and humancomputer interactionto generate premarket speculative applications such as music bottlesthat can be uncorked to release the music inside and òcurlybotsó thatrecord and play back physical gestures.29 a playful, speculative design approach is taken at the computerrelated design program atthe royal college of art (london), home of bishopõs marble answering machine and whimsical applications ranging from a telepathictamagotchi30 to a bird feeder that use principles of reinforcementlearning to teach songbirds new tunes.computer gamescomputer games, having long ago left their roots as playful experiments for academic computer scientists, are emerging as a contemporary topic of computer science research because advances inmany component technologies have driven burgeoning interest inògamesó for serious contexts as well as entertainment.31 thus, forexample, in the mid1990s the department of defense (dod) began toexplore prospects for research collaborations among people doingmodeling and simulation in defense and entertainment (includinggames) contexts,32 and the defense advanced research projects agency28blair macintyre, marco lohse, jay bolter, and emmanuel moreno, 2001, òghosts inthe machine: integrating 2d video actors into a 3d ar system,ó pp. 8083 in proceedingsof 2nd international symposium on mixed reality, yokohama, japan, march 1415.29hiroshi ishii and brygg ullmer, 1997, òtangible bits: seamless interfaces betweenpeople, bits and atoms,ó pp. 234241 in proceedings of the 1997 conference on computerhuman interaction, acm press, new york.30a tamagotchi (pronounced òtomahgotcheeó) is a relatively inexpensive toycontaining a small liquidcrystal display, a few touchsensitive user controls, and aprogram in which the image of a small creature is visible. users can see the creaturemature or, if insufficient attention is paid, see the creature die. tamagotchi comes fromthe japanese terms òtamagoó meaning òeggó and òchió as a term of endearment; itmeans, approximately, òlovable egg.ó derived from <http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/0,,sid9gci213089,00.html>. also see anthony dunne, 1999, hertzian tales:electronic products, aesthetic experience & critical design, art books international ltd.,london.31the popular appeal and success of computer games are discussed in chapter 2.32see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1997, modeling and simulation: linking entertainment and defense, national academypress, washington, d.c.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity108has begun to explore the potential of games for decision support. thedod exploration gave rise to an armyfunded center at the university of southern california, the institute for creative technology; related work had already begun at the naval postgraduate school inmonterey, california.computer games offer a unique playground for serious research,not only because of the underlying allure of fun and competition, butalso because important new questions arise. for example, what is abody, a surface (when infinitely malleable), or a space? how does onedeal with a changing sense of time given that one can go back to asaved game? how then does one change the way one plays? howdoes one convey the essence of person despite screen formñgestures,and so onñvarying? most interestingly, designers of massivelymultiplayer online games are grappling, with a large degree of success, with the social, political, and aesthetic issues inherent in virtualworlds. what is the social contract between participants, and betweenthe participant and the designer? what are the consequences of conflicts in the virtual world, and to what degree should those consequences be determined by the online population, versus the administration? how should people deal with the distribution of authorshipin an environment where narratives are participatory and emergent?how does one foster organic, selforganizing social structures in avirtual world? how does a designer make places people want notonly to visit, but also to inhabit for hundreds or thousands of hoursover the course of several years? these questions raise various issuesfor a number of computer science fields, including information retrieval, database management, and computer graphics, to name afewñthough such questions are not purely cs ones, but rather questions that are truly transdisciplinary. there is evidence that cs isbeginning to address some of these questions (e.g., see the specialissue ògame engines in scientific researchó in the communications ofthe acm, january 2002).33narrative intelligencein the early 1990s, a group of graduate students at the mit medialab formed a new reading group, which they called narrative intelligence (ni).34 the group explored issues at the intersection of narrativeand both human intelligence and ai, seeking to develop a dialoguebetween new computational concepts and technologies and the insights of literary theories such as poststructuralism and semiotics. thegroup came together with an understanding of, and the desire to33one reviewer observed that the cs research agenda was being only modestlyinfluenced as of november 2002.34marc davis and michael travers, 1999, òa brief overview of the narrative intelligence reading group,ó pp. 1116 in proceedings of the 1999 aaai symposium on narrativeintelligence, michael mateas and phoebe sengers, eds., aaai press, menlo park, calif.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d109reconcile, the contradictions and incompatibilities between these twoworld views: ai technology focused by and large on formal, logicalrepresentation and objectivity, whereas the analytical tools providedby new literary theories focused on subjectivity, multiplicity, and thelimitations of formalism. the pragmatics of negotiating the differencesbetween these world views led to a creative foment. the group flourished, exploring issues in the philosophy of mind, media theory, hci,psychology, social computing, constructionism, and ai, developingtheories and applications in all these areas, influencing the direction ofthe doctoral program at the media lab, and connecting to a widernetwork of researchers who joined in the groupõs discussions over email. narrative intelligence as a field was born.ni research obviously incorporates influences from a variety offields. artificial intelligence, with tools to model human emotion,personality, and narrative abilities, provides a framework from whichmuch of the research grows. psychology, especially narrative psychology, generates explanations of the human ability to understand theworld through narrative, creating a basis for systems that model orsupport this ability. art research raises new questions about the nature of narrative representation, keeping the concept of narrative fresh.cultural studies analyze hidden cultural narratives, including the stories ai researchers tell through their research. literary studies examine the nature of narrative in traditional and interactive forms. dramaprovides understanding of the realtime performance of narrative.this emphasis on mixing technology development with artistic andhumanistic perspectives is unusual in ai. it has supported the generation of new research fields within ai, such as lifelike interactive computer characters, as well as an increase in crossdisciplinary engagement between ai and other fields.35at the same time, narrative trends took on importance in relatedfields. the concept of supporting human narrative understandingthrough the interface of human and computer began to gain ground inthe field of hci. work in media studies on hypertext and interactivefiction was inspiring a generation of systems that support narrative innew ways. within ai, this interest began to spur research in ai forinteractive fiction and entertainment,36 including interactive computer35narrative as a topic of research is not new to ai. in the 1970s and early 1980s, therewas substantial interest in modeling story understanding and story generation, particularly by roger schankõs research group at yale university. programs developed by thegroupñwhich were able to generate stories and answer questions about them, albeit inlimited ways and domainsñillustrated theories of human understanding and the structure of knowledge in the mind. massive, unwieldy, and hard to extend, these systemsran into trouble during the òai winteró of the 1980s. researchers, seeking to combat theimage of ai as never living up to its inflated claims, favored clearly defined problemswith easily measurable outcomesña situation that is not conducive to this kind ofcreative workñand, therefore, narrative fell out of favor for a decade as a research topicin ai.36joseph bates, 1992, òvirtual reality, art, and entertainment,ó presence: the journalof teleoperators and virtual environments 1(1): 133138.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity110characters and interactive plots. many of these research areas explicitly draw on the arts and drama as a source of inspiration. with thegrowth of the computer game industry has come an interest in newgame forms that support narrative in more complex and interestingways than a stereotypical shootandkill form.research in ni is flourishing, with applications in a variety ofareas. narrative interfaces explore possibilities for making interfacesmore usable by incorporating elements of story, for example by embodying interaction in a storytelling character. artificial agents canthemselves be designed to use narrative, as humans do, to make senseof the world and each other (see box 4.2). researchers are developingsystems to support human storytelling, as in the case of plush toys thatchildren can program to tell their stories to families and friends.37databases of stories allow people to search for and share stories pertinent to their experiences.38 stories can be automatically generated,perhaps in response to input from human users. interactive digitalvideo allows video sequences to be generated interactively, tellingbox 4.2virtual charactersñimprovisational actorsthe research, development, and commercialization of a new class of intelligentagent applications thatreflect a philosophy of learning through play is the focus of extempo systems. softwaredriven virtualcharacters, which extempo systemsõ founder barbara hayesroth1 calls improvisational actors, can take theform of a human, an animal, or just about anything the imagination can dream up, to interact directly withpeople visiting a web site. what makes them different from other types of intelligent agents is their abilityto improvise stories. according to hayesroth, this design allows the actors to achieve their goals whileproviding engaging conversation for many different web site visitors. one of extempoõs creations, a dognamed jack, seeks to achieve six goals when people interact with him: get them involved, guide them to targetinformation, gather customer data, personalize the experience, delight them, and build site loyalty. jackaccomplishes his goals by improvising appropriately in response to a situation. for example, as a visitorenters a site, jack says what he can do for the person. if the visitor stops òtalking,ó jack is programmed witha few things to say based on the content of the conversation thus far. like a human, jack is designed to havea certain protocol involving turn taking and interruption. this allows him to have characteristics of intelligentconversation, such as making functional transformations and analogizing between topics.1see <http://www.extempo.com> for additional information about extempo systems and the work of barbarahayesroth, who was a briefer at the committeeõs january 2001 meeting held at stanford university.37marina umaschi, 1997, òsoft toys with computer hearts: building personalstorytelling environments,ó pp. 2021 in chi ô97 proceedings, acm press, new york.38see justin cassell and jennifer smith, 1999, òthe victorian laptop,ó pp. 7278 innarrative intelligence: papers from the 1999 fall symposium, technical report fs9901,michael mateas and phoebe sengers, eds., aaai press, menlo park, calif.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d111interactive stories.39 the field of interactive fiction and drama hasexploded,40 including the subfield of interactive computer characters,or characters with emotion and personality who respond to humanusers in the context of a story.41 a complementary area of narrativeintelligence studies the stories that ai researchers themselves tell aboutwhat they are doing.42 sometimes, analysis of these stories can lead tonew forms of ai technology by building on alternative stories.43in this explosion of research, the interdisciplinary engagementbegun by the ni group at the media lab remains presentñin worktaking place in traditional computer science departments, in crossdisciplinary arenas like the media lab, in humanities and arts departments that incorporate new media such as georgia institute oftechnologyõs school of literature, communication, and culture,44and in the computer game industry.nonutilitarian evaluationas discussed above, artists traditionally use evaluation techniquesthat differ radically from those of computer scientists, with little interest in formal user studies and more interest in social impact, culturalmeaning, and the potential political implications of a technology. theyseek to provoke as well as to understand the user. there is an opportunity to develop hybrid evaluation methodologies to combine thebroader concerns of artists with the narrower and more structuredmethodologies of hci. for example, angela garabet, steve mann, andjames fung use strategies that are openended and interpretive45 toevaluate usersõ reactions to wearable computing designs. interestingly, they demonstrate that users are more open to and accepting ofnew technology that is presented as the product of a commercialventure rather than as art. jonas lundberg and colleagues uninten39see glorianna davenport and michael murtaugh, 1997, òautonomist storytellersystems and the shifting sands of story,ó ibm systems journal 46(3): 446456.40for example, see peter weyhrauch, 1997, guiding interactive drama, ph.d. thesis,school of computer science, carnegie mellon university, technical report cmucs97109, pittsburgh, pa.41see bruce mitchell blumberg, 1996, old tricks, new dogs: ethology and interactivecreatures, ph.d. thesis, mit media laboratory, cambridge, mass.42see n. katherine hayles, 1999, how we became posthuman: virtual bodies in cybernetics, literature, and informatics, university of chicago press, chicago.43see philip e. agre, 1997, computation and human experience, cambridge universitypress, cambridge, u.k.; also phoebe sengers, 1998, antiboxology: agent design in cultural context, ph.d. thesis, school of computer science, carnegie mellon university,technical report cmucs98151, pittsburgh, pa.44described in chapter 6.45for example, because evaluators are trying to understand how people react to asystem, users might not be told about the purpose or operation of a system. see angelagarabet,steve mann, and james fung, 2002, òexploring design through wearablecomputing art(ifacts),ócomputerhuman interaction 2002, interactive poster: fun,pp.634635.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity112tionally achieved similar results in their explorations of a provocativetechnology, a refrigerator that videotaped its users, ostensibly allowing those who shared the refrigerator to find out if someone had stolentheir food. although the goal was to confront users with negativeaspects of technology, users who saw the òproductó demonstrated inan ostensibly commercial presentation were surprisingly enthusiastic.46 such results may motivate some artists to be more interested incollaborations with commercial objectives than they might otherwisebe.evaluation techniques drawing on both hci and arts traditionscould rigorously examine not only the usability and utility of softwareand electronic products, but also the meanings they may take on inusersõ everyday lives, the background cultural assumptions that underlie them (for example, the assumptions designers make about whatusers are like), and their potential impact on current cultural issuesand debates, such as intellectual property issues. at the same time,standard hci techniques appropriately adapted to the goals of artists(often far removed from issues of usefulness and efficiency that current techniques can address) may help improve the sometimes opaquedesign of interactive artwork. to achieve these goals will likely requirea fundamental rethinking of the notion of user tests, as well as otherevaluations. in an early example of what such work might look like,artistdesigners anthony dunne and fiona raby evaluated the placebo project, electronically enhanced furniture that makes users awareof activity in the electromagnetic spectrum, through openended interviews with users combined with photographic portraits of users withtheir devices.47 such techniques allow designers to do evaluation in aform that is to some extent recognizable and understandable to hcipractitioners, while exploring issues that matter to artists, such as thesubjective nature of user experience, the stories that give devices notonly functionality but also meaning in human context, and the messages that information technologies intentionally or unintentionallycommunicate to users. there is a need to develop a repertoire ofevaluation techniques appropriate for these more openended questions that is as wide and deep as that already available for the relatively well defined problems of usability and efficiency.experimental consumer product designcomputing is creating new challenges as it moves into everydaylife. the impact of it on everyday culture is felt particularly stronglythrough electronic consumer products such as handheld computers,46jonas lundberg, aseel ibrahim, david jınsson, sinna lindquist, and pernillaqvarfordt, 2002, òthe snatcher catcher: an interactive refrigerator,ó short paper,nordichi 2002, pp. 209211.47anthony dunne and fiona raby, 2001, design noir: the secret life of electronicobjects, august/birkhaeuser, basel, switzerland.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d113music storage and playback devices, and electronic toys. designersfiona raby and anthony dunne have argued that such consumerproducts are currently designed much the same way as hollywoodmovies: they are generally uncontroversial, focused on socially acceptable needs, and broadly marketed, and they serve an optimistically idealized lifestyle. in the analogy to film, they note that thealternatives to mainstream hollywood filmñsuch as film noir, experimental film, and independent cinemañconsistently develop techniquesof narrative and visual style that are later adopted by hollywood, thusin effect serving an r&d role.48 likewise, experimental designersoften develop ideas that, while often not immediately marketed, influence and eventually help redirect contemporary design practices inmarketed products.experimental designers explore a range of issues and ideas thatare often different from those of individuals working in specific product fields who are more constrained by the demands of the market.their work often explores issues at the intersection of product designand social issues. for example, the 2002 show of the interaction designprogram at the royal college of art included pedro sepulvedaõsarchitectural designs responding to fears and anxieties about cell phoneradiation. there is tremendous potential for itcp not only inreconfiguring existing consumer electronic applications, but also inimagining and building prototypes for new applications and markets.mobile and ubiquitous computingas hardware components become smaller, faster, and cheaper, itis being embedded into more and more physical devices, linked together through (often wireless) networks. networked systems of embedded computers (emnets) will be largely invisible but extremelypowerful, allowing information to be collected, shared, and processedin new ways. emnets promise significant changes in environmentaland personal monitoring as well as scientific research. thousands ormillions of sensors could monitor the environment, the battlefield, thehome, the office, or the factory floor; smart space containing intelligentsurfaces and appliances would provide access to computational resources.49however, product development often follows the path of leastresistance, resulting in products that are technically new but do nottake full advantage of the broad conceptual design space that is openedup by mobile and ubiquitous technologies. for instance, it is notuncommon to simply replace discrete analog or digital electronicswith an inexpensive microcontroller, or to imagine faster or smaller48dunne and raby, 2001, design noir.49this paragraph is drawn from computer science and telecommunications board,national research council, 2001, embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networkedsystems of embedded computers, national academy press, washington, d.c.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity114versions of existing applications. these approaches reflect an internaltechnical logic and a safe approach to introducing new products toconsumers in a competitive marketplace. as a result, they can ignoresome of the larger challenges in designing devices that could andshould meaningfully support everyday quality of life.the views of social scientists, designers, and artists are needed toaddress the potential implications of emnets. imagine living in aworld where it is impossible for anyone to get lost anywhere. cars,wireless devices, laptops, tvs, and even articles of clothing will always be able to tell you and others exactly where you are. imagine alsoliving in a world where devices recognize a personõs speech, emotions(through physical expressions and tone of voice), and likes and dislikes, and respond accordingly. now, many who use email and theweb enjoy relationships that involve real, but digitized, humans. willtechnology make so much available without complaint that the needfor interpersonal relations dissolves? will that relationship with technology generate an illusion of satisfaction, knowledge, creativity, andlife? these are the kinds of questions that influence it research, andthey are also the kinds of questions that inspire artistic exploration viaitcp50ñboth activities where governmentfunded academic researchor philanthropically supported artsbased activity can explore ideasnot likely to flow from conventional commercial efforts.51the development of smart appliances for the home provides aninteresting case study. many of the gadgets being developed todayñfrom refrigerators that can determine when to order more milk andscales that monitor usersõ weight gain and suggest lowcalorie recipesto home entertainment systems that remember the preferred settingsof different users in the homeñare obvious extensions of alreadyexisting technologies. the approach of the information arts, in whichtechnical questions are seen as interrelated with social and culturalquestions, lends itself well to a more fundamental shift in the design ofsmart appliances to support not only new technologies but also new,better, and/or more interesting ways of living in the home. the domestic environments project of the equator research collaboration,52funded by the u.k. engineering and physical sciences research council, is one model of how computer scientists collaborating with artistdesigners and social scientists can develop appliances that are interesting both technically and socially. one of the appliances is a òdrift50although this chapter focuses on how itcp, or the information arts, might influence the discipline of computer science, clearly itcp can (and does) influence theagenda for artists and designers as well. in this sense, it does much more than providetools to the arts and design disciplines.51as a comparison, consider the challenge of developing new kinds of content andapplications for broadband networks. as cstb has observed previously, there is animportant role for academic research. see computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council, 2002, broadband: bringing home the bits, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.52see <http://www.equator.ac.uk/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d115tableó designed to promote daydreaming and reflection. a òwindowóbuilt into the table shows images of the british countryside. as objectsare placed on the table, the window begins to drift slowly over thecountryside.the focus on security resulting from the september 11, 2001, terrorist attacks may well be a theme worthy of exploration. as technologists push ahead an agenda for more robust computer security, theinformation arts would promote an agenda of how to improve security with the least harm to society (or even allowing for the possibilityof improved security and a net positive gain to quality of life).53additional areas of interest include work inspired by the implicationsof intellectual property law and policy for the digital environment (seechapter 7 for a discussion of digital copyright) and bioinformatics.conclusiontwo different kinds of intersection between it and creative practices are presented in chapters 3 and 4. on the one hand, chapter 3looks at the use of information technology as a medium for art anddesign practices, suggesting that computer science can support itcp.on the other, chapter 4 looks at ways in which art practice and designand computer science can become fused, leading to new fundamentalinsights into the nature of computer science itself. in practice, thesetwo kinds of intersection are not disjoint. for example, imagine thedevelopment of new word processors with input from professionalwriters (see box 4.3).in policy circles, a vigorous debate has been taking place in recentyears about whether knowledge production at large is shifting fromdisciplinebound, strongly bounded, and relatively stable models totransdisciplinary, loosely coupled, and transient ones.54 there is littleto be gained by preferring either multidisciplinary or transdisciplinaryexchanges; both have their place and are capable of generating usefuland interesting results.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥53of course, new security sensitivities could have the side effect of complicatingitcp activities that seem to take advantage of weaknesses in order to manipulateconventional it.54david et al. (1999) attacks gibbons et al. (1994); gibbons et al. (2001) responds.paul david, dominique foray, and w. edward steinmueller, 1999, òthe researchnetwork and the new economics of science: from metaphors to organizationalbehaviors,ó in the organization of economic innovation in europe, a. gambardella and f.malerba, eds., cambridge university press, cambridge, u.k., and new york; michaelgibbons, camille limoges, h. nowotny, s. schwartzman, p. scott, and m. trow, 1994,the new production of knowledge. the dynamics of science and research in contemporarysocieties, sage, london; michael gibbons, helga nowotny, and peter scott, 2001, rethinking science: knowledge and the public in an age of uncertainty, blackwell, malden,mass.there is little to begained bypreferring eithermultidisciplinary ortransdisciplinaryexchanges; bothare capable ofgenerating usefuland interestingresults.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity116box 4.3information technology and word processingconsider it tools that support writing, such as the word processor. most word processors are basedon an underlying representation of text as a long string of characters, each having some properties affectingits surface appearance. this was not a deeply thought out metaphor for the process of writing; rather itevolved through generations of automation toolsñthe word processor as a better typewriter, or a softwaretool for automating typesetting. some word processors evolved to have a rudimentary structuralrepresentation of writingñoutlines, for exampleñbut the basic representation shines through even stylesheets and wizards. an apparent benefit of this approach is that it supports all kinds of writing equally well:it does not attempt to reinforce one writing style or approach to composition in favor of another (ignoring,for the moment, the effects of grammar checkers and other addons that attempt to critique the actualwriting). however, there is little doubt that the ease with which revisions can be made, ranging fromtypographical corrections to particular largescale structural changes, has influenced the approach one takesto writing. this design reflects choices by software developers to structure writing as a simple string ofcharacters, provide contextblind editing operations such as copy and paste, and let users work through thehigherlevel concepts and details for themselves.as an example of a realization of a completely different set of design choices, consider dramatica proña popular tool for developing screenplays.1 superficially, it is still a tool for supporting writing. however,it uses a domain model for screenwriting, including characters, themes, scenes, plot progression, characterdevelopment, and so on. it claims 32,768 òstory forms,ó allows four different viewpoints on the story beingtold (òthroughlinesó), and contains models of how plots develop, how character traits relate to one another,and how characters can respond to challenges. an intended side effect of this approach is that it forces theuser to consider certain aspects of structure, character, plot, and theme, claiming the benefits of òexpandingyour creative potential.ó without passing judgment on this particular tool, it is fair to note that its designreflects different choicesñan attempt to deeply embody domain knowledge, a focus on supporting higherlevel detailsñand, in fact, provides very limited editing operations such as copy and paste and virtuallyignores issues related to the surface appearance of text. it is intended to address a much narrower set oftasks than a generalpurpose word processing tool and, as such, would be of little use in writing a reportsuch as this one. could a writer create a new kind of screenplay for a radically new kind of film using thistool, or would such a creation be outside its scope? is it conceivable that a writer could push against theboundaries created by such a tool, abuse its constructs in various ways, and produce something surprisingto the tools designers? does having these boundaries against which to push perhaps expand creativepotential even more than having structures within which to work?2not enough is known about the deep impact of such design choices on users. however, it could provevery useful to explore, as an example, different kinds of word processors that could be designed, for instance,based on radically different notions of what writing is about, or on some deep criticism of the underlyingassumptions embodied in typical word processors from the point of view of writers. the result could bea meaningful intellectual shift in computer science, as well as a tool that is much more useful for writersñand possibly for the rest of us as well.1this discussion is based on version 4.0 of dramatica. see <http://www.dramatica.com/> for details.2dramatica is intended as a tool for developing story lines, not for producing the screenplay document. however,it does interface with a more traditionally styled word processor, tailored to the unique needs of producingscreenplays. this is another example of the kind of choices made by a designer. further research into innovative toolsfor supporting creative writing might make it possible to integrate both metaphors within a single tool.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the influence of art and design on computer science r&d117but both the multidisciplinary and the transdisciplinary modelsmake clear that there is a continuing need to maintain the integrity ofthe traditional disciplines, both in the arts and in the sciences. withouta disciplinary frame, the richness of disciplinary practices, methodologies, and concepts can become lost, leaving an oversimplified crossdisciplinary knowledge domain. this danger exists when any practiceis digitized in the absence of an appropriate model, as for example inarts education when young people have become wedded to the prescripted options of packaged applications and are only capable ofcreating photoshop art. what paul david and his coauthors fearwould become òcutprice research motelsó in scientific research55 corresponds closely to the degeneration of artistic quality that is possiblewhere electronic art forms (or media art or the modish ònew mediaó)have been cut loose from their deep connections to older and richer artpractices.finally, it should be noted that the transient, loose coupling oftransdisciplinary creativity runs an everpresent risk of prematurebureaucratization.56 a single successful outcome is a necessary but byno means sufficient reason to continue crossdisciplinary work in thesame vein. in some cases, the outcome of a rich experimental device isbest evaluated and further developed in the separate but transformeddisciplines that contributed to it. in other cases, however, the committee has found persuasive evidence of the need for the sustained bridging of disciplines, involving the development of both individual practices and a community of researchers in the crossdisciplinary areawith correspondingly innovative institutional structures (and theseare discussed in chapter 5).55david et al., 1999, òthe research network and the new economics of science,ó p.334.56as one reviewer notes, there is much to learn from history. see carolyn marvin,1998, when old technologies were new, oxford university press; brian winston, 1998,media technology and society, routledge, london; and paul n. edwards, 1996, the closedworld: computers and the politics of discourse in cold war america, mit press, cambridge,mass. but much of itcp history is undocumented or otherwise not very accessible, andtherefore, it is unteachable in an organized way. as a result, practitioners are unawareof precedents and relevant prior research, and they constantly reinvent the wheel.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118ˇndividuals and groups involved with information technology and creative practices (itcp) benefit from participating in venues that support, motivate, and display thistype of work. such venues may occupy physical or virtualspaces, vary widely in scale and scope, range from loosely organizedcollectives to formal programs, and be either freestanding or connected to established institutions. they can offer important benefitssuch as access to tools, information resources, work spaces, funding,1and opportunities for communication among practitioners, those whofund and display itcp work, and audiences. this chapter describesand analyzes the evolution and characteristics of these venues for thepurpose of providing guidance for the design of future ones.the first section provides a historical perspective on studiolaboratories, which bring together different domains of knowledge, research, and practiceñthus combining the artistõs (or designerõs) studio with the scientistõs (or engineerõs) laboratory. this section alsointroduces the three classes of modern studiolaboratories: multifaceted newmedia art and design2 organizations (typically nonprofit),mechanisms for public display, and applied research activities in corporations. the remainder of the chapter discusses examples of thesetypes of organizations and activities and draws distinctions betweenpatterns in the united states and those abroad. programs associatedwith academic institutions are an important special case and are discussed in chapter 6.1funding issues are discussed primarily in chapter 8.2newmedia art (and design) can be loosely characterized as art (and design) thatuses it in a significant way. internet art (net art) is a subset of newmedia art, becausethe internet is a subset of it. digital art is also a subset of newmedia art, because newmedia could incorporate nondigital technologies or content.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices119¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥studiolaboratorieshistorical perspectivein the evolution of creative work, the role of individuals in creating new practices and of disciplines in providing tools and methodologies to be reworked is well understood. but the essential role thatinstitutions play in making it possible for individuals and disciplinesto come into contact and flourish can be more difficult to recognize.an accurate history of 20thcentury developments related to itcpwould counter the widespread but false impression that there hasbeen a renaissance of creativity enabled uniquely by the computer,and would make clear that a gradual development of new institutions,especially the studiolaboratory, has also played a central role.the term òrenaissance,ó though, may in fact be appropriate, because the role of institutions in the last century parallels the central,often unrecognized role that they played in the renaissance. in 1950,art historian erwin panofsky pointed out that the age of leonardo anddurer was one of turbulence, decompartmentalization, and in particular great social mobility after the cloistered separation of the medievalworlds of theory and practice. the great advances, he added, wereindeed made by the instrument makers, artists, and engineers, not theprofessors. but what made this possible were new institutions, like theacademies, that served as òtransmission beltsó between previouslyseparated domains of knowledge and practice. perhaps blinded by thebrilliance of the rare figure of the da vincian creator, one may losesight of the importance of the dilettanti who frequented the academiesñpeople who were òinterested in many things.ó3 todayõs studiolaboratories are similarly populated.if the current era is, like panofskyõs renaissance, a period ofhybridity and interdisciplinarity, then it can also be described as aperiod where, in many different, local places, experts of diverse kinds,interested in òmany things,ó meet and learn from one another. thelate 20th century has generally been described as a period of postmodernism, in which the stable values of the past were no longerpertinent and were being replaced by a medley of ideas from differentsources. instead of taking the general view that sees ideas as hopelessly jumbled together, one can look for the complex dynamics thatarise when specific ideas come into contact with each other at a varietyof local, concrete places. this perspective corresponds with recenttrends in social theory, in which there is less focus on the individualan accuratehistory of the 20thcentury wouldcounter thewidespread butfalse impressionthat there hasbeen arenaissance ofcreativity enableduniquely by thecomputer.3erwin panofsky, 1952, òartist, scientist, genius. notes on the renaissance dammerung,ó the renaissance: a symposium, metropolitan museum of art, new york.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity120units of society and more on the complexity that results when theyinteract with each other. this allows us to move from thinking aboutart/design and science/technology as two distinct, separate spheres,and to look instead at how they interact with each other.4 from thisperspective, the studiolaboratory can be viewed as a hybrid institution where such interaction can occur. a useful demarcation point canbe found in the famous bauhaus slogan òart and technology, a newunity,ó in the early 1920s. it is here that a cursory genealogy of thestudiolaboratory can begin. see box 5.1.three classes of modernstudiolaboratoriesthere are three classes (or phases) in the development of modernstudiolaboratories: art/designdriven technology development, public diffusion and critical debate, and industrially sponsored appliedresearch. taken together, the three classes theoretically form a continuum involving upstream experimentation, public diffusion of results, and downstream development. these classes can easily bemerged into a single concern for more innovation and creativity in theartdesigntechnologyscience intersection. however, the reality is thatthe three classes came into being at different times and are rarely inclose productive cooperation. thus, it is not surprising that someaspects of the continuum have been more successful than others,leaving an overall impression of unevenness and some significantgaps.figure 5.1 conveys in broad outline the increasing frequency withwhich studiolaboratories were founded, especially after the 1960s. inthe first phase, research and production were oriented principallytoward the creation of singular, visionary artworks using technologyand little concerned with, or constrained by, wider application (orusability) outside the immediate aesthetic context. in the second phase,toward the end of the 1970s, specialized institutions were planned andestablished to focus on the presentation of new technological art inpublic arenas, and critical analysis and recognition of such work. thethird phase, beginning in the 1980s alongside the opening up of massmarkets for personal computers, packaged enduser applications, andcultural commodities like musical instruments and video games, wasoriented toward applied research and development.among the most oftcited examples from the first phase was experiments in art and technology (e.a.t.), founded by artist robert4karen knorrcetina, 1999, epistemic cultures: how the sciences make knowledge,harvard university press, cambridge, mass. òi also reject the notion that there is asharp distinction between technical (instrumental, productive, rational) activities andsymbolic processes. it is the exclusionary definition of the two that poses the problem.óbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices121box 5.1the bauhausinfluenced by the 19thcentury british arts and crafts movement, the bauhaus is commonly thought ofprimarily in terms of the modern design style with which it is usually associated, or in terms of its formativeinfluence in design education. but aside from its aesthetics, one of the basic issues the bauhaus worked onwas the tension between commitments to research on basic artistic principles and to making saleable,machinereproducible objects. this tension dogged it through its brief but highly influential 14yearexistence. constantly in turmoil, from its founding in the disastrous wake of world war i to suppressionby the nazis, the bauhaus was never a òstable, communal, harmonious ensemble.ó1an important example of the research made possible in the bauhaus context was the work of the òpureóartists who were employed to bring òexact experimentaló methods to the realm of art.2 the painter paulklee, for instance, created a substantial body of theoretical and pedagogical work at the bauhaus, much ofit concerned with the problem of visual notation of dynamic form. this researchproduction was to a largedegree out of sync with the immediate problems of mass production and housing. however, kleeõs sustainedinvestigation of visual form in terms of dynamics proved to have enormous influence on other fields outsideart, such as music composition and film animation, and on computer graphics decades later. all this workwas carried out using traditional means of drawing and painting, and was concerned not with directlyrepresenting the machine age of the bauhaus, but, more deeply, with the logical primitives needed forvisually representing dynamic relationships. kleeõs work was deeply reflective of broader cultural issues ofits time, including the intoxication with speed, transportation, and new models of time. but it was also beyondits time, in that it opened up a rich vein of òexact intuitionsó (as klee himself might have put it) whoseimplications were directly applicable to later practitioners working with newer technologies.the bauhaus ideal of an òexperimental minicosmosó mutually shaped by art, engineering, science, andphilosophical concepts3 served as inspiration and template for subsequent organizations crossing theboundaries between technology and culture. this occurred partly through people, as many of the bauhausleaders immigrated to the united states. but, more generally, the idea of an institutional site for researchto which master artists would attach themselves, if provisionally, has been influential, continuously invokedin the foundation of subsequent art/design and technology research centers since the 1960s. there wereother important influences from the early 20thcentury avantgarde on more recent arttechnologymovements. but the bauhaus developed what sociologist henri lefebvre has called a òspecific rationality,ówhich was new to the cultural sphere.4 this specific rationalityñcharacteristic of the studiolaboratoryñwas inclusive, refusing a sharp distinction between the technoscientific and the symbolicexpressive realms.for the modernist master composer pierre boulez in the 1970s, or the architectural theorist heinrich klotzin the 1980s, or computer scientist pelle ehn in the 1990s, the bauhaus model inspired a holistic approachto codevelopment of new art and new technologies, both informed by theoretical research.51elaine s. hochman, 1997, bauhaus: crucible of modernism, fromm international, new york.2paul klee, 1928, òexact experiments in the realm of art,ó paul klee: the thinking eye, notebooks of paul kleespiller, ed., lund humphires, london.3peter galison, 1990, òaufbau/bauhaus: logical positivism and architectural modernism,ó critical inquiry 16(summer): 709752.4henri lefebvre, 1991 [1974], the production of space, blackwell, oxford.5heinrich klotz, 1990, the center for art and media technology karlsruhe. an architecture competition, okotogon,le mod‘le du bauhaus. points de rep‘re, editions seuil, paris.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity122weimarbauhauschicagobauhausphilipswdrbell labsexploratoriumwnetmitcavsnrcnfbevlchicagoircamars electronicafestivalart + commit media labbanff centrev2zkmparcpairi3aecentergmdarteccanonartlabatr191819451960196619691970197719791980198519881990199119921995nttcce.a.tfigure 5.1 studiolaboratories in the 20th century.ae centerñars electronica, austriaatrñatr media integration and communications systems laboratories, japane.a.t.ñ experiments in art and technologyevlðchicagoñelectronic visualization laboratory, university of illinois, chicagogmdñgerman research center for information technologyi3 networksñintelligent information interfaces, program of european commission fifth framework for researchircamñinstitut de recherche et coordination en acoustique et musique (institute of research and coordination inacoustics and music), parismitðcavsñmassachusetts institute of technologyðcenter for advanced visual studiesnrcðnfbñnational research council canadaðnational film boardnttðiccñnippon telegraph and telephone intercommunication center, tokyoparcðpairñxerox palo alto research centerðartist in residence programv2ñv2organisation, institute for the unstable media, rotterdamwdrñwest german broadcasting networkwnetñwnet television workshop artistinresidence programrauschenberg and bell labs physicist billy klver in new york in1966. the goal of e.a.t. was to establish òan international network ofexperimental services and activities designed to catalyze the physical,economic and social conditions necessary for cooperation betweenartists, engineers and scientists.ó the research role of the contemporary artist was understood by e.a.t. as providing òa unique source ofexperimentation and exploration for developing human environmentsbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices123of the future.ó5 at the same time, other bell labs scientists were alsoengaged in collaborative research, in computer graphics and vision,music, and acoustics.6 also during the late 1960s, at mit, the hungarian artist and bauhaus affiliate gyorgy kepes founded the center foradvanced visual studies, providing a stable location for collaborationbetween artists in residence and universitybased scientists and engineers. in the second phase, the earliest selfstanding arttechnologycenters appearedñnotably the institut de recherche et coordinationen acoustique et musique (ircam) in parisñwith a focus on theartistic rather than the industrial potential of information technology(it) and electronics. composer pierre boulez launched the ircambased on a conception of research/invention as the central activity ofcontemporary musical creation; boulez invoked the òmodel of thebauhausó as crossdisciplinary inspiration for what he considered thenecessary and inevitable collaboration between musicians and scientists.7 the modernist autonomy of the computer music research atircam did not prevent it from also orienting its program toward awider cultural public, aiming to put an otherwise forbidding musicallanguage in the context of the history of 20thcentury music andintellectual life.the second phase, which incorporated festivals, exhibitions, commissions, and competitions of electronic art, marked an increasedcommitment of both public administrations and private corporationstoward exposing the most radical mediabased creativity to a widerpublic. as festivals such as ars electronica became global in scopebeginning in the 1980s, so also plans were drawn up in most advancedindustrial countries to establish permanent centers able to incorporatea dual research/development and public education mandate. amongthe most conspicuous were the zentrum fr kunst und medien (zkm)in germany and the ntt intercommunication center in japan.in the united states, there has been no investment at a comparablescale in active commissioning, exhibition, and public programming ofitcp. some smaller efforts have been made at a consistent level ofquality and commitment, notably in science museums, such as theexploratorium in san francisco. newmedia artists and technoartengineers speak with a common voice in lamenting the lack of welldeveloped circuits for public exhibition, review, and systematic documentation. this was often expressed to the committee as the absenceof europeanstyle institutions in the united states that combine re5experiments in art and technology (e.a.t.), 1969, experiments in art and technologyproceedings, e.a.t., new york.6belltelephone, 1967, òart and science: two worlds merge,ó bell telephone magazine, november/december. also see box 6.3 in chapter 6.7pierre boulez, 1985, le mod‘le du bauhaus. points de rep‘re, editions seuil, paris. interms of computer expertise, ircam depended heavily on the u.s. academic computermusic community, initially duplicating the computer system and software in use atstanford universityõs center for computer research in music and acoustics.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity124search in contemporary media arts with large collections and publicdisplays. artists worry about a lack of contact with the americanpublic, and, more specifically, seek intelligent and informed responsesto created installations and wider professional and disciplinary associations.not that zkm and other such centers are without critics. thegerman philosopher and critic florian roetzer analyzed the mediacenter bandwagon of the late 1980s, when he commented sardonicallythat òeverywhere there are plans to inaugurate media centres, in ordernot to lose the technological ôconnection.õ . . . this new attention issupported by the diffuse intention to get on with ôitõ now, the contentsremaining rather arbitrary, so long as art, technology and science aresomehow joined in some more or less apparent affiliation with business and commerce.ó8 roetzer was then not alone among criticalintellectuals in harboring a deep ambivalence about these institutionaldevelopments, fearing that they would serve only to accelerate thepublic acceptance of automation in everyday life, on the one hand, andto coopt artistsñòwith their purported creativityóñinto becomingcommercial application designers, on the other. as it turned out, explicitly designed linkages between art, research, and industrial innovation developed a good deal beyond roetzerõs cynical prognostications, and rather quickly became the basis for the third phase of thecontemporary studiolaboratory.the third phase was marked by the establishment of the mitmedia laboratory. many observers would probably count the mitmedia lab as the most successful, as well as widely imitated, modelfor industrially sponsored research on art, design, and newmediatechnologies. (because of its connection to an academic institution, thelab is discussed in chapter 6.) the media labõs largescale,precompetitive industrial consortia are global in scope and have inspired a number of institutional responses in other countries. forinstance, the swedish initiative of a network of six interactive institutes, loosely interacting but also differentiated according to technology and artistic focus, grew in large measure out of a national initiative to attract and retain a critical mass of researchers while stilldecentralizing the activity to both large and small cities.9during the third phase, a number of technology companies attempted to harness artistic expertise to further corporate goals. forexample, interval research corporation assembled an unusually diverse research staff, including artists and filmmakers as well as computer and social scientists. throughout the 1990s, xerox palo altoresearch center (parc) supported an inhouse artistinresidencethere is anabsence ofeuropeanstyleinstitutions in theunited states thatcombine researchin contemporarymedia arts withlarge collectionsand publicdisplays.8florian roetzer, 1989, òaesthetics of the immaterial? reflections on the relationbetween the fine arts and the new technologies,ó artware, catalog for the òkunst undelektronikó exhibition, hannover, germany.9see <http://www.interactiveinstitute.se>. also see the discussion in the sectionòhybrid networks,ó below.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices125program, whose intent, according to parc director john seely brown,was to serve as òone of the ways that parc seeks to maintain itself asan innovator, to keep its ground fertile and to stay relevant to theneeds to xerox.ó10 some of these efforts have had positive aspects, butfew, if any, last very long. much of the difficulty seems to be how tojustify them in the corporate context, especially in difficult economictimes. interval research is closed and parcõs work is increasinglyoutside the itcp domain.11multifaceted newmedia artand design organizationsthis section reviews a few of the bestknown examples of newmedia art and design organizations, based mostly in europe (giventhe lack of such organizations in the united states), in two categories:standalone centers and hybrid networks.12 some of these examplesmight serve as learning experiences for the future establishment ofsimilar u.s.based organizations.standalone centersamong the most prominent standalone centers is the zkm13 (acollection of commonly housed institutions involved in newmediaart), which encompasses research and development institutes, a mediaart library, a media art museum, and a modern art museum. the zkmregularly hosts talks, workshops, and conferences on issues in arthistory, technology policy, and cultural criticism of technology. anorth american version of this model is the banff centre in canada,although the scope of the banff centre extends beyond newmediawork and its exhibition programs are limited. other centers includears electronica in austria, the center for culture and communication(c3) foundation in hungary, and the waag society in the netherlands.established in 1988, the zkm (center for art and media) is aninfluential institution that plays an important role in the germancultural scene (zkm has hosted the bambis, for example, the germanequivalent of the emmy awards). founded on the idea that giving¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥10john seely brown, 1999, òintroduction,ó p. xi in art and innovation: the xerox parcartistinresidence program, craig harris, ed., mit press, cambridge, mass.11see the section òcorporate experiences with information technology and creativepracticesó below in this chapter for further discussion of corporate initiatives.12also see the discussion of funding organizations within the international context inchapter 8.13see <http://www.zkm.de/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity126artists access to all of the hardware and software tools and programmers they need to realize their creative vision, zkmõs research institutes maintain cuttingedge hardware and software and a staff ofprogrammers and designers. because of the depth of resources available to individuals who have a commission or residence at zkm,artists are encouraged to experiment. the rarity of a (relatively) nonresourceconstrained environment being offered by such an organization has resulted in zkm attracting many established and wellknownnewmedia artists. in addition to supporting artoriented work, zkmestablished two institutes with other fociñone institute with a focuson basic research and another with a focus on socioeconomic research.located within the mountains of alberta, canada, the banff centre hosts work that ranges from the visual arts to theater to music tomedia. an elaborate resource to facilitate creative thinking and production, the center provides artists with access to studios, technicalresources, and trained and skilled production interns. when supporting a project, the center has sometimes been able to supply an artistwith a highly trained collaborative team, which includes programmers and designers, to work with the artist until his/her project iscompleted.14 using repeat invitations, banff has a policy of developing relationships with people over time, and this has become a positive and even essential component of the centerõs atmosphere. theenvironment is intense and intimate; in the mountains, people tend tohang out together, working, eating, and socializing. the downside ofthe residency experience tends to be stretched resources, both humanand economic, that make it difficult to create continuous work flow.technical team members are often working on multiple projects, sometimes making it very difficult to move a project forward and keep itcoherent. in addition, the time limits on residencies mean that workmust fit within the allotted time rather than developing and resolvingat its own rate. how credit is given in teams has also become an issue,as there can be an unfortunate tendency to treat technical collaboratorsas a kind of service crew. like zkm, the banff centre has a history ofintellectually stimulating seminars and conferences that bring togethera broad variety of people from both the nonprofit and commercialsectors of new media. at banff these are often the top people in thefield, and the center has become known for the crosspollination amongdisciplines that it offers.ars electronica,15 which is located in austria, has a rich history ofpromoting collaborations involving art, technology, and society.14the art and virtual environments seminar, for instance, included eight projectsexperimenting with virtual reality tools. as an example, one virtual reality installationwas a murder mystery entitled òarcheology of a mother tongueó that involved acollaboration between michael mackenzie, a playwright and director working inmontr”al, and toni dove, an artist based in new york (and a committee member). seemary anne moser and douglas macleod, eds., 1996, immersed in technology: art andvirtual environments, mit press, cambridge, mass.15for more information, see <http://www.aec.at/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices127through a series of ventures dating back as far as 1979, it has established itself as a model for other organizations to follow. ars electronicaconsists of four major activities: the ars electronica center, a mediacenter showcasing art and technology projects; futurelab, the centerõsresearch and development arm; festival, an annual festival focusingon the convergence of art and technology; and prix, an internationalcompetition for òcyberarts.óthe center for culture and communication (c3) foundation16 inbudapest bills itself as an institution whose main focus is fosteringcooperation among the spheres of art, science, and technology, as wellas providing a space for innovative experiments and developmentsrelated to communication, culture, and open society. begun in 1996 asa 3year pilot project, c3 is the result of a cooperative effort of thesoros foundation hungary, silicon graphics hungary, and mat⁄v (ahungarian telecommunications company). in november 1999, c3ñwith the cooperation of its foundersñbecame an independent, nonprofit institution. one of c3õs goals has been to assist with the integration of new technologies into hungaryõs social and cultural tradition.along those lines, c3 has been involved in efforts to provide internetaccess to many individuals and nongovernment organizations, aswell as operating a free internet caf” and offering free courses regarding how to use the internet.the waag society17 was established in 1994 in amsterdam as afoundation whose research program is focused on the ways in whichpeople express themselves through new and old media. the societyhas four distinct programs: creative learning, interfacing access, publicresearch, and sensing presence. in addition, the society is also cooperating with partners from industry on several projects. among these ispiloot, a communications environment for people with mental disabilities.standalone newmedia arts and design centers possess uniquestrengths and face special challenges. among their strengths, they canoffer both stability and freedom to creative people who need workspace and technical support. but most such centers are small andresourceconstrained. many centers are based on artistinresidenceprograms or colonies with a shortterm orientation, and the accumulation of discrete projects with targeted, limitedtime funding forms theresearch agenda. as people and money come and go, organizationsmay have difficulty sustaining longterm intellectual agendas andpursuing topics iteratively in a way that leads to new insights; therefore, they seldom are viewed as knowledgebuilding entities like corporations or university departments. they also may have difficultly inacquiring innovative (often expensive, at least for the budgets of manynonprofits) technological capabilities. it is possible and desirable, butdifficult, for centers to have real research programs with multiyear16for more information, see <http://www.c3.hu/>.17for more information, see <http://www.waag.org/>.standalone newmedia arts anddesign centerspossess uniquestrengths and facespecialchallenges.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity128funding. one approach is to obtain sponsorship from the it industry;another is to develop durable research partnerships with universitiesand corporations. shortterm partnerships (on a project basis) sometimes have been successful, as when corporations provide significantresources in a codevelopment project.the optimal research strategy is not clear. shortterm programscan be valuable. artistsõ residencies are important as a way of democratizing access to technologies and networks of expertise that manyartists might not otherwise be able to acquire.18 but an agenda dominated by discrete projects does not encourage the development ofwork with depth and richness. the other extreme of very rigid, longterm research agendas is likely no better, because such agendas presume that itcp work can be clearly defined years in advanceñaproblematic assumption. at the level of the individual, as noted inchapter 2, there is a tension between the time needed for playfulexploration and conceptualization and the pressure for production. ifstandalone centers can strike the right balance among these competingpressures, they can fill unique ecological niches where ideas and newart forms are incubated successfully. moreover, standalone centersassume greater importance in the overall scheme of studiolaboratories in light of the difficulties faced by applied itcp activities incorporations, which are discussed in the last section of this chapter.19hybrid networksthe term òhybrid networks,ó which has become popular in someparts of the itcp community, refers to consortia of diverse organizations. these networks are a means of supporting cooperation andcollaboration across disciplines and communitiesñif they can overcome the communication problems, varying criteria for success, andother difficulties inherent in itcp collaborations (as outlined in chapter 2). in europe, as well as in canada, hybrid networks have sought toassemble a critical mass of itcp workers, coupled to industrial sponsors and public policy usually aiming to develop regional innovation18despite the lack of multifaceted newmedia arts organizations in the united states,there are artistsõ residency programs within academia, such as at arizona state university and the university of new mexico, and smaller organizations such as harvestworksin new york city. there are also local programs in many cities that provide access on amore limited basis to computers, skilled teachers, and other resources.19new investments in physical infrastructures have recently been announced, thoughit is by no means certain how far some of them will be curtailed by economic cycles. innew york city, the eyebeam atelier (<www.eyebeam.org>) proposes a venue like thears electronica center. at rensselaer polytechnic institute, a $150millionscale experimental media and performing art center has been announced. the presidio development in san francisco is negotiating a transfer of space to lucasfilm for mixeduseòhigh tech cultural development.ó see òopen letteró to create an arts labña hybrid artcenter and research facilityñat the san francisco presidio, available online at <http://www.naimark.net/writing/artslab.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices129clusters in creative industries. the decentralized network oftechnocultural centers supported by the federal government in canadaduring the 1990s included the banff centre (discussed above), whichused this support to initiate its significant investigation of virtualenvironments in partnership with university researchers and industrysponsors.20 the european commissionõs first round of hybrid research networks was focused on intelligent information interfaces (i3)and linked art centers, corporations, and national laboratories; continued work is being planned to support highquality digital content andculturalheritage preservation efforts.21the i3 networks attempt to join art, product design, and academicresearch and development with corporate product development andmarket research. in addition, research networks for digital arts beganto appear in the 1990s, consistent with a turn away from the stovepipeseparation of r&d and commercialization. the concept is captured inthe european commissionõs fifth framework programme, which emphasizes crossdisciplinary work and features as a theme the òuserfriendly information society.ó22 the european cultural backbone(ecb) mediates between the commercial, government, education, andthe cultural sectors, facilitating crossdisciplinary projects by servingas an incubator. the ecb can act as a brokerage structure for mutualsupport and collaboration to bring together complementary initiatives, drawing upon and connecting local and regional networks of itsmembers in europe.23in north america, the idea of consortia, networks, and sustainedcollaboration of this type is attracting greater attention. examplesinclude the u.s. federal governmentõs digital libraries initiative phase224 and internet2 project (both of which include some aspects of itcpwork); the ford foundation study in progress, òart technology networkó (grant to the kitchen in new york for a feasibility study, 2001);the activities of the national alliance for media arts and culture(namac), dedicated to encouraging film, video, audio, and online/multimedia arts and promoting the collaborations of individual mediaartists;25 and, at the regional scale, the bridges consortium (university of southern california with the banff centre). the canadian government is also supporting regional innovation networks to be admin20moser and macleod, eds., 1996, immersed in technology.21see <http://www.cordis.lu/ist>.22for information on the fifth framework, see <http://www.cordis.lu/fp5/home.html>. for further discussion, see paul david, dominique foray, and w. edwardsteinmueller, 1999, òthe research network and the new economics of science: frommetaphors to organizational behaviors,ó the organization of economic innovation ineurope, alfonso gambardella and franco malerba, eds., cambridge university press,cambridge, u.k., and new york.23see <http://www.ecb.net/>.24see chapter 8 and <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov>.25see <http://www.namac.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity130istered by canarie.26 clearly there are opportunities to advance thisconcept further.the establishment of additional collaborative networks is one wayto increase connections between existing activity in experimental artsand design, cultural and presenting institutions, and the it industries.27 but multiple projects are likely to be needed, stressing variously the mobility of people, exchange of knowhow, circulation of artand design works, and transfer of technology. furthermore, all of theinstitutions involved in such networks need an awareness of the kindof researchapplication/artdesigntechnology hybridity exemplifiedby the bauhaus.28other venues for practitionersin addition to multifaceted newmedia arts and design organizations, itcp practitioners can access supportive resources through several mechanisms, principally virtualspacebased strategies and professional conferences.29 it is interesting to note that traditional arts anddesign organizationsñmuseums, galleries, art and design fairs, magazines, and so onñare not the prime movers of these efforts. rather, apatchwork of diverse entities has organized and funded the virtualstrategies, and scientific and technical communities organize a number of the conferences.virtualspacebased strategiesa virtualsupport infrastructure came into existence in recent yearsto assist individuals in accessing creative tools and communities, enable communication of various types, and provide shared space forcollaboration and file storage and exchange. these organizations havebeen the most focused of any institutions on leveraging it to achievetheir goals. they tend to be notforprofit cultural establishments.26canarie inc. is canadaõs advanced internet development organization. it is anotforprofit corporation supported by its members, project partners, and the nationalgovernment of canada. canarieõs mission is to accelerate canadaõs advanced internetdevelopment and use by facilitating the widespread adoption of faster, more efficientnetworks and by enabling the next generation of advanced products, applications, andservices to run on them. see <http://www.canarie.ca/about/about.html>.27see <www.thekitchen.org/fordfinal.pdf> for the basis for such a network designproposal.28however, physical proximity still matters, and so hybrid networks that are constrained to a confined geographic area have advantages. see chapter 7 for furtherdiscussion.29and, of course, they have some access to organizations associated with academicinstitutions; see chapter 6 for a discussion.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices131a particular strength of these organizations is that they offer peopleaccess to spatially decentralized communities. the result is small,sharply focused groups with low overhead. some of the betterfundedorganizations also try to host small offline events for members in aneffort to strengthen the online community.these organizations draw from a common pool of tools to supportelectronic communication. in general, they use widely available it,such as directories, databases, online chat programs, discussion boards,and listservs, rather than specialized or stateoftheart tools. the creation and support of email listservs constitute a common mechanismfor organizations that seek to foster community. these tools support,ultimately on a widespread basis, the online equivalent of the gallery,workshop, community center, and coffeehouse, sometimes simultaneously.internetbased environments for supporting creative work takemany forms, including archives, portals, communities of practice, andvirtual galleries. the internet has made it much easier for grassrootsorganizations to identify, filter, and collect creative work.30 directories(or portals or indexes), usually implemented through web sites, aggregate pointers to a broad set of resources connected with a domain.organizations pull together these pointers and then, using a taxonomythey have developed, sort them into categories from which web pagesare then made. for example, the digital arts source (das),31 aòcuratedó index to newmedia art, divides its site into 16 òdepartmentsó with titles such as digital art, sound, software, and tools. byentering one of these departments, a user opens a page to a listing oflinks to resources; links are opened within a new browser window,leaving the das site open in the background.an example of a notforprofit organization that leverages the useof it to promote communication between professional and amateurnewmedia artists is rhizome.org. using the internet as its primarymedium, rhizome carries out its mission of presenting artwork bynewmedia artists, providing a forum for critics and curators to fostercritical dialogue, and archiving newmedia art.32 the rhizome artbaseproject provides selected internet artists with dualpurpose serverspace to store their electronic art as well as the space to make itavailable for online viewing. creating a taxonomy using metadata33 totag the art based on its type, genre, and the technology used in itsproduction, rhizome has organized an extensive library of digital art.a particularstrength ofnotforprofitculturalestablishmentsis that they offerpeople access tospatiallydecentralizedcommunities.30these mechanisms can aid in validating and recognizing quality work (see thediscussion in chapter 7).31see <http://www.digitalartsource.com>.32see òwhat we doó at the rhizome site, <http://rhizome.org/info>.33metadata are data about data. in information science, metadata are definitionaldata that provide information about, or documentation of, other data managed withinan application or environment.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity132the communication and information capabilities of the internethave allowed rhizome to break down barriers caused by distance andto build the rhizome community to more than 13,000 members representing more than 118 countries. to facilitate communication withinsuch a large and diverse group, rhizome provides a series of moderated and membersupervised digital resources that support manytomany communication. internet art news is made available to notforprofit organizations that seek to provide a news service to their usersbut do not have the internal resources to do so.34the principal mechanism used by rhizome to promote asynchronous communication is to push information to individuals by using email listservsñthe rhizome digest and the rhizome raw list (equivalent to a conference call that lasts all day every day, this list is unfilteredand enables subscribers to exchange virtually an infinite number ofmessages almost in real time; messages are stored in a searchablearchive). nettime,35 a completely virtual service provided by publicnetbase t0, also consists of a series of email lists, most notably nettimel. the organizationõs goal is to provide space for the discussion of newcommunication technologies and their social implications. formed in1995, the listserv has resulted in a conference in 1997 and a book,readme: ascii culture and the revenge of knowledge, published in 1999.a number of online communities assist practitioners in itcprelated fields in locating resources. for example, the museum computer network36 is a nonprofit organization dedicated to fosteringthe cultural aims of museums through the use of computer technologies. it serves individuals and institutions wishing to improve theirmeans of developing, managing, and conveying museum informationthrough the use of automation. it has hosted conferences with titlessuch as òreal life: virtual experiences, new connections for museumvisitors.ó the artsci project has led to an online resource called theartsci index, intended to create a rich global database of resourcesand requests for individuals wishing to collaborate, barter, research,or fund collaborative projects involving science and art. a òmatchingófunction assists with the filtering of data relevant to the userõs needs.in the architecture arena, archnet37 is designed as an online community for architects, planners, urban designers, landscape architects,architectural historians, scholars, and students, with a special focus onthe islamic world.34a syndication model is used in which an internet art news òmoduleó is added toweb sites for free. this module contains an introduction to a top story and a link to therhizome web site, where the complete story is located. through the use of html to calla javascript procedure on the rhizome web server, the top story changes daily on thesyndicatorõs web site without the need for manual interference.35see <http://www.nettime.org/>.36see <http://www.mcn.edu/>.37see <http://archnet.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices133some of the organizations providing these services are forprofit.the thing, an organization similar to nettime, started operation in1991 as an electronic bulletinboard system (bbs) for artists and hassince evolved into a fullfledged telecommunications company whilestill maintaining its focus on art and artists. the thing continues toprovide bbs services, functioning as an internet service provider (isp)and maintaining and supporting radar, a selective calendar of newyork art, performance, digital, video, and film events. individuals andorganizations from the art community of new york city contributesubmissions to radar.it is possible even for smaller centers and notforprofit community organizations to access networked technologies that allow formultisite performance. innovative uses of the internet and desktopcomputer technology are producing an explosion of creativity in thisarea. funding for smaller grassroots organizations allows the acquisition of both a basic level of technology such as desktop computers,software, and broadband connection possibilities, and the expertise tobegin to bring skills to a new population of independent producers.harvestworks inc. in new york city is a small, notforprofit organization with a sound studio, multimedia facilities for production, andclasses in a broad area of new technology tools. it runs a webbasedcomposerõs database, a cd magazine, and an artistsõ residence program that encourages experimental projects and helps to implementthem. it has sponsored and supported a number of experiments inmultisite performance that have accessed networking tools throughcollaborations with universities on internet2 or through smaller theater and performance centers with more modest equipment.professional conferencesprofessional conferences are another means of communicatingand displaying the results of itcp work and may be an ideal way tobring together crossdisciplinary groups of scientists, artists, designers, technical researchers, and others whose paths might not otherwiseintersect. there are international symposia that touch upon itcp, suchas artsci,38 which explores how the discoveries of scientific researchcan combine with the powerful metaphors of art to influence society.multimedia presentations have featured collaborative projects such asbrain waves transmitted via the internet; the presenters also havediscussed issues relevant to itcp, such as the opportunities and pitfalls of collaborating across disciplines.39 another example is the international computer music conference (icmc), an annual conference38see <http://www.asci.org/artsci2001/introduction.html>.39the symposium is coproduced by art & science collaborations inc. and severalprograms and departments of the city university of new york, with support from therockefeller foundation, at&t, leonardo journal, and nature magazine.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity134(since 1974) of the international computer music association.40 theicmc includes composers, performers, scientists, and engineers on aroughly equal footing and typically has technical sessions and two ormore concerts every day. papers are selected by peer review, andmusic is selected by a jury of peers. the 2002 dokumenta conferenceincluded many works that use projective technologies and involved anumber of participants from developing countries.in addition to conferences such as artsci, icmc, and dokumenta,professional conferences that are relevant to itcp are also rooted inscientific and technical disciplines. in computer science, the core groupof conferences, many of them crossdisciplinary, are organized byprofessional societies, notably the association for computing machinery (acm) and the institute of electrical and electronics engineers,including its computer society.41 of particular relevance are the acmõsannual conferences for the special interest group on computer graphics and interactive techniques (siggraph) and special interest groupon computerhuman interaction (sigchi). see box 5.2. specializedconferences related to itcp are also held under the auspices of technical societies, such as the creativity and cognition conference heldevery third year at loughborough university, an acm sigchi international conference.42a macrolevel approach to communicating and promoting workthat crosses disciplinary boundaries is exemplified by the u.s. national academiesõ frontiers of science and frontiers of engineeringconferences. the former series, for example, brings together the bestyoung scientists from a variety of fields to discuss cuttingedge research in ways that are accessible to colleagues outside their fields.the idea is to fertilize crossdisciplinary understanding and inspiration by exploring parallels and divergences between different researchprograms and protocols. one can envision a new venture based onthis model called frontiers in creativity.there are also a number of ad hoc conferences sponsored byprofessional organizations and universities aimed at bringing togetherscientists, humanists, artists, designers, and engineers to address topics related to it. examples include the first and second iterationconferences sponsored by the school of computer science and software engineering at monash university in melbourne, australia, ajuried competition that brought together musicians, artists, and humanists with computer scientists, physical scientists, and engineers todiscuss projects recognized for their achievements in using digitaltechnologies creatively.43 oriented more toward research, the national science foundation, the andrew w. mellon foundation, and40see <http://www.computermusic.org>.41there are also specialized professional societies that host relevant conferences,such as the american association for artificial intelligence.42see <http://creative.lboro.ac.uk/ccrs/cc02.htm>.43see <http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/~iterate/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices135box 5.2selected conferencesspecial interest group on computer graphics and interactive techniquesfounded as a specialinterest committee in the mid1960s by andries van dam of brown universityand sam matsa of ibm, the special interest group on computer graphics and interactive techniques(siggraph) was officially formed as a specialinterest group of the association for computing machineryin 1969.1 the siggraphõs premier event, its annual conference and exhibition, brings together artists,scientists, academics, and researchers from around the world working at the intersection of computerscience and graphics. the conference has become an important venue, especially for companies producingproducts that assist the creative process (such as animation software and graphics acceleration cards). oneof the more popular experiences is the siggraph art show, a place within the conference where newmedia artwork is available for perusal by conference attendees.2special interest group on computerhuman interactionthe special interest group on computerhuman interaction (sigchi) is an international group ofalmost 5,000 specialists working in a variety of disciplines including humancomputer interaction, education,usability, interaction design, and computersupported cooperative work.3 of special interest to membersof sigchi is the intersection of such fields as user interface design, implementation and evaluation, humanfactors, cognitive science, social science, psychology, anthropology, design, aesthetics, and graphics. a keyelement of sigchiõs strategy is the organization and support of a series of crossdisciplinary conferences,many occurring annually. in addition to its main conference, òchi: human factors in computing systemsó(held annually since 1983), sigchi also sponsors conferences in areas such as creativity and cognition(annually since 1999), hypertext and hypermedia (annually since 1987), multimedia (annually since 1993), thedesign of interactive systems (annually since 1995), virtual reality software and technology (in conjunctionwith siggraph and occurring annually since 1997), and other areas where the hardware and softwareengineering of interactive systems, the structure of communication between human and machine,characterization and contexts of use for interactive systems, methodology of design, and new designscoexist.1information adapted from the siggraph web site at <http://www.siggraph.org/>.2while in some respects siggraph is undeniably successful (e.g., it attracts tens of thousands of attendees to itsannual conference), several reviewers and committee members observed that the status of itcp work and of artistsrelative to technologists at the conference is ambivalent and perhaps declining.3information adapted from the sigchi web site at <http://sigchi.org/>. for a photo history of sigchi dating backto 1982, see <http://sigchi.org/photohistory/>.harvard university art museums jointly sponsored an invitationalworkshop in 2001 called òdigital imagery for works of art.ó44 the44the final report of the workshop is available at <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov/mellon/report.html>. this web page also contains a link to a comment form seeking feedback,including links to ongoing efforts in the various areas emphasized in the report, as wellas pointers to resources (collections, tools, and so on) that may be useful for futurecollaborative work.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity136workshop was designed to bring together computer and imagingscientists who have been active in digital imagery research with aparticular group of end users, namely research scholars in the visualarts, including art and architecture historians, art curators, conservators, and scholars and practitioners in closely related disciplines. thepurpose was to explore how the research and development agenda ofcomputing, information, and imaging scientists might more usefullyserve the research needs of research scholars in the visual arts. at thesame time, participants looked for opportunities where applications inthe art history domain might inform and push it research in new anduseful directions. other notable examples include the millennial opensymposium on the arts and interdisciplinary computing (mosaic)2000 that brought together people interested in the relationship between mathematics and the arts and architecture;45 the archaeology ofmultimedia conference at brown university in november 2000; there: play conference in november 1999;46 the international symposiumon electronic art (isea);47 and the doors of perception conference.48public display venuesa variety of physicalplacebased (or artifactual) and virtualspacebased techniques and strategies are used for the display of itcp workfor access by public audiences. exhibitions, performance festivals, andpresentations and lecture series seem to be the most common physicalplacebased strategies. museums, galleries, and other entities associated with physical places have featured newmedia art for severalyears. in the united states, the promotion of this art form is guided bymany of the established and betterknown museums. by constructively adapting their space to include newmedia art, both offlineinside conventional exhibition spaces and online through the web,and by commissioning work of this kind, these organizations areexperimenting with new frameworks for display and presentation.for instance, since internet art debuted at the 2000 biennial, the whitneymuseum in new york city49 has increasingly supported new mediainside its physical location (and on its web site). such efforts bytraditional art museums are not without critics, who point out thelimited allocation of resources or the artistic weaknesses of someshows that may be presented primarily to keep up with trends. still,some strategies have proven to be both novel and artistically credible.45held at the university of washington, seattle, in august 2000. see <http://www.cs.washington.edu/mosaic2000/>.46see <http://www.eyebeam.org/replay/>.47see <http://www.isea.jp/e/index.html>.48see <http://flow.doorsofperception.com/>.49see <http://whitney.org/>.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices137the new museum of contemporary art50 in new york hasadapted placebased strategiesñboth indoors and outdoorsñto accommodate itcp work. the museum features an entire floor wherevisitors can drop in to read, think, talk, browse, and experience interactive art. its zenith media lounge is dedicated to the exhibition andexploration of digital art, experimental video, and sound works. thisunique space, modest in physical size and budget, draws praise for itsadequate technology infrastructure (i.e., computers, projectors, wiring, and so on) and staff support (i.e., system administrators, installers, and others) as well as an artistic focus ensured by staff curatorsbringing in guest curators to add newmedia expertise. a group show,òopensourcearthack,ó which explored hacking practices, opensource ethics, and cultural production to provide commentary aboutlife in a networked culture, featured works such as an antiwar game,a packetsniffing application, and an òadbustingó project. themuseumõs education department also organizes panel discussions,film and video series, and lectures to introduce challenging new concepts to a broad public.physicalplacebased displays for itcp work are also evident atpopular technologyoriented museums, such as the tech museum ofinnovation51 in san jose, california. visitors can make a digital movieusing the latest tricks in animation, for example, visit with the roaming robot zaza, or engage in hightech play in the imagination playground. a short distance up the coast, exploratorium: the museum ofscience, art, and human perception,52 housed in san franciscoõs palace of fine arts, is designed to create a culture of learning. a collage ofmore than 650 blinking, beeping, buzzing exhibits invites visitors tomake their own discoveries about the world.the distinction between physical and virtual display approachescan be blurred in cases in which an organization uses both strategies,and the projects are interconnectedña not uncommon scenario. forexample, some museum and gallery exhibitions take advantage ofweb technology to enable fluid interchanges between virtual and realspaces. at the exhibition ò010101: art in technological timesó at thesan francisco museum of modern art (sfmoma)53 in 2001, physicalinstallation spaces were supplemented by computers at which galleryvisitors could access essays by artists and theorists. other exhibitionsuse virtual spaces as part of the artworks themselves, such as ininteractive dramas that combine responses by actors in the physicalspace with online participants who collaborate to produce emergentnarratives. see box 5.3.50see <http://www.newmuseum.org/>.51see <http://www.thetech.org/>.52see <http://www.exploratorium.edu>.53see <http://www.sfmoma.org/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity138box 5.3computer and sensorbased art installationtiffany holmesõs computer and sensorbased installation, òamaze@getty.org,ó relies on òlivewareóñthat is, realworld and realtime viewer collaborationñnot just hardware. created for the exhibitionòdevices of wonder: from the world in a box to images on a screen,ó1 this networked system consistedof tiny spy cameras distributed throughout the gallery space to capture people looking at, and interactingwith, other works in the show (such as the multiplying spectacles, book camera obscura, engelbrechttheater, and mondo nuovo peep show). the live video was ported using wireless technologies into acomputer that integrated the imagery into a large montage displayed on a plasma screen encountered asone left the exhibition. the space around the plasma screen acted as the interface for the piece.in its resting state, with no viewer standing before it, the screen displays a panoramic image of robertirwinõs garden lying just outside the museumõs walls. when a viewer approaches the screen the animationchanges. slowly, the video is fractured by small rectangles. as they multiply, the sweeping image of the gardenis replaced by even smaller images grabbed earlier by the hidden cameras. at the end of the piece, layersand layers of imagery fuse and then are broken apart in a simple game of breakout. see figure 5.3.1.conceptually, the piece draws on the metaphor of armchair travel, moving from material terrain intodatasphere. the longer the viewer lingers in the gallery, the more she travels virtually, away from theseemingly infinite landscape into a series of highly localized private spaces that ultimately incorporate thewatching subject into their confines. unlike the hyperillusionism of virtual reality, the experience makes theviewer acutely aware of how visual technology structures perception and how we structure visualtechnology.21exhibited at the getty museum, los angeles, november 11, 2001, through february 3, 2002. see <www.getty.edu/art/exhibitions/devices/choice.html>.2see barbara maria stafford, 2001, òrevealing technologies/magical domains,ó in barbara maria stafford andfrances terpak, exhibit catalog, òdevices of wonder: from the world in a box to images on a screenó in cosmos in apalm, getty museum publications, los angeles.figure 5.3.1 screenshot fromthe òdevices of wonderó realtime animation in which a computercontrolled breakoutgame removes the specific evidence of the localized surveillance imagery. contributed bytiffany holmes, school of theart institute of chicago.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices139many organizations, from museums to professional associations,are eager to explore the possibilities that it offers for communicatingtheir work to peers and/or public audiences. but until recently, traditional museums and galleries have been slow to provide technologicalresources or exhibit space to creative talent whose primary medium isthe internet. their initial online efforts have often focused on supporting activity, such as the digitization of existing collections and the useof the internet as a medium for providing visitor information, promotion, and virtual gift shops. with that experience and further observation of how artistic expression involving it is evolving, these organizations are rapidly becoming more open to exploring, supporting, andextending the techniques by which internet creativity is produced anddisplayed. increasingly, it is the strategies being tested, as opposed towhether they are doing any itcp work at all, that differentiates theseorganizations from one another.examples of such efforts include the whitney museumõs artport,which provides a portal to digital art and art resources on the internetand also functions as an online gallery space for commissioned internetand newmedia art.54 this approach creates a dual strategy of supporting artists directly by commissioning projects, but also promoting thedevelopment of the internet art domain in general by providing artistswith cataloged resources. the dia center for the arts began commissioning and exhibiting webbased work in the mid1990s.55 thesfmoma is expanding its presence on the internet through the development of its e¥space program.56 with projects dating back to 1996,the e¥space initiative supports internet art via commissions and exhibition. functioning as a portal to other internet art or providing agateway to resources is not one of the projectõs main goals, althoughcollaboration is. a recent illustration is crossfade, which concentrateson the web as a performance space for sound art, an internationalcollaboration involving sfmoma, the walker art center, the goetheinstitute, and zkm.newmedia art is also beginning to make inroads in mainstreamgalleries, led largely by internet art and the macrotrend of convergence among media and disciplines. commercial galleries such aspostmasters57 and sandra gering58 are now showing and selling newmedia art. there is even a commercial gallery dedicated to new media:bitforms.59 for an alternate mechanism for matching up artists andcollectors, see box 5.4.until recently,traditionalmuseums andgalleries havebeen slow toprovidetechnologicalresources orexhibit space tocreative talentwhose primarymedium is theinternet.54see <http://whitney.org/artport/>.55see <http://www.diacenter.org/rooftop/webproj/index.html>.56see <http://www.sfmoma.org/espace/espaceoverview.html>.57the postmasters gallery features the work of perry hoberman (see chapter 2) andnatalie jeremijenko (a committee member). see <http://www.thing.net/~pomaga/>.58the sandra gering gallery presents the work of two individuals featured in thisreport: karim rashid and john simon (see chapter 2). information about the gallery isavailable online at <http://www.geringgallery.com/>.59see <http://www.bitforms.com>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity140it is important to recognize that itcp work creates new demands,because the work is often experimental and nonstandard, and because the nexus of it and creativity involves at least a limited breakdown of the separation between audience and performer. traditionalmuseums and galleries are often poor choices for the display of interactive and/or timebased work (e.g., narratives) because visitors strollin and out and are not prepared for an experience of duration, nor arethese spaces set up for specific start times. the rigidity of theaters withseats bolted to the floor does not work well, either. as a result, galleryspaces and performance and theater spaces need to be rethought toaccommodate a less defined and more flexible practice. theaters withflexible seating, movable partitions, projection systems with scalable,reconfigurable screen systems, and other innovations along these linesare making new work possible. examples include the newcinematheater of the daniel langlois foundation for art, science, and technology (dlf) in montr”al, where seats can be fixed or folded under toalter the more conventional cinema setup for special presentations andwhich has a stateoftheart digital projection system. the schaubuehnetheater in berlin showcases another innovative design and is based onflexibility of scale, audience organization, and media tools for presentation. however, to a large degree, such innovations are not visible tothe general public when they visit movie theaters, playhouses or operahouses, symphony halls, or other arts venues, which appear much asthey have for the past decades. there would seem to be a rich set ofopportunities for new approaches in these traditional venues. however, such new approaches do not replace traditional venues, whichbox 5.4mixed greensthe forprofit organization mixed greens does not deal with newmediaart specifically, but it has an interesting business model that might be extendedto other contexts. describing itself as an organization that discovers,supports, and promotes artists, this multimedia production company uses itsweb site to facilitate communication between artists and collectors. thismodel allows collectors to get to know artists through a multimedia,personalitybased approach to exhibiting art. there are artist documentitos(short videos about the artists), questions that users can answer to matchthem up with artists, and ways for users to contact artists and learn moreabout their work or perhaps start a discussion about anything from artisticinfluences to commissioning a work.1 one result is the mix, a webbasedtool for constructing a personal environment for site members to get toknow the artists and their work that mixed greens supports.1see <http://www.mixedgreens.com>.itcp work creates new demands,because the workis oftenexperimental andnonstandard, andbecause the nexus of it and creativity involvesat least a limitedbreakdown of theseparationbetween audienceand performer.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices141may well remain valuable places to experience itcp work. for anexample of a distinctive nontraditional venue, see box 5.5.performance art is also going online. franklin furnace,60 a nonprofit arts organization that has long supported performance art andother alternative practices in the downtown new york art scene, wentdigital in the late 1990s and began supporting digital art throughcommissions and residencies. also in new york, as part of an exhibitbox 5.5burning manin contrast to much of the work done within research laboratories, academic departments, and artsorganizations, burning man1 is an intriguing example of art and technology hybridized outside an institutionalframework. in many ways, this event, held annually in the desolate environs of the black rock desert innevada, is a counterpoint to what happens in the formal context of grants and research budgets,committees, and disciplines. the festival population, which in recent years has numbered almost 30,000(mostly from the san francisco bay area), includes thousands of engineers from silicon valley, from ciscoprogrammers to oldschool hardware hackers. it is also a homing beacon for the west coastõs itcpcommunity. it is a largescale undertaking, all coordinated through electronic mail by a selforganizing webof techies, artists, lightning rods, and logistical magicians. the freespiritedness of the event is belied by animpressive degree of networked organization.in a matter of weeks, this group of visionaries, tinkerers, and geeks erects not only a small city, withits own roads, sanitation, medical facilities, and electrical grid (all of which are dismantled in a matter ofdaysñthese libertarians run their show like a military operation), but also an eyepopping assortment ofheavily technological artworks: towering amalgamations of metal and screens and sound feedback devicesrunning artificiallife code, huge and programmable lighting arrays, explosive spectacles, and laser contraptions. many of these art projects present unprecedented technical challenges, often requiring onthespot,midstream innovation (somehow, there are always enough soldering irons, duct tape, fuses, and volunteerlaborers to go aroundñmany of the larger installations combine the community effort of barn raising withthe specialized expertise of mission impossible). in a sense, burning man embodies the ògiftó economy thatdrives opensource software, with regard to atoms as well as bits. burning man also serves as a combinationlaboratory/audience for a grand technoartistic experiment.perhaps the most salient aspect of burning man, for technologists and artists within institutions, is theextent to which social capital can be leveraged at the intersection of technology and creative practices. whatburning man has in abundance is not financial resources or institutional support or even human capital, inthe sense that corporations do (i.e., salaried employees and administrative support). what it has, inabundance, is social capitalñthe relationships among people that give the event a reason to exist. burningman is a phenomenon that emerges from that network, a physical manifestation of the social and creativeties that go back years, sometimes decades. as a way of manifesting the human relationships that bind artand technology, and leveraging those relationships on a large scale, burning man is an object lesson for moreformal organizations, both in vision and implementation.1detailed information about burning man can be found at <http://www.burningman.com>.60see <http://www.franklinfurnace.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity142associated with the new museum, the surveillance camera playersperformed in front of a webcam; the audience could view the performance in person at various locations, including the new museumwindow on broadway, or online. the brooklyn academy of music,61which gave its first performance in 1861 and has a reputation forchanging with the times, has hosted online interactive documentariesthat explore and offer insights into the ideological foundation andcreation of work presented on stage. for example, òunderscore: netart, sound and essays from australiaó exhibits the works of nineartists with portals to sonic experimentation. thematically centered onthe body, these projects confront what it means to be sexed up, desired, gendered, and identified under electronic conditions. anotherdocumentary chronicles the development of the work love songs bychoreographer david rouss‘ve and his company reality, and presented as part of bamõs 1999 next wave festival. users have access torehearsal footage, interviews with rouss‘ve, company information,and discussions about the work.62some experiments with art presentation provide venues forinternetbased research that push the envelope in terms of how technology can be used to augment social environments. the museum ofmodern art (moma)63 in new york city has supported a number ofnewmedia artists through commissions and has used the internet toengage artists to overcome obstacles linked to space and time. forinstance, its conversations with contemporary artists program, originally presented offline, recently was replicated online. projects constrained by time such as time capsule have been migrated online aswell.similarly, the walker art center is focusing not on how virtualspace enables the display of content, but rather on how it facilitatesinformation sharing and collaboration in the creation of artña kind ofinternetbased creative research and development.64 built in 1971, thecenter concentrates on supporting the development and exhibition ofmodern art. by supporting film/video, performing, and visual arts,the center takes a global, crossdisciplinary, and diverse approach tothe creation, presentation, interpretation, collection, and preservationof art.65 the newmedia initiatives of the center seek to achieve twogoals: its gallery 9 project promotes projectdriven exploration throughdigitalbased media, whereas the smart project concentrates on information architecture and the role that it might play in facilitating accessto the collections and activities of the center.61see <http://www.bam.org>.62one reviewer, however, suggested that bam is pulling back from such digitalinitiatives.63see <http://www.moma.org/>.64see <http://www.walkerart.org/jsindex.html>.65see <http://www.walkerart.org/generalinfo/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices143it is important to note that efforts to collect and display itcp workrun into the formidable challenges posed by digital technology. (seechapter 7.) for instance, the likely inability to distinguish between anoriginal and a copy will have a profound effect on museums, onerivaling the effect that photographic reproduction had on art.66 thiswill cause a paradigm shift in how a museum views its holdings (aspimarily unique original objects) and how it certifies their authenticity. conservationists will also have to shift from the paradigm ofrepairing and saving a physical object to that of maintaining a set ofdisembodied artistic content over time. indeed, it has been said thatnewmedia art questions the most fundamental assumptions of museums: what is a work? how do you collect? what is preservation?what is ownership?67corporate experiences withinformation technologyand creative practicesa number of industries depend heavily on, and derive substantialprofits from, itcp activities. this may be most obvious in entertainment, or òcontentbasedó corporations. for example, filmmaking hasdriven and adopted advances in both technical and creative achievement, and computer games would not exist at all without itcp (thecollaborative nature of these industries is discussed in chapter 2). yettechnology companies seem to be less successful in importing andapplying art and design knowledge to their activities. some companies have experimented with specialized arts centers, artistinresidence programs, or shortterm arts projects, with mixed results.two less than successful initiatives were mentioned earlier in thischapter: interval research and xerox parcõs artistinresidence program. lucentõs oneofakind collaboration with the brooklyn academy of music, which produced the acclaimed listening post (described in chapter 2), is now defunct, a victim of the companyõsfinancial woes. tough economic times in 2001 and 2002 have led to thedownsizing of the nippon telegraph and telephone intercommuni¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥66walter benjamin, 1969, òthe work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction,óilluminations, hannah arendt, ed., schochen books, new york; howard besser, 1987,òdigital images for museums,ó museum studies journal 3(1): 7478; howard besser, 1997,òthe changing role of photographic collections with the advent of digitization,ó thewired museum, katherine jonesgarmil, ed., american association of museums, washington, d.c., pp. 115127.67as characterized by jeremy strike, director, museum of contemporary art, losangeles, in museums and new media art by susan morris, a research report commissioned by the rockefeller foundation (mimeo), october 2001.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity144cation center (icc)68 and folding of the canon artlab,69 both intokyo.but some it companies have experienced ventures into art anddesign that generate qualitative and tangible benefits. the philipsvision of the future is one example of a largescale, successful projectthat integrated technology development with design practices andhumancentered disciplines such as anthropology.70 (see box 5.6.)another example is ibm corporationõs computer music center (cmc),which from 1993 to 2001 focused on the intersection of computerscience and music as a research testbed, beginning with an effort todevelop the underlying technology for kidriffs, a consumer softwareproduct that was eventually marketed and sold. over time, the centergrew to focus on interactive music composition tools, seeking to understand the special demands that largescale creative endeavors, suchas film scoring, place on software. research on visual programminglanguages, interactive graphics, realtime systems, and audio identification provided a diverse backdrop for the core music compositionwork. although the cmc was ultimately closed, it contributed toproduct development, public relations, and the companyõs portfolio ofintellectual property.71 the qsketcher system, for example, developedin close collaboration with faculty and composers affiliated with theberklee college of music, pioneered several hci mechanisms.72 the68established in 1997, icc sought to òencourage the dialogue between technologyand the arts using a core theme of ôcommunicationõó and òto become a network thatlinks artists and scientists worldwide, as well as a center for information exchange.óboth a museum open to the public and a research lab, icc was a place for theconceptualization, introduction, and testing of advanced media art communicationtechnologies. but icc was more than just a setting where artists and technologistscongregated to create media art to be displayed in a museum or gallery. offeringworkshops, performances, symposiums, and publishing, the center went beyond exploring the possibilities of new forms of communication to attempt to educate andexpose the public to the capabilities of the art and technology intersection. see <http://www.ntticc.or.jp>.69artlab was a corporate lab focused on the integration of the arts and sciences,primarily by encouraging new artistic practices using digital imaging technologies. theòfactoryó (laboratory) employed computer engineers using canon digital products ininteraction with artists in residence to produce new digital art works. the studio portionof the program has presented exhibitions of the works developed inhouse. in 1995,seeking to introduce multimedia works to the general public, the artlab began itsprospect exhibitions program, which also provides access to the work of multimediaartists and creators outside the artlab. workshops and lectures on new communications technologies and practices were also organized on an ad hoc basis and are bothnational and international in scope. see <http://www.canon.co.jp/cast/artlab/index.html>.70see <http://www.design.philips.com/vof/toc1/home.htm>.71sometime prior to the closure of the center, ibm determined that a venture into themusic software tools market was unlikely but continued to support the center as afundamental research effort.72see steven abrams, joe smith, ralph bellofatto, robert fuhrer, daniel oppenheim,james wright, richard boulanger, neil leonard, david mash, and michael rendish,2002, òqsketcher: an environment for composing music for film,ó pp. 157164 inproceedings of the fourth conference on creativity and cognition, loughborough university, u.k., acm press, new york.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices145center hosted wellknown musicians, served as a recruiting tool, andcontributed to education and outreach programs. the venture alsoproduced a stream of inventions, including 16 patents filed over thecenterõs last 4 years.73such interactions can also be valuable from the artistsõ perspective. for example, at&tõs bell labs, later partly spun off with lucent,never had a formal artistinresidence program, but bell labs hadsome informal arrangements with musicians and filmmakers whowere invited to try out software programs, collaborate on specificprojects, and provide consulting or video documentation services. nomoney was provided for music and art projects, although film production expenses were sometimes covered by the parent company (at&tor lucent) or outside grants. a committee member who participatedin these activities, lillian schwartz, recalls that the artists were thrilledto have the chance to work with great minds and unique technologies,and the scientists were inspired by the interactions to produce newand enhanced hardware and software such as a handsfree telephone.in addition, such interactions afford artists and designers with thepossibility to have widescale impact, by affecting the design of products used on a massmarket scale.whether the types of benefits detailed here are sufficient to convince technology companies to initiate and retain artistic/design programs is open to debate. within a forprofit corporation, there is anunderstanding that initiatives have to justify their own resource commitments in an expected financial return in terms of some measuresuch as productivity improvement, cost savings, or increased revenue.unfortunately, itcp work, like corporate r&d more generally, doesnot lend itself very easily to calculations of return on investment or netpresent value.74nonetheless, these programs can be evaluated, and their impactascertained, in a qualitative fashion, much as the impact of an employee can often be ascertained in a qualitative fashion. the questionsinclude the following: did this project enhance the capabilities of theorganization? did it prompt useful discussion and action? did it matter to anyone other than the artist or designer? if so, how? if the projectis undertaken as a strategic exercise, rather than a public relationsexercise, then it has to demonstrate some relevance, even if it does notdirectly result in a commercial product (as most r&d projects do not).73the discussion of the ibm computer music center is based on the personalaccount of a committee member.74as an aside, it is worth noting that basic researchñin the sciences or otherwiseñisalso very difficult to describe in terms of quantitative benefits, inasmuch as the benefitsmay become apparent after a considerable lag or may be realized outside the performing unit. although some companies (e.g., ibm, lucent technologies) use counts ofoutputs such as patents, and most companies measure how much they spend onresearchrelated activities (usually development), such indicators are still primitive andincomplete when it comes to assessing the value of the work.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity146box 5.6a vision of the future pays off in new knowledge and productsthe goal of the 1995 vision of the future, a project in the design division of a large electronicscorporation, was to incorporate qualityoflife considerations into the design of new technological products.participants created conceptual designs for electronic consumer products, based on scenarios sketching outtechnological and cultural changes likely to happen in the near future. although it products are often drivenlargely by technical considerations, philips hoped to demonstrate that its products are intended to improvequality of life;1 enhance creativity within the philips organization; use an integrated technical and socioculturalperspective as an opportunity to create new, unique types of products; and demonstrate that a focus onquality of life could have tangible benefits in the form of new product design.the project created concrete instantiationsñmodels, simulations, and moviesñof scenarios developed by crossdisciplinary teams whose members ranged from anthropologists to engineers to graphicsdesigners, based on trends identified by futurists and engineers. these instantiations were used to get userfeedback through an exhibition, book, video, and web site, and to influence the design of future products.figure 5.6.1 òemotion containersó come in various personalized, aesthetically pleasing forms that contain smells,sounds, and images and can be given as sensuous and emotionally meaningful presents. images contributed by philipsdesign.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices147for example, in the futurehome scenario, technology is largely invisible, made transparent by beingintegrated directly into the home and its contents. screens, for example, disappear, replaced by òlivingwallpaperóñwallsize, flat displays that could present anything from static or moving decoration toinformation to entertainment. electronic objects no longer look òtechie,ó instead featuring sculptural shapesand aesthetically chosen forms that can be personalized to the user. there is an emphasis on technologiesthat support social connections; an example is remote eyesñsmall, wireless video cameras that can beplaced anywhere, allowing people to share images from their daily lives and supporting a variety of playfuluses. environmental values are reflected in technology such as the intelligent garbage can, whichautomatically sorts trash for recycling, compacts it, and removes its smell.the vision of the future was clearly a design successñit has achieved wide recognition, including the1996 design distinction for concept design by i.d. magazine (u.s.). but what about its impact on technologyproducts? according to the philips web site, in the last 6 years ò60% of all concepts envisioned in the visionof the future became actual solutions.ó wearable electronics, for example, which were envisioned in theproject, are now being produced and marketed in the industrial clothing division line, a partnershipbetween philips and nike. the value of the methodology for the company itself is reflected in thedevelopment of a series of followon projects including the home of the near future (1999), connectedpl@net (2000), and smart connections (2001), each of which analyzes different technologies and applicationdomains using the strategic futures methodology pioneered by the vision of the future. the value to philipsseems clear.at the same time, the question of the broader value of humancentered input from anthropologists,futurists, and designers for it product development remains open. the projectõs claim of supporting theenvironment seems to be belied by future scenarios describing the proliferation of inessential consumergoods and personalized (and hence nonreusable) products. at the same time, critics like genevieve bell andjoseph kaye argue that the human values embodied in the vision of the future products are not substantiallydifferent from those of previous productsñthat the vision of the future manifestoõs claim that human valuesmatter more than efficiency is violated by many of the resulting efficiencyfocused products, from the shivapersonal organizer to interactive jewelry that connects wearers to agendas and reminds them ofappointments.2 in fact, in describing products specifically intended to promote quality of life, the firstattribute of this quality is said to be òwhen products or services reduce the time or amount of tasks neededto be performed.ó3 issues such as these underscore the need to negotiate the tension between theconstraints on philips as a company in the marketplaceñthe need to sell more products to consumers thatare recognizable to them as consumable objectsñand the humanist vision of the designers, ethnographers,and other participants in the project. in the end, claims to be able to shape culture in positive ways cannotbe truly evaluated until the products have entered peopleõs homes and daily lives. clearly, the vision of thefuture is good for the philips corporation; it remains to be seen if it will be good for society.1for this project, quality of life was understood with respect to two broad issues. the first issue was sustainability,in terms of both environmental sustainability (for example, the materials out of which the products were made) andsocial sustainability, or the support of an individualõs social and emotional needs within society. the second issue wasgeneral qualityoflife issues, with a focus on values and aesthetics over efficiency, a traditional focus of electronicappliance design (see, for example, figure 5.6.1).2see genevieve bell and joseph òjofishó kaye, 2002, òdesigning technology for domestic spaces: a kitchenmanifesto,ó gastronomica 2(2): 4662.3see <http://www.design.philips.com/vof/vofsite6/index.htm>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity148even if it stirs controversy, or galvanizes opposition (some would saythis is a sign of success), the project has to have an impact on thecorporate discourse. if it is acclaimed outside the organization andignored within, that, too, is a point of departure for the institution.thus, the argument for introducing outsiders, such as artists, writers, independent designers, directors, curators, activists, anthropologists, and the like, into an it corporation must be made in the absenceof specific supporting empirical evidence. when would such outsideperspectives be most valuable? the motivations of outside artists anddesigners, in the right context, can drive technology forward in unexpected ways. artists reconfigure unlikely materials for unexpectedpurposes.75 designers understand that commercial products alone donot determine their value as professionals; they often sustain elaborateextracurricular work to demonstrate their creativity. the opportunitycost of risk is tiny in the realm of cultural production, compared withthe corporate sphere. and the rewards for risky new ideas are high.these drivers create a strong set of incentives to break new ground byconfronting emerging issues,76 not the least of which is the form,function, and significance of new technologies, and the practices andassumptions that drive technologyoriented organizations. essentially,the corporation that engages outsiders leverages incentives outsidethe economic sphere to generate intellectual capital that might nototherwise take root inside the organization.77the primary value of this engagement, from the corporate perspective, is not the production of a better mousetrapñcorporate r&ddoes a good job of optimizing mousetrapsñbut the discovery of newrelevance for the mousetrap.78 the engagement of outsiders can generate value from the design of more stylish, usable, and aesthetically75see, for example, vicki goldberg, 2001, òindustry and art: a long embrace,ó newyork times, april 22, available online at <http://query.nytimes.com/search/abstract?res=f20a17fb3d540c718eddad0894d9404482>.76the incentives are intellectual and socialñcuriosity and gloryñrather than commercial. the rewards in this context are overwhelmingly about status, rather thanmoneyñan artistõs career is, for better or worse, measured by and dependent onawards, inclusion in public and private collections and in museum and gallery exhibits,and critical attention. architects and designers sometimes earn as much (or more)acclaim for their conceptual designs as for commercial products and realworld buildings.77as economist richard caves has argued, òcreative goods and services, the processes of their production, and the preferences or tastes of creative artists differ insubstantial and systematic (if not universal) ways from their counterparts in the rest ofthe economy where creativity plays a lesser (if seldom negligible) role.ó see richard e.caves, 2000, creative industries: contracts between art and commerce, harvard universitypress, cambridge, mass., p. 2.78new relevance may emerge over time. for example, british petroleum has begunto investigate applications in medicine for the visualization and virtual reality tools itdeveloped for oil and gas exploration. and a reviewer noted that schlumberger was thefirst oil company to get into the medical business as it applied its knowledge of capillaryaction on another scale.outside artistsand designers, inthe right context,can drivetechnologyforward inunexpected ways.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venues for information technology and creative practices149pleasing products, if indeed it is true that technology has advancedsufficiently that the major differences among products discerned byconsumers seldom are based on technological capability per se.79 theeconomic payoff of creative practice tends to be at the design levelñfor example, design has been so important at such companies as applecomputer and nike as to be a core competency.80 moreover, currenttrends in itcp suggest the potential for creative practice to shape itthat is more usable and better integrated with its users than has oftenbeen the caseñwhether among companies that focus on producing itor on its intense use.the crux of the argument to bring in outsiders is that theorganizationõs regular staff is unable, on its own, to avail itself of theopportunities articulated above. outsiders can help to challenge thestatus quo,81 to foster cognitive diversity.82 resistance to change orinertia often derives from an organizationõs culture and legacy productsñthere are proven ways to achieve success, and so it is understandable that the organizationõs employees can be ambivalent aboutpursuing unproven avenues. and, indeed, the purpose of many organizations is to perform particular tasks repeatedly, gaining competitive advantage and providing value to the consumer through costeconomies.83some corporations have initiated artistinresidence programs thathave tended to operate at the periphery of the organization. suchprograms may produce greater benefits if they are managed as seriousendeavors aimed at core functions that can yield important resultsacross the enterprise.84 (companies that have terminated programsthat operated on the periphery may have had unrealistic expectationsfor them.)79see vikas bajaj, 2002, òmakers of electronics begin to emphasize style,ó dallasmorning news, may 2.80of course, the contribution of designers reflects the work of artists, much as thecontribution of engineers reflects the work of scientists.81one criterion for the selection of artists or designers in this role is that they will bewilling to engage corporate staffs actively. they must not be aloof.82see dorothy leonardbarton, 1995, wellsprings of knowledge: building and sustaining the sources of innovation, harvard business school press, boston, mass.83whether an organization bakes bread, manufactures automobiles, teaches students, or provides hotel accommodations, what some might construe to be organizational (or structural) inertia may be characterized as core competence by others. moreon this point can be found in the literature on organizational ecology; for example, seemichael t. hannan and john freeman, 1989, organizational ecology, harvard universitypress, cambridge, mass; and glenn r. carroll and michael t. hannan, 1992, dynamics oforganizational populations, oxford university press, new york.84one comparison might be to the efforts of companies such as apple computer todesignate roaming specialists as evangelists, such as its use at one time of brucetognazzini as its evangelist to human interface to promote attention to usability acrossthe company.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity150there could be irresistible pressure to institutionalize outsidersinto an organizationñespecially if the outsiders are successful. formalstructures, titles, budgets, and other processes may evolve. such developments may be essential to some degree, but this institutionalization would have to be monitored carefully. formalization may undercut the effectiveness of the outsiders if priorities shift toward theprotection of budgets and outsiders are enculturated to become insiders. to ensure fresh perspectives, it may be that the tenure of outsidersshould be limited to a relatively short period of time.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.151chools of art and design, colleges, and universities arefertile ground for fostering work in information technology and creative practices (itcp). as sources of knowledge, education, and training, they facilitate the acquisition of new and different skills and insights. in addition to providing aplace for exploring new types of activities and new mixes of skills andknowledge, they bridge old and new knowledge and techniques andways of thinking and doing, providing a place to see (and study) howthe new builds onñand differs fromñthe old. as the institutionalhome for students, they provide a ready source of talented and motivated labor to support work in itcpña practical reality that encourages some itcp practitioners to be involved with such institutions.1academic environments are designed to enable broad, deep, andlongterm creative explorations, but how they embrace change, whetherwithin a discipline or in a multi or transdisciplinary activity, variesenormously. some generate new programs and embrace new areasreadily, while others find programmatic and structural change moredifficult, given the challenges and/or inertia in leadership, institutional culture, and the allocation of resources. approaches to crossdisciplinary opportunitiesñwhich today come from many directionsñvary, depending on the institutionõs relative emphasis on research orteaching, the seniority and size of its faculty, and faculty membersõwillingness and ability to collaborate across disciplinary boundaries.itcp activities have begun to proliferate in academiañmore visibly and vigorously in departments of art and design than in computer1this observation was made by briefers to the committee and is consistent with theexperience of some committee members as well.2computational science involves the application of computer science to study scientific problems, which often involves highperformance computing.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity152science departments. this imbalance of interest is not necessarily bad;it is analogous to the linkage of computational science2 programs toother sciences (e.g., computational physics or chemistry) rather than tocomputer science. in particular, itcp can be seen in the emergence ofvarious newmedia (or digital media or digital arts) activities. theseactivities relate to itcp in name, but they appear to vary greatly intheir intellectual rigor and vigor and in their impact on preexistingprograms in the arts and design.this chapter begins with a presentation of the specific organizational mechanisms that directly support and promote work in itcp.efforts within the mainstream schools and departmentsñof computerscience, art, and designñto advance itcp work are then discussed.the chapter concludes with crosscutting observations and implications.3organizational models forsupporting workthere are three broad categories of academic itcp organizations:specialized centers, workshops, and service units. specialized centersare of the greatest interest in the present context because they tend toproduce work that balances and integrates disciplines at the deepestlevels and for the longest periods of time. however, workshops andservice units can also make valuable contributions by working orfostering work across disciplines, as detailed below.specialized centersthe specialized center is the most visible model for academicwork in itcp. the (relatively) standalone type operates largely autonomously from mainstream academic departments, and the derivative type obtains significant funding from one or more mainstreamacademic departments within one or more universities. and, of course,there are various gradations of specialized centers between standalone¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥3although this chapter focuses on higher education, the committee does not intendto suggest that itcp work occurs only in higher education and/or that preparation foritcp work in colleges and universities cannot begin earlier at the k12 level. while itneither possessed the credentials to speak authoritatively on k12 education nor heardtestimony from k12 researchers or educators, the committee does wish to record itssense that itcp work could have a considerable, positive influence on the curricula ofprimary and secondary schools. moreover, rich offerings in the arts and design areas, inaddition to mathematics and science, in k12 education can serve as an importantbaseline for itcp thinking and work in the undergraduate years.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities153and derivative. representing points along a spectrum, the specializedcenters described here are often positioned according to their links totheir host academic communities. specialized centers can serve as acooperating unit for joint appointments of faculty and staff in mainstream departments, which can encourage intellectual crossfertilization.in contrast with more decentralized attempts to evolve existingacademic units or to incorporate itcp elements within traditionalunits, the standalone center aims to focus on itcp work from theoutset. experts skilled in one or more areas are convened in a singleorganizational unit to conduct work in itcp. many of the conceptsand principles of studiolaboratories apply to academic standalonecenters,4 although the context is different.the media lab at mit may be the bestknown example of astandalone itcp research center, at least within the united states. itopened its doors in 1985, growing steadily from an interest in computation at the massachusetts institute of technology school of architecture and planning and expanding its scope to include multiple artsand rather different fields, such as materials science, which it incorporates through its own hiring as well as joint appointments. it hasbecome both one of the largest centers focused on itcp5 and thesubject of discussions about whether it should be considered a model,given the mixed success of larger, enduring organizations in the itcpspace in general6 and some of the specific problems it has encounteredin its own growth.7 areas of interest include the computational properties of physical systems of all types; the overlay of digital information on the physical world (e.g., tangible media, discussed in chapter4); and global outreach, especially to developing nations.8 the challenge for the media lab is to sustain a high level of energy and successas it continues to mature and grow, and to avoid losing its edge byallowing past successes to dominate plans for the future. at present,the model has attracted interest in other countries (e.g., india), wheresister facilities are contemplated.an example of a derivative center is the newly established centerfor research in interactive, telematic, and immersive culture (critic)at the university of california at irvine, a crossdisciplinary graduateprogram in the arts, computation, and engineering that is jointly supported by the school of the arts, the school of engineering, and theitcp activitieshave begun toproliferatemore visibly andvigorously indepartments ofart and designthan in computersciencedepartments.4see chapter 5 for a discussion of studiolaboratories.5as of 2003, the media lab has about 30 faculty members and senior research staff,170 graduate students (somewhat evenly divided in masterõs and doctoral programs),and about 150 undergraduate students.6see chapter 5.7for further commentary on the media lab, see david h. freedman, 2000, òthemedia lab at a crossroads,ó technology review 103(5): 7079, available online at <http://www.technologyreview.com/articles/freedman0900.asp>.8for additional information about the media lab, a unit of the school of architectureand planning at mit, see <http://www.media.mit.edu>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity154(soon to be) school of information and computer science, with additional support from the school of humanities. course materials areprinted with the disclaimer òmay cause permanent damage to axiomatic assumptions.ó9the critic will be complemented by a research program in acrossdisciplinary, multientity project, the california institute for telecommunications and information technology (cal(it)2).10 althoughcentered on science and technology, cal(it)2 has hooks into the artsand social sciences, and accordingly, it has a range of institutionallinks. a new media arts òstrategic applicationó component11 focuseson computer games and visualization environments òto provide creative research challenges likely to have impact on distance learning,collaborative work environments, and understanding large complexdata sets.ó12 it, in turn, involves the center for research in computingand the arts (crca) at the university of california at san diego, anòorganized research unit . . . whose mission is to foster advancedresearch and production at the crossroads between digital technologyand new art forms.ó13 crca activities include interactive networkedmultimedia, virtual reality, computerspatialized audio, and live performance techniques for computer music and graphics; it also exploresartistsõ software systems. cal(it)2 is an ambitious experiment in holism and maximal crossdisciplinary effort. like other large and multifaceted academic centers that build on preexisting components, it ishard, especially at the early stages, to understand how much truesubstantive integration is actually being achieved.whereas cal(it)2 spans two universities in one state, other derivative centers have broader geographical reach (although this remains uncommon). an example is the graphics and visualizationcenter that involved brown university, the california institute oftechnology, cornell university, the university of north carolina atchapel hill, and the university of utah. one of the earliest nationalscience foundationsupported science and technology centers for it,the nowdefunct center explored options for future interactive graphical environments, from algorithms to user interfaces, and it was itself alaboratory for tools to support remote collaboration. additional specialized itcp centers are described briefly in box 6.1 to further illustrate the nature of these centers.149as described to the committee by the centerõs founder, simon penny.10see <http://www.calit2.net/research/index.html>.11within cal(it)2, this component has a special name, òarts layer.ó12see <http://www.calit2.net/art/index.html>.13see <http://www.crca.ucsd.edu/>.14one important dimension that can be used to characterize specialized centers iswhether one world view is dominant (and if so, which one). for example, the electronicvisualization laboratory is closer to the computer science field than to the arts or designworld, while the institute for the study of the arts is closer to the arts and design worldthan to the field of computer science.the standalonecenter aims tofocus on itcpwork from theoutset.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities155workshopsflexible, informal means of promoting truly creative practices areneeded, because any institution designed to support some particularconception of creative practice (such as a specialized center) will discourage movement beyond that paradigm, increasingly so as the institution becomes more established. in many universities, workshops,seminars, and other ad hoc convenings provide a quasiinformal meeting ground for testing multi and transdisciplinary work focused on aknotty problem or a complex area. such flexible, lowcost mechanismsfor bringing disparate people together are inherently bottomup, intimate, and conversational; typically, drafts of papers are read anddiscussed, and students, faculty, and visitors mingle across disciplinary divides. at the university of california at los angeles, for example, an crossdisciplinary initiative with the acronym sinapse(social interfaces and networks in advanced programmable simulations and environments) provides a variety of forums to encouragediscussion and debate of it issues. this approach has proved effectivein encouraging conversations among humanists, scientists, and artists.there is also much potential for itcp in a different type of workshop, harking back to the medieval, handson space for technologicalexperimentation and testing of thoughts. part alchemical laboratory,part wellstocked hightech site, a media lab is the less formal, lessexpensive correlate to the fullfledged research center. it offers facultyand students a dedicated place for experimentation and an opportunity to produce the kinds of results that can happen only with newmedia. media labs may be constituted temporarily, perhaps based ona theme, for periods of 3 to 6 weeksñlong enough to permit doingnew intellectual and technical work and to support identifying viableproblems and projects, but still without imposing the burdenñandriskñof making permanent institutional arrangements. participantscan sign up and work anonymously and/or collaboratively, but without fanfareñmuch as members of the academic community, in thedays before the personal computer, flocked to shared computing centers. mcmaster universityõs multimedia program offers such a facilityfor faculty and, with the aid of a large grant, is in the process ofdeveloping opensource software with collaborative input from a variety of faculty at mcmaster and other canadian institutions. the university of california at santa barbara, in conjunction with its transcriptions project, has also established a hightech meeting place toencourage collaborative and creative work on curriculum and research projects that incorporate it.15workshops andother ad hocconveningsprovide a quasiinformal meetingground for testingmulti andtransdisciplinarywork focused ona knotty problemor a complexarea.15from the project web site (<http://transcriptions.english.ucsb.edu/about/index.asp#concept>): òthe goal of [transcriptions] is to demonstrate a paradigmñatonce theoretical, instructional, and technicalñfor integrating new information mediaand technology within the core work of a traditional humanities discipline. transcriptions seeks to ôtranscribeõ between past and present understandings of what it means tobe a literate, educated, and humane person.óbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity156box 6.1 selected specialized centers¥the electronic visualization laboratory (evl) at the university of illinois at chicago (uic), created in1973, is a graduate research laboratory specializing in virtual reality and realtime interactive computergraphics. evlõs current research areas include scientific visualization, new methodologies for informalscience and engineering education, paradigms for information display, distributed computing, sonification,humancomputer interfaces, everycitizen interfaces, and abstract mathematical visualization. a joint effortof uicõs college of engineering and school of art and design, evl offers graduate degrees (m.f.a., m.s.,ph.d.) in electronic visualization. for more information, see <http://www.evl.uic.edu/>.¥the institute for studies in the arts (isa) at arizona state university (asu; herberger college of finearts) supports individual inquiry and collaboration among artists, scholars, and technologists. the isasponsors both faculty and student research as well as residencies for visiting artists and scholars. in the fallof 2002, the isa began offering two new training programs, interdisciplinary digital media and performance(idmp) and signal processing and programming for the arts (spp). the idmp program features òsurvey,lecture and laboratory exposure to the uses of technology as an essential part of crossdisciplinary art andthe principles of collaborative art making through collaboration between creative artists and technologists.óthe ssp program focuses on tools for digital and media arts, incorporating basic signalprocessing technicalconcepts taught for nonscience majors. overall, the isa program offers as research environments digitalimaging, audio, and intelligent stage laboratories, as well as a technology development studio, a collaborationwith asuõs college of electrical engineering. for more information, see <http://isa.asu.edu/flashhome.html>.¥the institute for creative technologies at the university of southern california (usc) draws on uscõsschool of cinematv, the school of engineering and its information sciences institute (isi) and integratedmedia systems center (imsc), and the annenberg school of communication. the institute has a specificmissionñmeeting the armyõs interests in better tools for immersive training and simulation, which mayprove to constrain its approaches as well as its projects in terms of itcp work. it is an experiment in bothcrossdisciplinary exploration and academic engagement in meeting military needs.1 its assumptions are thatò[t]he entertainment industry brings expertise in story, character, visual effects, gaming and production. . . . in addition the computer science community brings innovation in networking, artificial intelligence, andvirtual reality technology.ó for more information, see <http://www.ict.usc.edu/>.¥the center for advanced technology (cat) at new york university draws from a larger state programof support for centers of advanced technology. its mission involves support for new yorkõs newmediaindustryñthe development and licensing of technologies relevant to that industry is a goal. graphics (andrelated computer science) is central to the itcp work undertaken. a committee member associated withcat joined with another committee member to initiate a local lecture series inspired by this project,meaow! (media art or whatever), to facilitate artistsõ engagement with technologies and technologists.for more information, see <http://www.nystar.state.ny.us/nyu.htm> and <http://cat.nyu.edu>.1another program that addresses military needs is the moves institute, based at the naval postgraduate school,which is a crossdisciplinary department dedicated to education and research in all areas of modeling, virtualenvironments, and simulation. see <http://www.movesinstitute.org>.fortunately, the costs of most such efforts to promote creativepractices tend to be modest. at the low end (e.g., to support a seminarseries), the incremental costs might involve little more than refreshments, photocopying, and a quartertime graduate student assistant;to provide the wellstocked hightech site described above would,though, involve hardware, software, networking, facilities, and technical support costs.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities157service unitsas is true across society, academic environments depend on ittools and infrastructure for their daytoday activities in general andalso for the support of itcp work specifically. as such, supportingservices are valuableñindeed essentialñto the work of todayõs university. for this discussion, though, the question of interest is how (orwhether) such supporting services can directly affect the rise of newintellectual activity aimed at understanding what it itself could become and how it can be integrated with elements from the arts anddesign world to represent and explore ideas in different ways. whetherthe assistance takes the form of consultation with a database softwareexpert in a centralized it department or is provided through a servicecourse (e.g., òintroduction to programming for humanistsó), the support provided by service units does not usually lead directly to deepinsight into itñhow it is developed, how it works, how it could bemeaningfully incorporated into other work, and how it could be extended in support of new explorations and objectives. mastery of anew set of itbased tools16 is only the first step for artists and designers involved in such efforts, as it has been for scientists. it is not clearthat there is in the arts and design an analogue to the it service unit,other than the selective use of artists or designers, who tend to beincorporated as needed into technical projects rather than centralizedin a service unit.service organizations can be important in stimulating itcp workin environments where such explorations are otherwise difficult tolaunch. in addition to the classical it service unit, a libraryñalready anexus of multiple disciplines that embodies it in its daily practicesñcould help foster itõs introduction into arts and designoriented departments, especially in institutions without engineering schools orcomputational science programs. the transformation of both librariesand the schools that prepare library professionals illustrates a fundamental attention to it as a tool for and means of crossdisciplinaryexploration.17 for example, specialized digital libraries such as theperseus digital library at tufts university can simplify access todisparate literatures and thus help enable work based on multipledisciplines.18 physical spaces are also evolving, such as vassarõs me16understanding how information technology works has been called it fluency. seecomputer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999,being fluent with information technology, national academy press, washington, d.c.17two institutions of higher education that were previously more narrowly focusedon library science and now have a much broader, social science and policyrich curriculaare the university of michiganõs school of information and the university of californiaat berkeleyõs school of information management and systems. see <http://www.si.umich.edu> and <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/>.18see <http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/>. a general resource on collaborative facilities for academic environments is under development as a project that is hosted bydartmouth college and sponsored by the coalition for networked information. see<http://www.dartmouth.edu/~collab>.serviceorganizationscan be importantin stimulatingitcp work inenvironmentswhere suchexplorations areotherwisedifficult tolaunch.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity158dia cloisters, a collaborative space in the collegeõs main library that isequipped with stateoftheart technology,19 and the media union atthe university of michigan, which brings together information resources, information technology, production studios, and the combined talents of information professionals from across campus units tofacilitate crossdisciplinary collaboration as well as integrative learning and exploration.20fostering itcp work withinmainstream departmentsand disciplinescomputer sciencecomputer science is a young discipline (departments and degreesin the field emerged in the 1960s) with roots in mathematics andelectrical engineering. although it drew from other disciplines, and aswhat herbert simon called an òartificial scienceó21 would seem tohave inherent flexibility, its recent history of crossdisciplinary interactionñthat is, in the period when itcp has been emergingñhas beenmixed. in the late 1980s and early 1990s, for example, attention toapplications of computer science was sometimes questioned in thecomputer science community, in part because of concern about thepotential for diversion of resources to other fields using computing.22as applications have proliferated, respect by the field for research incomputer science has most often been accorded to work defined ascontributing to advances in the science and engineering that are fundamental to the field itself, whether or not an application problem hasinspired the activity. collaboration with, or engagement of, any fieldis judged within computer science by that criterionñwhich is a reflection of the basic view that good work in the field advances the field.23¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥19see <http://mediacloisters.vassar.edu>.20see <http://www.ummu.umich.edu/intro.html>.21herbert a. simon, 1996, the sciences of the artificial, third ed., mit press, cambridge, mass.22although cstbõs 1992 report computing the future: a broader agenda for computerscience and engineering (computer science and telecommunications board, nationalresearch council, juris hartmanis and herbert lin, eds., national academy press,washington, d.c.) had as a first recommendation sustaining the core of the field, itsrecommendation that the field look to application areas for inspiration was controversial when published.23for example, collaborations with psychologists and sociologists have been routinein work on usability and humancomputer interaction, including in particular the areaof computersupported cooperative work. because research in these areas involvesstudying how people use technology and draws on those insights to improve the designof hardware and software, such collaborations have had some direct appeal, as reflectedin professional society, conference, and journal activities and in the composition ofresearch teams.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities159this somewhat limited focus, however, is not conducive to the exploration of new relationships called for in itcp work.examples of itcp workthere are computer science faculty members pursuing itcpwork,24 although the number is relatively low, in the committeeõsestimation, compared to the number of art and design faculty whopursue itcp work.25 for example, ken goldberg, a professor of industrial engineering and operations research at the university of california at berkeley, explores itcp through robotics, including telerobotics(operated over the internet), which he has extended intotelepistemology (see box 6.2 for a description of his work). for about15 years he has been òusing art work as a way of challengingñquestioning, critiquingñthis world that i was operating in, the worldof robotics and engineering.ó his work has attempted to explore thehuman and philosophical side of issues in control technologies. heobserved that the engineer/researcher in him wants to discuss operations, steps, and motives very precisely, whereas the artist in him isboth skeptical about and has an appreciation for the benefits of sayingless.as described in chapter 2, michael mateas, a new faculty memberat the georgia institute of technology, uses the term òexpressive aiófor his combination of art studio practice and artificial intelligence (ai)research practice; he uses ai to build interactivity into cultural artifacts, applying technology to enable a ònegotiation of meaning between the artist and the audience.ó in describing his work to thecommittee,26 mateas sketched out the principal schools of thought inai and then differentiated what he did from them, explaining differences in the goals of art or cultural production and ai research and inthe ability to shape the internal workings of a device as they relate tothe audience experience.27 in sum, òthere is new ai technology beinginvented that would not be invented or discovered or even thoughtabout by someone doing ai research whoõs not interested in art. but itis focused on art practice.ó24they include david salesin at the university of washington and roger dannenbergat carnegie mellon university, members of the committee. also see the program of theconference mosaic 2000, available online at <http://www.cs.washington.edu/mosaic2000/program.html>.25the committee does not have specific quantitative evidence to support this claim,which reflects the committeeõs expert judgment, based on professional networking byits members.26in january 2001, when he was a doctoral student at carnegie mellon university.27conventional ai, as with other computer science, focuses on quick and efficientcompletion of a task, whereas cultural production focuses on poetics and rich possibilities for interpretation by an audience; ai is concerned with generalities (principles),whereas cultural production focuses on the potential of a specific work, per se; and aiaims at realism while cultural production aims at abstraction, which may exaggerate orchange a part of the world. also see box 2.3.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity160box 6.2teleroboticsthe study of knowledge acquired at a distance, telepistemology, tries to comprehend how epistemology can inform the understanding of robotics, and to what extent telerobots can furnish new insight intoclassical questions about the nature and possibility of knowledge. ken goldberg, the editor of the robot inthe garden,1 sees a fine line between how people perceive traditional virtual reality, where interactions takeplace in synthetic space, and telematic reality, where there is a physical space but it is distant. how peopleinteract in telematic reality is a central concern of telepistemology, and it raises important technical andmoral questions. technical questions include whether telerobotics provides access to real knowledge andthe degree to which telerobotic experiences are equivalent to proximal experiences. moral questionsconcern how people should act in telerobotically mediated environments and to what degree technologicalmediation affects human values.one of goldbergõs telerobotic art projects, telegarden (figure 6.2.1), tries to provide insight into someof these questions by focusing on how information arises from live interaction with remote physicalenvironments. goldberg describes telegarden, which has been housed at the ars electronica center inaustria since 1995, as a telerobotic art installation on the internet where remote users direct a robot toplant and water seeds in a real garden. the telegarden receives, on average, more than 1500 hits a day.2based on the feedback received from visitors to the telegarden site, goldberg and his colleagues have beenable to reflect on how perception, knowledge, and agency, important principles of telepistemology, are beingdefined in telerobotic interaction. for example, they have found that people are skeptical of the experience,often wondering whether the telegarden is real in the physical sense or a digital simulacrum.3figure 6.2.1 telegarden. image courtesy of ken goldberg.1ken goldberg, ed., 2001, the robot in the garden: telerobotics and telepistemology in the age of the internet, mitpress, cambridge, mass., and london.2at its peak, the site attracted on the order of 15,000 hits per day.3ken goldberg briefed the committee at its meeting in january 2001 at stanford university. for further informationconcerning his work, see <http://www.ieor.berkeley.edu/~goldberg>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities161different institutions may be culturally better suited to differentmodels of itcp work. for example, committee membersõ experiences,and testimony to the committee, suggest that carnegie mellon university (cmu) generates crossdisciplinary activities in various formswith relative frequency and success as compared to many other universities. in the cmu culture, it is generally acceptable to work in anydiscipline from a basis in any other, an unusually open posture (albeitbounded by expectations for performance that can be evaluated withinthe home discipline28). work in different disciplines is accepted, too:there is a separate history of computer scientists with academic appointments who are also significant creative artists, namely composers. one can speculate that such a development took place becausecomposers were more likely to program computers than were otherartists or designers.regardless of setting, a key element of success is effective training;more than talking about opportunities is needed. in the early days of anew area of study, people put in a lot of time to educate themselves inthe new domain. time matters, and accordingly, so does institutionalsupport for the investment of time necessary for learning.what goes on within the walls of academia is only part of the itcpstory, however. computer science laboratories and departments haveboth official programs of activities and a panoply of unofficial activitiesña penumbrañthat extends the interface between the academicand the nonacademic, both feeding and drawing from popular interests off campus. comparisons might be drawn to the intellectual fringearound industries that deal with pop culture, or the marginal artproduction feeding off the core, which serves as a magnet. it is important to sustain that penumbra (supporting such activities as shortanimation/student festivals, for example) as it relates to part of astrategy of nurturing academic itcp on the computer science side.this is the arena in which collaborations with independent artists maybe achieved.among the most notable of such interactionsñand the most visibleñwere the computer graphics and computer music collaborationsamong computer scientists and artists and designers dating back tothe early years of the computer science field. computer graphicsevolved in part through interactions with scientific (and other) userswhose needs for visualizing complex processes could be met with thistechnology.29 see box 6.3.28also note the further comments on criteria for tenure in the section òchallenges incomputer science departments,ó below.29scientific visualization has itself evolved with computational power in ways thatreinforce the values of an artistic approach to making sense of growing quantities ofdata. thus, for example, artist donna cox was an early employee of the national centerfor supercomputing applications at the university of illinois at urbanachampaign,where she has collaborated with computer scientists and other scientists on the challenge of visualizing the processes for which supercomputing generates enormous volumes of data.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity162box 6.3beyond academia: computer science reaches out to the communitythe development of computer music and computer graphics collaborations among computer scientistsand artists dates back to the early years of computer science. computer graphics emerged from computerscience research in the 1960s, spurred by vigorous defense advanced research projects agency (darpa;then arpa) funding,1 but it also grew up in a variety of pockets of filmmakers working in close associationwith both academic and industrybased laboratories. computer music also took a variety of paths, linkedto corporate research programs as well as university computer centers.much of the foundational work in computergenerated sound occurred at bell labs, under theleadership of max mathews and john pierce, who from the earliest days employed qualified composers tocollaborate in the study of both the acoustics of instruments and the design of highlevel languages forcomposition.2 links to computer science departments were highly visible as well. stanford universityõscenter for computer research in music and acoustics, which leverages computer technology as an artisticmedium and research tool,3 grew out of the stanford artificial intelligence lab, and centers for hybrid analogdigital computer music were located at princeton university, the university of toronto, and columbiauniversity in the 1960s. (the formal properties of avantgarde music were well suited to proceduralrepresentation even earlier than this, as exemplified by the work of xenakis in the 1950s, who worked withibm researchers in france to devise stochastic composition under computer control.4) as smaller systemscame within reach of independent composers and more academic music departments in the 1970s,composers themselves tended to take the lead in devising both hardware and software components. by the1980s, easily programmable commodity hardware became affordable, and a communication protocolñthemusical instrument digital interface (midi)ñmade it possible for both researchers and commercialpractitioners to adapt the cumulative knowhow in languages and synthesis techniques across a broadspectrum of musical styles. indeed, an unanticipated consequence of this widely adopted protocol was animportant factor in enabling the growth of newmedia art forms, such as interactive installation andperformance art: the musical eventgenerator could as easily talk to imagemaking, lighting, motiondetection, or robotic machinery as to synthesizers or soundprocessing devices.challenges in computer sciencedepartmentsone of the biggest challenges to be addressed in departments ofcomputer science seems to be a culture that discourages itcp workñalthough sometimes subtly. committee members and briefers to thecommittee recounted personal stories of their art and design interestsgenerally not being viewed as productive. as one individual explained,òa faculty member told me that it was a complete waste of time andthat i should stop doing the ôflakyõ stuff. that caused me to go underground.ó this person decided to limit conversations with other technical colleagues about artistic work and did not include the work in thecase for promotion, observing that relevant activities such as seminarswere treated as over and above conventional responsibilities. anotherbriefer characterized the departmentõs reaction to art and design workas òfriendly toleration.óbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities163in computer graphics, the technical issues addressed in the 1960s by the darpa contractors(massachusetts institute of technology, stanford university, carnegie mellon university, university ofutah) dealt primarily with the problems of threedimensional modeling and simulationñfueling the decadeslong quest for the holy grail of immersive photorealistic virtual environments.5 important contributionswere made to the commercial motion picture industry by university laboratories in the 1970sñnotably thenew york institute of technologyñwhich sustained the core set of early darpa researchers before priceand performance factors leaped forward in the 1980s and made a market for commercial graphics a reality.the national film board (nfb) of canada collaborated with the canadian national research council inproducing some of the most widely viewed and convincing artistic computer animations before 1975. thiscollaboration was decisive for the nfbõs early adoption of digital techniques, and it fostered a communityof advanced users with strong links to the academic work in canadian labs (at the universities of waterloo,toronto, and montr”al) that helped to underwrite the knowledge base feeding the successful cluster ofcanadian graphics software firmsñalias, softimage, sideffects, and discrete logic.the scientific and entertainment graphics community coalesced around the professional organizationsiggraph (the special interest group on computer graphics and interactive techniques of theassociation for computing machinery), which has been successively extending its scope to include otherscientific specialties, such as humancomputer interaction, and media genres, such as computer games. it isperceived as emphasizing commercial applications, which have games as a driver for computer graphics.1see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999, funding a revolution:government support for computing research, national academy press, washington, d.c.2pierce worked with claude shannon on pulsecode modulation, and mathews followed up with the analysis oftransmission systems using pictureprocessing algorithms. they had an abiding interest in audio and visual; mathewsworked closely with lillian schwartz, a computer artist at bell labs beginning in the late 1960s who was also associatedthere with a. michael noll and ken knowlton, who pioneered certain graphics and animation programs.3see <http://ccrmawww.stanford.edu/>.4iannis xenakis, 1992, formalized music, pendragon press, stuyvesant, n.y. (first published in 1963 as musiquesformelles, editions richardmasse, paris).5see the chapter òvirtual reality comes of ageó in computer science and telecommunications board, 1999,funding a revolution.the criteria for tenure in computer science tend to reinforce suchnegative attitudes toward itcp work. although they vary amongcomputer science departments, criteria for tenure at a research university typically include the ability to win a strong endorsement in confidential assessments by subject experts at other institutions and thequality and quantity of published research, as well as the quality of thecandidateõs research program, supervision of doctoral students, andgeneral teaching record. if the subject experts on a tenure committeedo not include anyone familiar with itcp work, or if that itcp workdoes not produce a bounty of published research in major technicaljournals, efforts devoted to itcp work may not advance a computerscientistõs career within the department.another challenge is related to the rise of computing and datacommunications across the board in academic environments, withelements of computer science increasingly being taught in other departmentsña situation that makes some computer scientists skepticalbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity164about collaborating with colleagues who may be viewed as lacking thecredentials to be hired in the computer science department itself.when computer science is taught as a service course to meet specificneeds, other departments may be less motivated to reach out to computer scientists for help with deeper, challenging problems in computing and communications. the computer science diaspora in academiahas typically focused on developing skills of immediate application inanother field, whether programming (at the more sophisticated level)or the use of common software tools (at the less generic user level).whether they are expected to teach computer science (cs) courses formajors in other departments or whether those departments internalizesuch courses, computer scientists tend to see such activity as something less than òdoing real computer science.ó also, the emphasis ofsuch courses on meeting immediate needs and delivering a targetedservice is not conducive to thinking about collaborations.the willingness and ability of academic computer scientists toengage with artists and designers depends on institutional support, asnoted above, and on other particulars of a given departmentñwhether,for example, the department is in a school of engineering, whether abachelor of arts degree is an option, and so on. recently, to improvethe richness of its crossdisciplinary interactions, the cs department atmit planned to make about half of its new appointments joint withanother unit at mit:30 one course per year would be taught in eachdepartment, salary and promotion decisions would be made jointly,and the research expected from the new faculty member would appealto each department, with selection standards the same as for core(nonjoint) faculty. the first person hired in the cs department underthis plan was a physical chemist, and the partnering department wasbioengineering. it was expected that he would be exposed to newmethods in computer science and in turn would contribute to newproblems demanding new cs solutionsñand thus motivating fruitfulcrossdisciplinary interaction. how this departmentõs openended planfor crossfertilization is realized and whether it will contribute to itcpwill depend, in part, on whether artists (for instance) can also be hired.that prospect is uncertain, in part because of questions about how toassess candidates who are so different from computer scientists andhow to compensate people who span departments with substantiallydifferent salary structures.31whatever the mechanism for forming collaborations for itcpacross departments and disciplines, they must include researchersworking with shared goals and must address intellectually challeng30briefing to the committee by john guttag, chair of the electrical engineering andcomputer science department at mit, may 31, 2001.31on the other hand, the differences might make artists and humanists more attractive than social scientists, who bear the òsoft scienceó stigma among some computerscientists because of perceived contrasts in the quantitative and analytical elements ofthe fields. at mit, the point may be moot, because the media lab already provides avehicle for exploring itcp.one of thebiggestchallenges to beaddressed indepartments ofcomputer scienceseems to be aculture thatdiscourages itcpworkñalthoughsometimes subtly.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities165ing computer science problems. one approach to ascertaining whethera project is intellectually challenging might be to ask whether it couldlead to a suitable computer science doctoral thesis. computer sciencefaculty tend to value work that advances the state of the art in computer science. for dual appointments, the issue may be whether thework helps to redefine computer science for the future or to create anew field.one approach to establishing credibility for, and perhaps encouraging, itcp work and programs within computer science departments would be to appoint a senior researcher as the leader of crossdisciplinary activities. sending such a signal may be even moreimportant for collaborations that would include a field traditionallyregarded as far from computer science. in addition, institutional pathsare needed that allow faculty members to break out of narrow specializations and that encourage crossdisciplinary ph.d. programs,although market realities may argue for a òhomeó department incomputer science or another technical area. programs with crossdisciplinary minors could also be established or expanded. crossdepartmental activities such as distinguished lecture series and topical studygroups or seminars could also be adopted.a key criterion in assessing specific options for crossdisciplinaryappointments will be their potential to advance the interests of graduate students, who are the backbone of a computer science departmentõsresearch program. it will be necessary to frame interesting new, crossdisciplinary problems that provide appropriate entr”es to careers forgraduate students (perhaps more at the masterõs than at the doctorallevel).art practice and designwithin the academic environment, the arts range broadly fromtraditional fine artsñthe visual arts, music, drama, dance, photography, film and video, and so onñto design, architecture, crafts, and thehistory and criticism of the arts.32 the rise of it has touched all of theseareas, some more than others, blurring some of the traditional distinctions among them. the emphasis of arts programs varies with theinstitution: some take a more humanitiesbased approach, teachingartistic expression and critical theory as a way of understanding cultural problems, or a more theoretical approach, studying the fine artsõinterrelationships with all aspects of contemporary culture; othersprepare students for careers in commercial graphics design, fashion,or animation and special effects. and some academic art environments have a broader range of exposure to it than others.32the rise of it in the 1990s is viewed as an important cultural phenomenon with farreaching implications for visual artists who wish to interact with, and represent, theworld in which they live.one approach toestablishingcredibility foritcp work andprograms withincomputer sciencedepartmentswould be toappoint a seniorresearcher as theleader of crossdisciplinaryactivities.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity166the outreach from the arts to information technology, like thatfrom the humanities,33 echoes the sciencesõ earlier reaching out to it.computational science has been dominated by people and activitybased on one or another science, although new, hybrid programsñacademic programs, industrial and academic laboratoriesñhaveemerged. within the field of computer science, computational sciencehas tended to be viewed as an outside(rsõ) activity, in part because themajority of the impetus came from the various sciences that saw incomputer science useful tools. this is part of the previously notedcomputer science diaspora. response from within computer sciencerequired recognition that the field could gain inspiration from theseother fields, rather than serve only the oneway function of supplyingthose fields. similar concerns and patterns shape academic itcp, stillembryonic. further complicating the picture is the fact that itcp mayinvolve more than the pairing of arts with computer science (or electrical engineering). this is illustrated in particular by the recent trend toinvolve as well ideas and activities from the life sciences, given growing use of it in that domain and the visual or music performancepotential that results.34some arts programs have embraced it, even creating independentareas of study; many have simply broadened their current programsby adding courses in various software packages, thereby treating it asanother tool. arts programs are increasingly encouraging intermediaand crossdisciplinary artwork as it tools blur the distinctions between traditional art disciplines. some art schools are more skepticalof itõs potential as ònew mediaó and argue that computers and software, input devices such as digital cameras and scanners, and displays such as led screens and projectors are nothing more than toolsthat replicate and simulate traditional media without presenting anynew problems in visual theory.33see computer science and telecommunications board, 1997, òcomputing and thehumanities: summary of a roundtable meeting,ó acls occasional paper 41, americancouncil of learned societies, new york, n.y., available online at <http://www.acls.org/op41toc.htm>.34take the case of the artist as creator of new life forms. eduardo kac, of fluorescentgreenbunny fame (see his web site at <http://www.ekac.org>; see also eduardo kac,1998, òtransgenic art,ó leonardo electronic almanac 6(11): 289296), in another project,biblically titled ògenesis,ó mutated e. coli bacteria into genesis bacteria. what is ofspecific interest from the perspective of it is that the genomic code was translated intomorse code, which was then converted into dna base pairs. the complicated production of this synthetic gene is not the concern here. what is significant, however, is thatthese cultured fluorescent bacteria remain invisible until it intervenes. a microscopewith an internal ultraviolet (uv) light source, a web server, and an overlifesize videoprojection make visible the separation and interaction processes of these newly createdentities. both the onsite and the online observer can intervene in the procedure ofbacteria transformation by manipulating the uv light source. a further aspect of thisinstallation (shown at the ars electronica conference in 1999) is the dnamusicsynthesisñturning the physiology of the dna into a musical parameter. the real as well as theonline viewer is influential here, too, since she can control the rate of mutation and thesequencing.arts programs areincreasinglyencouragingintermedia andcrossdisciplinaryartwork as ittools blur thedistinctionsbetweentraditional artdisciplines.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities167schools of art and designto understand the emergence of itcp from the academic artsperspective, it is helpful to consider how major schools of art anddesign approach it. the rhode island school of design (risd), forexample, observes that òcomputers are natural allies in the creativeprocess, with the emphasis on using new technologies to expressartistic vision. breakthroughs in digital media have transformed virtually every discipline taught here.ó35 indeed, it has influenced thedevelopment of risd programs in graphic design, apparel, ceramics,architecture, photography, film, animation, video, and illustrationñproviding new ways to address a shared concern in visual literacy andcreative problem solving.risdõs integration of digital media into its more traditional coursework follows the typical pattern of the integration of it into artseducationñthe first and most natural step in the process is to usesoftware to create a model of a potential artwork before the work isrealized in a traditional medium, such as paint or marble. applications such as adobe photoshop, and any number of threedimensional modeling applications, allow students to experiment with image composites and collage, placement of colors, and generalcomposition before working with physical materials. however, in2002, risd announced a new graduate department to explore innovative approaches to digital media. expanding on a media art focus, thevision of the new department is to provide a diverse environment formultidisciplinary and transdisciplinary exploration of digital media.schools such as the california institute of the arts (calarts36)have focused on preparing undergraduates for professional careers inart, design, film, music, and theater. information technology has beenwholeheartedly incorporated into all of the above programs, and anew, crossdisciplinary study option has been created. graduate students have the option of undertaking a new concentration in integrated media, designed for students who are fluent with (or want tobe fluent with) computer programming and digital technologies asbasic elements in their artwork. programming is taught to increasemastery of it (beyond learning how to use an existing package).new yorkõs school of visual art (sva) boasts an impressive list oftechnical courses in its m.f.a. program in computer art, includingc++ programming, unix, interactive multimedia, interface design,and soundña list that shows a range from key skills development(e.g., programming) to explorations in applying those skills. the svaõscomputer art m.f.a. was the first of its kind, established in 1987.3735risdõs web site even features a technology statement. see <http://www.risd.edu/technology.cfm>.36see <http://www.calarts.edu>.37information on the school of visual arts is available online at <http://www.sva.edu/mfacad/facilities.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity168a course called òpublic art/private spacesó in cmuõs college offine arts explores itõs effect on the notion of public space, and itdirects students toward the creation of a public artwork that addressesthese issues. òwith the ubiquity of advertising, cell phones, surveillance cameras and wireless computers it is increasingly difficult todefine the parameters of public space. in this course, students willconsider how visual artwork and performance are incorporated intowhat is considered ôpublic space.õó38 carnegie mellonõs m.f.a. program is rooted in critical theory and a conceptual approach to artmaking, and consequently has incorporated it into its broader cultural concerns as well as into the practical aspects of streamlining theartmaking process and working in new media. also see box 6.4 for anexample of a program in electronic literature.the department of the arts at rensselaer polytechnic institute(rpi) provides a contrasting model to cmu, as it operates as the solecreative arts department within the school of humanities and socialsciences. stressing òintegrated electronic artsó in the wider context ofa technological university, the arts department at rpi offers both aconcentrated graduate masterõs degree in electronic arts practice andan undergraduate dual degree in electronic media, art, and communication. without the richness of creative resources and disciplinaryspecialties found in colleges or faculties of fine arts, rpiõs faculty ofprimarily electronic artists must attempt to cater to both the high endof experimental, researchoriented graduate itcp practice, as well as alarge and ever growing undergraduate demand for a hybrid bachelorõsdegree. after experiencing rapid growth in the late 1990s, the rpi artsdepartment is now poised to become the anchor academic partner forthe new experimental media and performing arts center, which willprovide exhibition and performance venues for both locally developed and internationally curated itcp work.the arts and design departments and colleges have generallyembraced information technology as a new tool to accomplish work.however, somewhat fewer programs in the practice of arts and designhave focused on itcp workñto examine how it may be able to enablenew forms of art and design and new ways of making such workavailable, as well as how it may be able to change profoundly thepractice within traditional art and design categories. in some respects,art and design departments were challenged just as society at large toidentify how advances in it could be used beneficially. in one sense,expectations are higher for arts and design departments than for computer science departments: most people would readily conclude thatsome kind of profound development in the arts and design shouldemerge from advanced it capability. by contrast, it is somewhat lessclear how itcp could and should affect computer science departments and whether the nature of this influence should be minor ormajor.3938see <http://wwwart.cfa.cmu.edu/academic/descriptions.html>.39the committee argues for a major impactñsee the discussion in chapter 4.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities169box 6.4school of literature, communication, and culture at thegeorgia institute of technologyabout 15 years ago, the english department of the georgia institute of technology (georgia tech)received a large institutional grant from the national endowment for the humanities to transform itself. thedepartment broadened its scope to include electronic media, leading to the adoption of a new name: theschool of literature, communication, and culture (lcc). aggressive recruitment for media arts facultyfollowed, and with a number of new members secured, the school began to focus on growth. first an m.a.program in information design and technology was created. then a series of workshops were convened atcorporate sites, which proved to be an excellent financial resource as the workshops soon raised more than$1 million in discretionary funds. this revenue went toward the purchase of uptodate equipment and tofund traditional courses, research, and projects in literary studies. today, the lcc is widely recognized asone of the premier programs in electronic literature.the transformation of a traditional english department into a nontraditional electronic media schoolhas resulted in both advantages and obstacles. the success and prestige that the school enjoys within georgiatech and the newmedia community at large have created visibility that would have been unavailable if it hadremained a traditional english department. with the help of creative campaigning by the lcc, the engineersand scientists of georgia tech, faculty members who hold the majority of clout within the university, havehad little trouble understanding the benefits and advantages of a program in digital media. the school offerstwo graduate programs, continuing education programs, and an undergraduate major, two minors, andthree certificate programs.1the changes also have created tensions. the new focus involves commercial considerations to a muchgreater extent than one finds in a traditional english departmentñperhaps welcomed by some faculty, buttroubling to others. related to this tension is the concern that the department might be morphing into afancy kind of trade school, away from an established place in the world of scholarshipñin other words, thatteaching highly marketable electronic skills might come at the expense of intellectual and scholarly inquiry.one solution may be to approach electronic literacy as a rhetorical practice, rather than a skill.1see the lcc mission statement at <http://www.lcc.gatech.edu/index.html>.as departments within universities, art practice and design programs must adhere to the same general guidelines for tenure as computer science departments. however, there are some important differences attributable to the discipline and profession. perhaps the centraldifference involves what constitutes a publication. in both cases, completed work must be made public in some way. computer scienceemphasizes the publication of articles and technical reports (and booksto a lesser extent). publication in the arts and design may occur throughexhibition, performance, or other means; there can be a scholarlypublication associated with a completed work, but not necessarily(and in computer science, there may be a prototype or working systemthat corresponds to a scholarly article, but not necessarily).4040experimental computer science focuses on demonstrations, somewhat analogousto exhibition or performance in the arts and design world, in which the primary focus ison systems that operate, not on articles describing systems.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity170crosscutting issuesacademic organizations can beñand often areñincubators fornew fields that emerge from the interstices of the old ones. that wasthe case for computer scienceñand for the study of film and video, forexample. both of those arenas, however, illustrate how emerging fieldsof study have to struggle to gain respect in the academic community.this struggle implies that at early stages, resources and institutionalpolicies can constrain potential.hiring facultyat first glance, cohires (appointments with nearly 50 percent ineach departmentñin computer science and the arts and design) mayseem to be an attractive prospect. the cohire becomes steeped indiverse settings related to itcp and can draw on a tremendous rangeof expertise and resources. however, entering into a joint appointment or major collaboration across disciplines introduces challengesand risk, especially for junior faculty who have yet to attain tenure,inasmuch as decisions about their promotion and tenure may dependon assessments by people accustomed to more traditional avenues.the demands of the tenure process may be one reason that venturinginto new and crossdisciplinary areas seems more suitable to seniorfaculty41ñbut it is often the young who show more interest in newareas, especially those involving it in a new context.thus, the committee believes that faculty should have their primary home in one department. this home departmentõs criteria areused for tenure and promotion decisions. the faculty member wouldattend the home departmentõs faculty meetings and seek mentorshipfrom the ranks of this department. in some instances, a minorityappointment in a second department can be desirable to encouragecrossdepartmental itcp research and teaching (which may result, forexample, in teaching a course in the second department occasionally,perhaps jointly with another faculty member whose primary appointment is in the second department). the utility of zeropercent appointments42 is questionable, especially if the reality is that the facultymember seldom becomes involved in any way with the second department.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥at first glance, cohires in computerscience and thearts and designmay seem tobe an attractiveprospect.41with a focus on computer science, this observation was discussed in cstbõsmaking it better: expanding information technology research to meet societyõs needs (computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2000, national academy press, washington, d.c.).42zeropercent appointments provide faculty members with formal recognition andselected privileges (which may include attending and voting at faculty meetings, theopportunity to supervise doctoral students, and so on) within a department, eventhough that department does not provide any of the faculty memberõs salary.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities171one alternative is to create voluntary clusters of interested peoplewithin an art, design, or computer science department who wouldteach material on the edge of the respective department. for example,there could be an art/it group within an art department. it is important to locate it quasiformally within all fields simultaneouslyñevenif it is only at a voluntary cluster level at first. this parallel existencewould serve to familiarize larger groups of faculty and students withitcp possibilities and help to increase the awareness of itcp work.the idea of voluntary clusters could also be enabled and bolstered bythe workshop concept (see the section òworkshopsó above).some programs in itcp areas depend on adjunct faculty. as inother domains, the limited use of adjunct faculty can be quite beneficial in bringing different perspectives (often from areas in the relevantpractitioner community) into academia. however, dependence on adjunct faculty in itcp centers as a costsavings measure is a flawedlongrun strategy, although budget pragmatics may offer no alternative in the shortrun in some instances. a large cadre of adjunct facultyjeopardizes sufficient stability among the faculty to develop the deeperinsights that can derive from projects that extend beyond one term orone academic year. furthermore, a large cadre of adjunct faculty promotes the idea of secondclass citizenship in the academic communityfor those who pursue itcp work.encouraging multiskilled individuals andcollaborationsacademic environments feature metamorphosis in core disciplinesñcomputer science, various arts and designñand more or lessindependent crossdisciplinary activities, which aim to generatemultiskilled people and support their work. both individuals withskills from multiple disciplines and people willing and able to collaborate across disciplines appear important for sustaining crossdisciplinary programs.43 suitable training and institutional support for eithercategory are still emerging.a challenge is to overcome the tendency of the communities withinthe itcp realm to fear becoming marginalized in collaborations, tofear being treated as technicians in support of anotherõs work. ensuring sharing of responsibility and recognition is prerequisite for collaboration and for acquisition of crossdisciplinary skills. that challenge may be greatest on the computer science side, from which itcphas to be able to draw to achieve its full potential.because the best collaborations seem to be modestsized effortsthat grow from the bottom up (graduate students often may be thea large cadre ofadjunct facultypromotes the ideaof secondclasscitizenship in theacademiccommunity forthose who pursueitcp work.43see veronica boix mansilla, dan dillon, and kaley middlebrooks, 2002, òbuildingbridges across disciplines: organizational and individual qualities of exemplary interdisciplinary work,ó review draft, project zero, harvard graduate school of education, cambridge, mass.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity172ones to make and promote connections across boundaries becausethey are not yet fully invested in the models and norms of a particularfield), broader exposure and effective evangelism may be needed toovercome the disciplinary inertia that can militate against interactionswith people who seem very different. administrators need to recognize that effective crossdisciplinary activity is harder and can involvemore work than traditional intradisciplinary efforts.44 accordingly,they should provide incentives for people from different disciplines towork together and should make it easy to get started by minimizingthe red tape, while maintaining perspective on academic goals and onhow best to structure the means toward those ends. investments areneeded in planning and preparation and in guidance for students. forexample, the tendency for fellowships to be attached to departmentsmay limit flexibility. further complications stem from differences acrossdisciplines and departments in compensation, teaching load, graduatestudent culture (e.g., autonomy in dissertation selection, expectationsfor authorship credit on published work, and career expectations beyond the terminal degree), and support (i.e., it is not unusual forcomputer science graduate students to receive research assistantshipsduring much of their course of study, but this is much less common inthe arts and design fields). although these differences can be found incomparisons between any pairs of fields, they are greater in casesinvolving major historical, cultural, and resource disparities, such asthose between the arts and design on the one hand and informationtechnology and computer science on the other (see chapter 8 forfurther discussion).45some universities such as carnegie mellon can draw on strengthsin both computer science and art, both of which attract a critical massof talent from which interactions may flow. the case of cmu illustrates the benefits that can accrue from large scale, which is a circumstance that may not be broadly transferable. for example, the humancomputer interaction institute at cmu has organized a series oflunches engaging people from the computer science and design departments, and a recent course drew from both the robotics and artdepartments to explore robotic art. few institutions could bring together on a regular basis audiences with such a wealth of expertise44see catherine sentman and samuel hope, 1994, òdisciplines in combination:interdisciplinary, multidisciplinary, and other collaborative programs of study,ó briefing paper of the council of arts accrediting associations, reston, va., march.45an imbalance in resources can have a significant effect on the nature of collaborations pursued. suppose that two professorsñone in the arts and one in computerscienceñwish to pursue a joint project. further suppose that the project will requirehardware and software that cost $150,000 and four halftime research assistants over thecourse of several years. to the extent that a resource imbalance exists, such projects mayhave to be funded primarily by the computer science participant (introducing a powerasymmetry into the collaboration) or not be pursued.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities173and experience, but those able to do it have a significant advantage inthe support of itcp work.administrators also have to resist the urge to direct large sums ofmoney to anything digital. a new organization, for example, is notnecessarily the best solution, at least in the beginning. and they alsoneed to beware of the faddism that can accompany identification ofcrossdisciplinary opportunities. in particular, university administrators may feel tension about their institutions being perceived as (orbecoming) fancy trade schools if programs lack a recognized researchbase.however, in the long run, the creation of a specialized center isdesirable to consolidate common interests as demonstrated by theinitiatives of individual faculty members. itcp work must develop itsown world view, and while that will necessarily be built largely fromthe parent disciplines, a more neutral context is required so that theinherent problems and contradictions can be negotiated.designing curriculaquestions arise about kinds of degree programs and how theyshould relate to skills. there is an art to evolving coursesñin computer science and in the arts and humanitiesñto promote crossfertilization, and it is not clear that there are replicable models. differentapproaches will be needed where the emphasis is on increasing breadthversus depth of knowledge. on the arts side, a challenge is to movebeyond treating it as blackbox tools and to enable more explorationof the workings of it, to foster deeper integration of art and it. on thecomputer science side, a big constraint is the already tight engineeringcurriculum that shapes most degree programs (though most programsinclude some social science and humanities courses as a part of ageneral education requirement). the challenges begin with deliveringarts and humanities (or social science) courses in ways that make clearthe relevance to computer science students, and computer sciencecourses in ways that link to other issues and contexts, thereby openingthe doors to crossdisciplinary inquiry. the next level of challengepertains to curriculum. as sentman and hope ask,is there a common, clearly defined concept of what studentsshould know and be able to do after completing a program thatcombines work in two or more disciplines? how do collaborativeprograms aid in the development of knowledge and skills both inthe component disciplines and in intellectual approaches andtechniques for making connections?4646sentman and hope, 1994, òdisciplines in combination,ó p. 6.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity174one illustration of how curriculum design is thought through isprovided by the standards for joint accreditation by the nationalassociation of schools of music and the accreditation board for engineering and technology of baccalaureate degree programs combiningstudies of music and electrical engineering. addressing admission,faculty, facilities and equipment, library facilities, curricular structure,specific course requirements by category, and essential competencies,experiences, and opportunities, the standards spell out what wouldand would not be acceptable for joint accreditation, and they provideguidelines for the operation of òcombination degree programsó inmusic and electrical engineering.47 that effort illustrates implementation that responds to fundamental concerns raised by sentman andhope: òconnect the work of the arts unit to professional work in otherdisciplines. teach by example the interconnections of the arts professions with other intellectual and professional activities . . . .ó48of concern to the committee is the narrowness or shallowness ofsome of the new offerings, which seem little more than venues forlearning and applying skills in certain software packages (e.g.,photoshop), and the observation that in some contexts, the rise of newactivities involving it seems to dominate preexisting programs (withthe acquiescence of those in charge of such programs), with questionable results for curricula and degree programs. while initial interestmay begin with superficial use of it, there is a need to think through,in the long run, the emphasis of academic activities on intellectualcontent relative to process: generating indepth knowledge, skills,and competence requires intellectual content, not just method.truly good curricula that support itcp work are difficult to design, because they must reflect a sufficiently broad scope of learningand inquiry while also incorporating the core of some body of knowledge. graduates are best served by gaining both exposure to itcpwork and grounding in some discipline.49 the practical realities of theemployment marketplaceñwhich tends to reward specialization anddegree name recognitionñsuggest that jettisoning any attempt at specialization is perilous for the student.the time is ripe for academic experimentation with itcp, givenbroad trends among disciplines. it is a time when disciplines arefragmenting or have become so porous as to lose their former shapeand identity. first formulated in the early 19th century in hegelõs47see handbook of the national association of schools of music, 1995, national association of schools of music, reston, va. there is apparently only one program, at theuniversity of miami, that conforms to the guidelines at this time.48sentman and hope, 1994, òdisciplines in combination,ó p. 7.49under ideal conditions, students would master two bodies of knowledge: computer science and a field within the arts or design. however, such a course of study isprobably time (and cost) prohibitive for most students and universities.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schools, colleges, and universities175berlin, the now classic university fields and professions are undergoing a complex process of reconceptualization and restructuring. just asthe opposition between brain and body is being rethought, so, too, isthe binary model separating the arts from the sciences, culture fromnature, and biological from engineered systems.5050for the last quarter of a century, philosophers, cognitive scientists, and culturalhistorians have been delving into the problem of human knowing and consciousness.george lakoff and mark johnson summed up this turn toward neuroinquiry as òphilosophy in the fleshó (george lakoff and mark johnson, 1999, philosophy in the flesh: theembodied mind and its challenge to western thought, basic books, new york). in light ofrecent developments in ai, robotics, biotechnology, it, and the exponential expansionof the internet, can one still claim, however, that òour reality is shaped by the patterns ofour bodily movement, the contours of our spatial and temporal orientation, and theforms of our interaction with objectsó (p. xix)?beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176any of the opportunities and challenges associatedwith work in information technology and creativepractices (itcp) are presented in the preceding chapters. chapters 3 and 4 focus on substanceñthe subjectareas that merit attentionñwhereas chapters 2, 5, and 6 focus on theprocesses and places that directly support itcp work. there are alsoglobal factors that can indirectly promote or deter itcp work thatextend beyond the intellectual agenda and specific mechanisms andsupport structures previously described. attention is focused here onthe four relevant global issues on which committee members haveinformed commentary to offer: digital copyright, digital archiving andpreservation, validation and recognition structures, and the geography of itcp.in these four areas, itcp work could benefit from some type ofconcerted actionñby government agencies; legislatures; courts; industries; colleges and universities; professional, scholarly, and tradeassociations; and other interest groups. first, the ongoing copyrightdebates on the use and reuse of digital information have importantimmediate and future consequences for the conduct of itcp work.second, the archiving and preservation of digital content for the benefit of future generationsñto support both future enjoyment and toserve as a baseline for future itcp workñrequires action now beforemany digital works become lost. third, new recognition and validation structures may be needed to evaluate and reward itcp work thatis notably different from mainstream information technology (it) orarts and design work. and fourth, regional development policies andpractices can encourage or discourage the evolution of environmentsbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy177¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥conducive to itcp work. the issue of funding from governments andprivate philanthropy is discussed in chapter 8.1digital copyrightitcp work builds on the cumulative record of social and culturaldiscourse, scholarship, and scientific debate and discovery. simpleand direct access to this record can greatly facilitate the production ofcreative work. governments recognize the importance of this dependence in cultural, artistic, technical, and/or scholarly accomplishment.intellectual property laws are fashioned with a careful balance ofinterests in mindña balance that includes the interests of those whoproduce creative and intellectual work, those who wish access to it,and those who mediate between the producers and the users.however, the advent of digital content and networks has upsetthis balance, which was crafted substantially for a world of physicalartifacts, not electronic bits (see box 7.1). some suggest that the balance is skewed, and, in particular, that the balance has shifted in favorof commercial interests. whether this shift has indeed taken hold canbe debated,2 but no one can deny that the interests of commercialcontent producers and distributors are well represented and highlyvisible in the public debate. recently, however, other viewpoints aregaining prominence, through the work of scholars such as lawrencelessig.3capability in the creative use of it needs to be understood asgrowing from the fertile soil of a common culture containing pastcreativity, ever more encoded in digital artifacts, and the nurturing ofsocial processes, ever more mediated through it networks, that makedeep knowledge of this past creativity possible. the real choices available to individual itcp practitioners in defining how their work circulates socially constitute an effective dimension of their creative freedom.4 however, the mediation by networks raises new questions1there are, of course, other public policy issues that have varying impact on itcpwork, such as the concentration of the massmedia industries and the role and impact ofinternational organizations (some of which is discussed in chapter 8 under the rubric offunding). the committee focused its attention on the set of public policy issues that itsees as most important to itcp work and for which the committee is capable ofproviding specific commentary.2see computer science and telecommunications board (cstb), national researchcouncil (nrc), 2000, the digital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age,national academy press, washington, d.c.3see, for example, lawrence lessig, 2001, the future of ideas, random house, newyork.4michael shapiro makes the important argument that while americans usually donot think of their nation as having a cultural policy (since it prefers private over publicfunding models), in fact intellectual property regulation is precisely thatña politicallybeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity178box 7.1what changed in the balance of copyright protections?¥deterioration in the effectiveness of the natural inhibitors to copying. magazines, oil paintings, and mostother physical objects involve nontrivial costs to copy, and in some instances, the costs can be prohibitive.digital information largely overcomes these natural physical deterrents; copying bits is very inexpensive andtypically only requires access to commonplace computer systems. the proliferation of digital informationand networks makes it possible to produce and distribute many exact copies rapidly for nearly zero cost.¥deterioration in the effectiveness of the natural inhibitors to modification. similarly, modifying physicallybased objects often involves nontrivial costs (e.g., modifying a copy of a book), and the modifications mayoften be obvious once made. modifications of digital information can usually be accomplished at very lowcost and often are virtually undetectable.¥use of information technology to lock up digital information in ways that were previously impractical.information contained within physical objects (e.g., books) could not be reasonably controlled oncedistributed; by contrast, contentprotection technologies could control access to some digital informationindefinitely.¥from display to publication? the use of the web to make work accessible can raise questions thatdid not arise previously. for example, consider a physical work of art that incorporates ordinary householditems that are protected under copyright.1 copyright permission is not required to incorporate a soup canor soft drink container into an artwork. however, developing the comparable work for access on the webmay constitute publication and may therefore necessitate permission from the copyright holder (which alsomay involve the payment of a fee) before such work can be made publicly available.¥digital archiving and preservation involves copyright law in an intimate way. as described in the sectionòdigital archiving and preservation,ó archiving and preserving digital works often involves making a copy ofthe original (and possibly modifying it) and providing access to the copied work. archiving of physical objectssuch as sculpture or books rarely involved such concerns.¥technology facilitates reuse of information, but the legal and economic infrastructure does not. networksand digital information can enable the development of extraordinary information technology (it) andcreative practices (itcp) work that draws on many other works from around the world. it facilitatesintegrative, improvisational approaches. however, the infrastructure to secure the legal rights to use otherworks is a long way from supporting many such projects and is a deterrent to the creative process.¥increasing use of contract law (licenses) instead of some provisions of copyright law. one provision ofparticular importance in the conduct of itcp work, especially work that incorporates small portions ofother works, is the fair use doctrine.2 if licensing increasingly replaces fair use, itcp work can be inhibitedbecause of difficulties in securing permissions, as discussed above. cost is also an issue. the fair use doctrinewas included in the copyright law as a part of the deal in copyright protection in support of the publicinterestñthat is, protection is granted, but the copyright holder agrees to limited free access. insofar as theincreasing use of licenses implies increased cost, itcp work is deterred.note: the content of this box is derived from (1) two commissioned papers of the art, technology, andintellectual property project of the american assembly: òlooking backward and forwardó by michael shapiro, 2001,and òpublic policy at the intersection of the artsó by margaret wyszomirski, 2001, available online at <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac/atippcp.htm>; (2) the final report of the art, technology, and intellectual propertyproject of the american assembly, 2002, available online at <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac/atipnafr.htm>;and (3) computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2000, the digital dilemma:intellectual property in the information age, national academy press, washington, d.c.1for some items, trademark law might be more applicable. nevertheless, the basic point still applies.2the fair use doctrine relates to a provision in u.s. copyright law that permits limited copying and use of worksprotected by copyright to be undertaken without the explicit permission of the copyright holder. the scope ofòlimitedó is too complex to be addressed here; see chapter 4 of the digital dilemma.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy179about rights and responsibilities that, depending on how law andnorms evolve, could chill some explorations.5 thus, future stakesinclude access to and protection of content as well as the shaping ofplatforms for cultural expression.the openness of some software communities to the free exchangeof softwarecode components and the designation of digital art objectsas common property for reuse have become a contentious aspect ofdigital culture in the past decade. code sharing, especially for researchand education, characterized the early years of computer science;restrictions on sharing grew with proprietary, commercial interests;and the òopen sourceó (for open access to source code) movementarose as an attempt to reset the balance and foster alternatives toclosed, commercial systems. notwithstanding the partial origins ofthe opensource movement in the quest for highly reliable genericcomputing resources, like operating systems or file transfer services,6there are similar incentives for individual creators to contribute to acommon art or design platform.7 such a platform can permit a risingtide of community performance in particular domains, such as computer animation or interactive art, while still preserving the ability ofindividuals to create their own works. similarly, an opensource approach may enable development of tools specialized for art or designuses that would not themselves justify commercial development. thus,as the case of the max programming language8 shows on a small scale,ecologically diverse mixtures of proprietary and free components haveappeared with growing frequency in large, industrialstrength applications offered by vendors such as aliaswavefront, softimage, andautodesk. this phenomenon, and the interest in itcp communities inopen source, illustrate how creativity is a process combining cooperation and competition. more thoughtful approaches are needed thanshaped framework for cultural development. in this framework, citizensõ knowledge oftheir creative rights and responsibilities becomes a core capability within an information society. by analogy to the rise of environmental consciousness, public policydefining such capabilities should no more be delegated to private media corporationspecial interests than should the setting of environmental policy be dominated by eitherthe sierra club or general motors. see michael shapiro, 2001, òcopyright as culturalpolicy,ó center for arts and culture, washington, d.c.5for a concrete example, consider the robotic plants of ken goldberg (described inchapter 6), or any other participatory work that is enabled by the internet. who retainsthe copyright for each individual contribution? if the answer is òeach individual,ó thenuse of the work and the collective individual contributions could require copyrightapproval (or a licensing agreement) from each participant.6for further information, see <http://www.gnu.org/>.7emblematic was the organizing of the òinternational conference on collaborationand ownership in the digital economyó (known as code) held in cambridge, england, in april 2001. see <http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/code/>.8see the discussion in chapter 3.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity180simply to discourage or criminalize the copying of digital content.9and (longitudinal) study is needed to understand what, in fact, is theimpact of open source on creativity.creators of all types, from economically marginal or folk producers to professional commercial artists, need to become aware of therange of licensing options and permissions already available to themwithin current legal frameworks. one of these is, of course, to chooseto place works in the public domain to facilitate reuse, or to pool themas part of intellectual property conservancies.10 there are initiatives toassess the options available for balancing individual creative incentives with the legitimate needs of citizens to share and cooperate in thebuilding of a common digital culture.11 for example, the americanassemblyõs art, technology and intellectual property (atip) projectis a national effort by a nonpartisan, public policy institution to address the impacts, challenges, and opportunities resulting from technological advances that are confronting the arts.12 case western reserve university has established the new center for law, technology,and the arts.13 continuing efforts are needed, particularly those thatcan offer new and bold ideas that are commensurate with the effectson copyright law and practice attributable to the shift from analog todigital information. the development of specific proposals that couldbe implemented deserves priority over general philosophical and conceptual discussions of the impact of copyright law on the conduct ofitcp work.the brief discussion above on this very complex and importanttopic can only begin to outline the many facets of digital copyright andespecially those facets that have the most impact on itcp, whichembrace the use, control, distribution, ownership, and creation ofitcp work. a more complete examination would extend to otheraspects of intellectual property rightsñpatents and trademarks. thus,the purpose of this section is not to provide a comprehensive analysis9the digital dilemma (cstb, nrc, 2000) documents the debates about how to framethe commonly agreed upon importance of public education about intellectual property.the future of ideas (lessig, 2001) leads the charge in articulating the counterproductiveeffects on the public welfare from imposing stringent intellectual property protection bymaking copyright valid for longer periods.10based on a presentation by rick prelinger, prelinger archives, at the committeeõsjanuary 2001 meeting at stanford university.11creativecommons.org has launched a set of tools and templates for guiding creators in the òspecializedó licensing of their workñsuggesting intermediate solutionsbetween the monopoly status of copyright and the uncertain and sometimes inappropriate status of general public licenses and other comparable mechanisms. òthe projectwill make use of one of the techniques employed by digital rights management systemsñspecifically, the concept of a rights expression languageñbut with the primarygoal of releasing (rather than reserving and enforcing) intellectual property rightsó(private communication, molly shaffer van houweling, university of michigan lawschool, april 15, 2002).12see <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac>.13see <http://lawwww.cwru.edu/academic/lta/introduction.htm>.copyright issuesgreatly influencethe nature ofitcp work, andsuch issuesdeserve furtherexamination andaction.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy181of the copyright issues relevant to itcp work, but to convey to thereader the message that copyright issues greatly influence the natureof itcp work and that such issues deserve further examination andaction. for detailed discussions, the reader is advised to review theworks referred to in this section.digital archiving andpreservationin theory, digital information is perfectly reproducible and therefore potentially eternalñbut practically speaking, this is far from thecase. instead, art and memories that are committed to digital mediaput the cultural heritage of the nation and the world at risk. collectionand exhibition must necessarily evolve into something that looks andfeels like stewardship, not mere storage. as concluded in previouscomputer science and telecommunications board reports, new technical infrastructures are required to archive and preserve digital content,14 or when feasible, to incorporate provisions for longterm preservation into itcp work as an integral component of initial design.the challenge of digital archiving and preservation is formidable andcannot be addressed fully in this report. there are no easy answers.however, some of the most pressing problems can be outlined here,underscored by the committeeõs sense that urgent action is needed.15physical artifacts, although they require environmental controlsand secure storage, can be preserved more easily than digital information because their formats do not become obsolete over timeña painting or sculpture remains òreadableó for centuries into the future.digital content, on the other hand, can become difficult to read in amatter of a decade (or even less) as formats and systems for digitalcontent evolve.16¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥14for detailed treatments on digital archiving in general, see computer science andtelecommunications board, national research council, 2001, lc21: a digital strategyfor the library of congress, national academy press, washington, d.c.; cstb, nrc, 2000,the digital dilemma; and the forthcoming report of the committee on digital archivingand the national archives and records administration (for further information, see<http://www.cstb.org/projectnara.html>).15the next three paragraphs are based largely on howard besserõs òlongevity ofelectronic art,ó february 2001, available online at <http://www.gseis.ucla.edu/~howard/papers/electartlongevity.html>.16try to find the hardware to read a multimate (word processor) file on a 5.25inchfloppy disk saved using the cp/m operating system. howard besser characterizes thissituation as òthe viewing problemóñthat is, òthe default for electronic objects is tobecome inaccessible unless someone takes an immediate proactive role to save them.ósee besser, 2001, òlongevity of electronic art.óbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity182files can be moved from one physical medium to another (calledrefreshing) in an effort to avoid ending up with files that are increasingly difficult to read because of technological obsolescence or physicaldecay of the medium. refreshing does help, but it does not address theproblem of evolving file formats. refreshing files in obsolete formats(e.g., wordstar word processing files) still leaves the problem of beingable to read the obsolete format. the problem of obsolete formatsbecomes more difficult with multimedia information, as the differentmodes (sound, text, images, and so on) are represented using differentformats.as a file of bits, the physical rendition of an electronic work is notfixed. itcp works may be viewed on a personal computer with aninternet explorer or netscape browser today, but might be viewedusing very different hardware in the future (or even the present)ñwith each configuration of hardware and software offering a differentuser experience, though based on the òsame work.ó for example,faster hardware and networks can cause works to operate at a morerapid pace than intended by their creators and, ultimately, as hardware and networks become orders of magnitude faster, the userõsexperience could change markedly. curators and conservators willneed to identify those characteristics of the enabling information technology that are integral to a work.even the definition of a work can be problematic. a work may linkto other works (that may belong to the same creator or not), and thoseother works may be live works themselves, that is, changing over timein response to usersõ actions, be they descriptive or structural in effect.capturing everything necessary to preserve works that link to otherworks can be quite difficultñin a technological and institutionalsense.17 determining whether a work is authentic also becomes morechallenging: the changing of a few bits within a work (whether byaccident or design) can alter a work in a substantial way and can beextremely difficult to detect.18some itcp works are created to interact with peopleñsuch worksare alive in the sense that a sculpture or painting is notñand thereforethese works can change over time by intent, presenting the problem ofhow to archive and preserve multiple versions of ostensibly the samework. in this way, itcp work can be more challenging to archive andpreserve than some other forms of digital content that are, for instance,fixed (e.g., electronic versions of printed scholarly journals).17there are also legal questions. although one may link to the work of another,copying another work as an integral step in the preservation of a given work (whichpresumably will be made accessible to various people in the future) may well violatecopyright law (for works under copyright protection), at least in the united states. seethe section òdigital copyrightó above in this chapter for further discussion.18for example, consider a computer game in which several key parameters arechanged. in terms of how the game looks and plays, all may seem as usual, except to anenthusiast who has played the game many times and can detect that òsomething doesnot feel rightó or that it seems a lot harder to achieve some particular goal thanpreviously.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy183it is not uncommon for itcpbased work to end its life with theclose of the original project and exhibition, much before the challengesof obsolete hardware, software, and file formats become relevant.therefore, archiving and preservation of itcp work depend at least inpart on the status of newmedia art within curatorial institutions. forexample, digital works that enter a permanent collection presumablywill be properly maintained and migrated to new digital formats asnecessary to ensure that the work remains accessible using reasonablyavailable information technology. jon ippolito, associate curator ofmedia art at the solomon r. guggenheim museum, said, òthe objective is both to demonstrate our conviction that these forms of culturalexpression deserve to be safeguarded for the future and also to demonstrate a method for doing it,ó when commenting on theguggenheimõs acquisition of its first two works of internetbased artfor its permanent collection19 in the beginning of 2002.20 anotherrecent initiative is the project archiving the avant garde, which intends to establish guidelines for museums, galleries, and artists forpreserving art that incorporates information technology in significantways.21 other notable archiving initiatives include the conceptual andintermedia arts online project (ciao)22 and the variable media network.23 the daniel langlois foundation houses the centre for research and documentation, which has created an online database ofartifacts that documents the history, artworks, and practices associated with digital media arts and then makes the information availableto researchers and the general public.24electronic literature provides a good example of the problems andpossibilities. the practice of literature and literary criticism would bealmost unthinkable without the rich resources of the codex archive,stretching back to early print books and beyond that to manuscriptculture. recognizing its crucial importance, major institutions havedevoted significant resources to the preservation and accessibility ofthis archive, including great public and private libraries such as thebritish museum library, the getty research library, and the beinecke19the works are net.flag by mark napier and unfolding object by john f. simon, jr.,available online at <http://www.guggenheim.org/internetart>.20derived from matthew mirapaul, 2002, ògetting tangible dollars for an intangiblecreation,ó new york times, february 18, p. b2.21participants in the archiving the avant garde project include the walker artcenter, cleveland performance art festival and archive, solomon r. guggenheimmuseum, franklin furnace archive, berkeley art museum and pacific film archive,and rhizome.org; see <http://www.bampfa.berkeley.edu/ciao/avantgarde.html>.also see scott carlson, 2002, òmuseums seek methods for preserving digital art,óchronicle of higher education, may 28, available online at <http://chronicle.com/free/2002/05/2002052802t.htm>; and kendra mayfield, 2002, òhow to preserve digital art,ówired, july 23, available online at <http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,53712,00.html>.22see <http://www.bampfa.berkeley.edu/ciao/>.23see <http://www.guggenheim.org/pressreleases/newmediapr.html>.24see <http://www.fondationlanglois.org/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity184rare rook and manuscript library at yale university. but there is asyet no national program for the archiving and preservation of electronic literature and art. as indicated above, the guggenheim hasbegun to explore the problem as it applies to electronic art, but there isas yet no consensus on what and how to archive these works. solutions include a migration strategy, which would require periodic updating and translation of works to ensure that they can be implemented on contemporary software and hardware. emulation focuseson the development of software that can read and interpret files inolder formats. another possibility is archiving of the machines andsoftware on which the works run, an approach that would requirecontinuing maintenance that becomes increasingly problematic as themachines age, as well as increasing amounts of storage room andaccessibility. yet another possibility is to identify an extensible codinglanguage, such as the extensible markup language (xml), and publishstandards that writers and artists would be encouraged to follow ifthey wanted to make their works as accessible as possible for archiving.in this case, concerns include securing the equivalent of electronicmuseums on the web, where works could continue to be updated andmade accessible to users as the coding languages continue to evolve.the electronic literature organization25 is exploring all these possibilities, but again no consensus has yet emerged that is likely to winsupport from the relevant stakeholders.validation and recognitionstructuresvalidation and recognition structures are needed to encourage theproduction of good work in itcp, to offer reliable indications ofquality to users, the public, and funders, and in academia, to supportdecisions on hiring, tenure, and promotion.26 the nature of the output(consider the clich”, òbut is it art?ó) and the nature of the methodology(i.e., the actions taken to integrate it into art or art into computerscience) may raise questions among reviewers.a successful artist must satisfy two audiences: a public audienceand the elite circle of critics, theorists, dealers, curators, and collec¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥25the mission of the electronic literature organization is to òfacilitate and promotethe writing, publishing, and reading of literature in electronic media.ó see <http://www.eliterature.org>.26as one reviewer put it: òthe new mediañand simulations of the oldñthat computers can create allow immense novelty. but it would be surprising if the ideas on thesefringes are less mediocre than most ideas elsewhere. in fact, one might expect theopposite: that it will be very difficult for most who are trying to express through thecomputer to find and invent genres that can carry real content expressed in new andimportant ways.óthere is as yet nonational programfor the archivingand preservationof electronicliterature and art.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy185tors.27 if an art piece gets into juried competitions because jurors like it,and then gets into galleries where many viewers see it and like it, thena verbal and written discourse is generated that renders a judgment.critical acclaim is a strong motivator and criterion for success formuch cultural production.28 more prosaic criteria are also applicable:access measurements such as exhibition attendance or web site hits orcommercial success of artists. designers engaged in itcp represent akind of hybrid of artists and information technologistsñmarket appeal is a criterion of success, but so is positive feedback from the circleof elites. although there may be a discrepancy between popular andelite appraisal at any time, either or both may become more positivewell after a work has been made public, even after the creator hasdied.computer scientists (information technologists) who are employedby industryñor leverage their results by starting up a new businessñmay rely on market feedback. the late1990s surge in entrepreneurialactivity by computer science faculty suggests a swing toward marketacceptance as a validating factor in that time period, although computer scientists continue to view academia as the locus of fundamentalresearch and idea generation and industry (the dotcoms and otherbusinesses) as the locus of the application of these ideasñtheimplementers. market acceptance may generate professional recognition in retrospect, as is clear in the history of both computer scienceand the arts.on the arts side, analysts and criticsñsuch as art historiansñhavelong contributed to deeper understanding than mere access to artisticartifacts provides. there appears to be a lag, however, in analyticalappreciation for itcp. one reason is the prominence of fastmovingpopular culture, although the history of art shows that forms must bestable for at least a while before they yield profound expression.another reason is the slow embrace in the artsanalytical community;29 and a third reason is the undocumented nature of itcp, whichconfounds scholarship. (as noted in the previous section, it may wellbe that humanistic scholarship in this arena will be stalled until strong,enduring alliances can be made with information scientists and com27a reviewer explained this challenge, a kind of double standard, as follows: òin thepopular imagination (and in the popular press) the work is no good unless it is accessible to the general public. but professional advancement is the result of approvalamong the elite circle of critics, theorists, curators, dealers, and collectors. imagine if acondition for the nobel prize for physics was that, in addition to being groundbreakingscience, joeonthestreet must understand and like it!ó28a practical challenge for all parties addressing it and creative practice is maintenance of a critical attitude toward the technology. this challenge is exacerbated by thesheer difficulty and time demands of developing, maintaining, and updating technicalskills, and of building reliably functioning technology. artistsõ propensity for socialcommentary can shape attitudes toward technology (and technologists).29this was remarked upon by several reviewers.there appears tobe a lag inanalyticalappreciation foritcp.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity186puter scientists, as these two groups become increasingly familiarwith the new properties of emergent digital cultural forms and thusare able to help develop a scholarly apparatus appropriate to theseforms.) the lack of historical perspective among practitioners andappraisers of itcpñthat is, the lack of an understanding of the durability of new ideas and their longterm impact, and also of an understanding of how and when ideas emerged and evolvedñcomplicatesvalidation and recognition and contributes to considerable wheelreinventing.work in itcp can sometimes be given acclaim as breakthroughsor as pioneering new forms of work. being first to do something isoften valued in technical contexts but may obscure the artistic merits.in this situation, the purpose of a work òoften seems to lie outside theexperience of the artwork as actually encountered. instead the captionand illustration in the catalog, web site, or newspaper seem to play afar greater role in the projectõs perceived success than the actual experience it engenders. the labels and photographs seem to push theartwork along every institutional step of the way: before, in grantapplications; during, for publicity; and after, to help memorialize thework, readying it for its incorporation by curators, critics, and academics into a historical timeline.ó30 part of the problem lies in thenature of it, which confounds early identification of innovations thatwill have a lasting impact: the computer (hardware plus software) is avery plastic medium, inviting the creator to push the edge of thecurrent convention and sidestep the current limits of the medium.this is an invitation to move fast, to leave the past behind, and to goexplore a constantly new future. in this early period of experimentation, it is hard to tell what is really creative, what will end up being oflasting value, what is passing novelty, and so on; too much is in flux tosustain the usual critical feedback processes. this situation helps toexplain why it seems to take a long time to integrate a new technologyinto making nontrivial art. often in the past, it has been the childrenwho have grown up in a genre who have produced the most profoundexpressions. the innovators have tended to be more awkward, even inthe socalled classical disciplines, while the second generation hasoften gained the fluency to push the ideas the furthest. most formsthat we make things fromñwhether languages or materialsñhavemore degrees of freedom than most of us can easily handle. this givestremendous freedom and range that have to be balanced with considerable discernment, taste, and criticism, whether one is a painter,composer, or computer scientist.in industry and in various design and art contexts, assessmentsmay be less rigid as compared with those in academia, inasmuch asthere are greater total numbers of jobs or other outlets for work. even30in the words of a reviewer of this report.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy187so, evaluations vary based on whether a new idea is seen as òjustó anapplication or an incremental advance rather than as a significantinnovationñthe term òcreativeó is more likely to be used to describethe latter. in both academic and other contexts, there may also be anemphasis on whether an individual (or team) is the true originator of anew idea. massmarket acceptance of new ideas and output/products(as opposed to acceptance by a community of peers) is not sufficient; itmay be acknowledged within and outside academia, but it is no guarantor of high professional or peer regard,31 although it may mattermore for some subdisciplines (e.g., design, computer graphics) thanothers. also, as explained by a member of the committee, òpopularization and elite curation, though seemingly opposed, actually worktogether to produce stronger results than either alone could.óthe extant structures for computer scientists, artists, and designers are each based on the differing goals and motivations of the respective fields; the criteria used in validation and recognition structuresrelevant to itcp also differ by subdiscipline within those arenas; andvalidation and recognition structures for itcp work should reflectmultiple sets of goals and motivations. differences within a field inhow people perform research or undertake specific practices are alsodifficult to appreciate across disciplinary boundaries. this confoundsthe appraisal of creative practices, or excellence. in computer science,how does one judge whether a particular breakthrough is creative ornot?32 even among the arts (or the sciences), it is no easy matter toappraise creative practices across disciplines; one should not assumethat a painter would automatically recognize when a jazz pianist isparticularly creative, or that a network expert could easily discern acreative advance in computer graphics.review panels, whether associated with a conference, a professional society or group, or a publication, tend to be composed ofevaluators with expertise in an established field, discipline, or profession. since itcp work often crosses established boundaries of expertise, panels can be unprepared to conduct proper peer review of thatwork, especially when it includes substantive technical and cultural,critical, artistic, or design components. alternate mechanisms for thereview of itcp work are needed. for example, one possibility is toestablish smallscale independent workshops for this purpose underthe auspices of several prestigious organizations (to help establishlegitimacy and recognition) in diverse domains. mechanisms to support selforganization among those pursuing itcp work would alsobe helpful.3331in a famous example, astronomer carl sagan (creator of the television seriescosmos and the book and movie contact) was probably the most popular science communicator of his day, but he was not elected to the national academy of sciences.32an experiment by the committee, featuring a set of theoretical computer scienceexamples, yielded mixed reactions (at best) even among computer scientist reviewers.33see chapter 5 for a discussion of possible mechanisms.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity188ultimately, a set of distinctive goals and motivations may emergefor itcp work, making it easier for leading practitioners to achieve therecognition that they deserve. maturation of appraisal criteria mustdevelop along with itcp work, and a critical mass of critics sufficiently sophisticated to evaluate itcp work is needed. an importantfactor in these developments will be the evolution of a language ofdiscourse. achieving great art in the future, regardless of the medium,implies finding enough stability in the language or media carriers ofthe ideas for both creators and appreciators (including critics andcurators) to learn them. the evolving language of itcp, of course,must be one that bridges multiple disciplines, and that bridging willhave to acknowledge the different meanings attached by computerscience and the arts to such words as òabstractó or òrepresentation.ópublicationpublication is important to both computer science and the arts anddesign (though probably more important to computer science), andthis activity is evolving along with the role of technology as both inputand output element. publication vehicles vary in the extent to whichthey are perceived as indicators of validation and recognition. thegold standard for academiañand the criterion most easily understoodby parties outside a given subdisciplineñis the socalled archivaljournal (often published by scholarly or professional societies) thatinvolves considerable editorial selection plus prepublication reviewand revision, which function as a screening system for quality. but thelong lead time for such publications poses problems for subdisciplinesin which timelinessñquickly getting an idea into the fieldñmatters.in experimental computer science, for example, the need for speed hasled to an emphasis on conference publications for disseminating newideas (journal articles are preferred for summarizing and consolidating a longterm body of work, and they are more amenable to longerwriteups). conference proceedings offer greater speed of publicationat the expense of broader audiences, stronger refereeing, and recognition associated with archival journals. yet the prestige associated withpresentations at major conferences actually makes some of them moreselective than journals, especially in computer science.outside of academia, the range of relevant publications increasesmarkedly. publications can range from wired and res to artforum andvogue. anthologies, surveys, and monographs cover the work of artists. catalogs are created from museum exhibitions, film festivals, andgallery shows. works that are performed or displayed publicly maybe reviewed by critics, providing a public forum of validation andrecognition.34 such reviews can appear in specialized professional ortrade periodicals or in the popular pressñfrom the new york times toa smalltown newspaper.34in contrast to the peer review process that often provides anonymous feedback.maturation ofappraisal criteriamust developalong with itcpwork.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy189broadening use of the internet has spawned new online publications and induced changes in journals. many print journals have nowgone to electronic format, either to supplant or to complement printeditions. these journals typically adhere to the same gatekeepingmechanisms, including peer review, that they developed for print.some journals that publish exclusively in electronic form, for examplepostmodern culture,35 also have gatekeeping mechanisms equivalentto those for print. others occupy a position midway between selfpublishing and reliance on peer review, having submissions reviewedby the editors but not by outside readers. as long as editorial policiesare clear to users, these electronic journals, whether partially or fullyreviewed, can perform valuable services. similar observations can bemade about òtechnical reportsó in computer science, which are usually published by the researcherõs organization and typically do notinvolve peer review. web sites published through individual initiatives, lacking any validation mechanism, can have content that rangeswidely from the authoritative to the misleading.curatorial web sitesfor itinformed literary ventures and other forms of creative expression, webspecific practices are needed for carrying out some ofthe reviewing functions that have developed over three or four centuries for artistic production. this is especially important given thesurge in volume of material associated with the enabling of creativeefforts by amateurs. one way this concept is being implemented isthrough curated web sites that screen large amounts of material,evaluate the products, and then feature only those deemed to be thebest. these sites combine traditional reviewing functions with thecollection functions served by galleries and museums, where visitorscan be assured that they will be able to see several pieces gatheredtogether in a single physical location. as curated web sites graduallygain credibility, they serve as important display sites for audiencesinterested in electronic art but unsure where to find it. existing sites ofthis type include those curated by marjorie luesebrink, jennifer ley,and carolyn guertin that assemble the best of webspecific electronicliterature: òprogressive dinner partyó and òjumpin at the diner.ó36òbest of the web: museums and the web,ó a juried competition coordinated by maria economou, identifies museum winners in the categories of online exhibition, museumõs professional site, educationaluse, and research site.37 even individually curated sites can providevaluable recognition; for example, the digital libarian site38 produced35see <http://www.iath.virginia.edu/pmc/contents.all.html>.36for further information, see <http://califia.hispeed.com/rm/predinner.htm> and<http://califia.hispeed.com/jumpin/>.37see <http://www.archimuse.com/mw99/best>.38see <http://www.digitallibrarian.com>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity190by margaret vail anderson, a professional librarian, recommends awide range of library resources.other organizations are using the traditional commission andcuratorial model for determining which individuals will receive electronic archive and display space. although this strategy may limit thenumber of digital pieces available for presentation on a site, it does,through the commission function, provide the financial assistanceneeded to construct the work. organizations using this strategy include turbulence,39 a web site sponsored by new radio and performing arts inc., and the alternative museum (tam).40 using a peerreview process, turbulence selects up to 20 internet art projects peryear to commission and display on its web site. in return for providing the commission and display space, turbulence retains exclusiverights to display of the work for 3 years. similarly, through its website, tam sponsors the digital media commissions program. eachyear, with the help of a select committee of professionals from arts andtechnology fields, tam chooses artists for whom it provides technicaland financial support for the production of internet art. once completed, the projects are displayed together as an online exhibition.communitybased, grassroots approaches to filtering for content,quality, and relevance are made much more feasible by the internet.such approaches are discussed in chapter 5.awards and prizesthe value of awards and prizes as a means to recognize outstanding achievements and stimulate further creativity in research is wellknown, but the numbers of prizes available are unevenly distributedacross disciplines. awards and prizes can be based on recognitionñaccorded for past accomplishmentñor can be offered to motivate thecreation of new work (e.g., an award based on the best entry at anexhibition). some fields, such as chemistry and literature, have a number of prizes awarded by professional organizations,41 whereas otherareasñincluding computer scienceñhave relatively few. this situation places an extra premium on the ability to secure funding (e.g.,grants, employment in a suitable job), a process that, under contemporary conditions, can inhibit risk taking. especially needed in the presentclimate are awards specifically recognizing creativity in both artisticand technical areas. noteworthy in this regard are the electronic literature organizationõs awards for the best work of electronic fictionand electronic poetry, which in 2001 provided substantial prizes of$10,000 each. also exemplary is the lyman award, recently funded bythe rockefeller foundation and administered by the national center39see <http://www.turbulence.org/>.40see <http://www.alternativemuseum.org/>.41in addition, these established fields (and some others) derive further legitimacythrough awards such as the nobel prize, the national medal of arts, the national medalof science, and the pulitzer prize.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy191for the humanities, recognizing the creative use of information technologies in the humanities, with a prize amount of $25,000. in 2001, theprix ars electronica competition celebrated its 15th anniversary; it is ahighlight of the ars electronica festival program. from 1987 to 2001,169 of these prizes with a total value of approximately $1.2 millionwere awarded.42 however, such opportunities for recognition in thedigital arts remain rare. see chapter 8 for a discussion of awards andprizes as a means of financial support for itcp practitioners.the geography of informationtechnology and creativepracticesparticular geographic configurations can support creative work inprofound ways, even with information networks linking remote parties. there are hot spots of scientific, technological, scholarly, andartistic creativity, as exemplified by ancient athens and renaissanceflorence, just as there are large areas where very little activity of thissort takes place. the explanations for this uneven spatial and temporaldistribution are far from simple. as harry lime provocatively (and nodoubt unfairly) observed in the third man, òin italy, for thirty yearsunder the borgias, they had warfare, terror, murder and bloodshed.but they produced michelangelo, leonardo da vinci, and the renaissance. in switzerland they had brotherly love. they had five hundredyears of democracy and peace. and what did that produce? thecuckoo clock.ó43however, peter hall has convincingly made a case, in cities incivilization,44 that creativity flourishes mostly in urban settings. citiesallow the specialized division of labor that is necessary for intellectualexploration and innovation. they can support specialized facilities,such as libraries, that creative work frequently demands. and theyprovide the conditions for effective collaboration among specialists.45¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥42see <http://www.aec.at/> for further details. the prix ars electronica competition attracted controversy in 2000 when the writer neal stephenson won in the internetcategory, even though he did not enter the competition. see matthew mirapaul, 2001,òand the best internet art is . . . virtually anything,ó new york times, september 3, p.b2.43from the 1949 movie produced by carol reed.44sir peter hall, 1998, cities in civilization, pantheon books, new york. richardcaves has also examined arts clusters in specific cities. see richard e. caves, 2000,creative industries: contracts between art and commerce, harvard university press, cambridge, mass.45state arts agencies track grants awarded to rural artists and organizations, whichare an order of magnitude less (in dollars) than those going to urban areas. see statearts agencies, 2002, òstate arts agency funding and grant making,ó national assembly of state arts agencies, february.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity192information technology has changed the established geography ofcreativity in two ways. first, it has produced hot spots, such as siliconvalley, that are clearly fueled by it itself. second, it has supportedspecialized division of labor on a global scale; made libraries and otherfacilities available online rather than at specific, privileged locations;and enabled geographically distributed remote collaboration. thesegeographical factors have implications for future progress in itcp.information technology hot spotsthe emergence of it hot spots, in areas such as californiaõs santaclara valley, bostonõs route 128 corridor, and the austin (texas)vicinity, is a special case of the general phenomenon of industrialclustering. there are many examples of this. the automobile industryis clustered intensively (though not, of course, exclusively) in detroit;the film and music industries in southern california; the publishingindustry, arts and design communities, and museums in new yorkcity; the biotechnology industry in cambridge, massachusetts, and soon. however, it is worth noting that growth occurs both within andbeyond the clusters.once a cluster is firmly established, it is not difficult to see how itcreates a regional advantage. silicon valley has become a magnet forit talent from all over the world. it provides specialized facilities andopportunities that are not available elsewhere. the concentration oftalent and activity within a relatively small area produces valuableknowledgespillover effects. and the talent and resource pool available in the area makes it relatively easy to put together crossdisciplinary collaborations to innovate. the classic conditions for creativity arein place.46the formation of such clusters is a more mysterious process, and itoften seems highly dependent on unique circumstances at particularlocationsñwith one thing building on another.47 in silicon valley, thestory began with a tradition of technological innovation in the early20th century and developed further with the creation of a hightechindustrial base around stanford university in the 1950sñstudent networks and fluid relations between scientists and instrument makerswere key factors in the areaõs vitality.48 it continued with the growth of46for further discussion, see annalee saxenian, 1994, regional advantage: culture andcompetition in silicon valley and route 128, harvard university press, cambridge, mass.47see manuel castells and peter hall, 1994, technopoles of the world: the making oftwentyfirstcentury industrial complexes, routledge, london, for stories of silicon valley and other such complexes.48presentation by timothy lenoir to the committee at its january 2001 meeting atstanford university. also see timothy lenoir, 1997, òinstrument makers and disciplinebuilders: the case of nuclear magnetic resonance,ó instituting science: the culturalproduction of scientific disciplines, stanford university press, stanford, calif.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy193defense electronics during the 1960s and the emergence of semiconductor manufacturing and the microprocessor era in the 1970s. thepersonal computer industry built on this foundation and established aculture of innovative consumer electronics development. all that electronic hardware created a demand for software, and the hardcoretechnologists added yet another critical cultural layer. finally, venturecapitalists, lawyers, journalists, and marketers were attracted by thebooming startup activity, and in turn greatly facilitated that activity.in silicon valleyõs boom years, this was a magicalñand difficult toreplicateñmix.the possibility of replicating silicon valleyõs vitality, creativity,and economic success is obviously of great interest to policy makerswho would like to produce similar success elsewhere.49 it is easy toidentify some of the necessary elements in the magic mix, but considerably more difficult to combine enough of these ingredients in such away as to produce silicon valley clones at other locations. attemptshave been made, with varying degrees of success, in northern virginia (united states), sophiaantipolis (france), tsukuba (japan),hsinchu (taiwan), and many other locations. smallerscale attemptshave also been made, and some of these have focused on itcp, whichis less capitalintensive than some forms of it production and engagesa broader skill mix. an example is the western massachusetts area andits massachusetts museum of contemporary art (massmoca) in aformer factory complex, which has attempted to attract digital mediafirms to colocate at the intersection of it and the arts.50a more subtle question is whether silicon valley itself can sustainits hotspot status as conditions evolve and change over time. forexample, the development of the world wide web and digitally distributed news, entertainment, education, and other content produceda need to engage graphic artists, designers, writers, and others with it.these sorts of specialists frequently did not find the engineering culture and suburban ambiance of silicon valley particularly congenial;many of them preferred a more urban setting and a different set ofcultural connections, and so they tended to cluster in locations such asthe soma area of san francisco, the soho area of new york, and the49see david rosenberg, 2002, cloning silicon valley: the next generation of hightechhotspots, reuters, london.50when massmoca opened in may 1999, its mission was not only to function as alaboratory for contemporary visual and performing arts, but also to help drive therevitalization of the economically depressed town of north adams, massachusetts. thetown had experienced a dramatic downturn in its fortunes as the national economymoved away from a manufacturing base toward information and technology services.see <http://www.massmoca.org/mission/index.html>. also see kristen andersen,2002, òbangor looks to bay state town as model for culture,ó bangor daily news,october 24. for a broader discussion, see òthe role of the arts in economic development,ó issue brief, june 25, 2001, national governorsõ association center for bestpractices, washington, d.c.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity194greater los angeles region.51 as if to respond to this question, a localphilanthropic and community development organization, culturalinitiatives silicon valley, was formed in the late 1990s to promote thearts as a spur to creativity and community; it even used it to create acrude cultural policy simulation game to link the arts and culture tothe economic wellbeing of the area.52it seems likely that in the 21st century a key challenge for theworldõs established it hot spots will be to add a vibrant layer of artsand design to the magic mix. if they are unable to do so, their advantage is likely to fade as the cultural content of digital products andservices grows in importance relative to the more purely technicalcontent. if a company is making chips or operating systems, then it isan advantage to be located in a strong engineering cluster; but if acompany is making digital movies, it may be more of an advantage tobe located in a cluster of artists, actors, and musicians.geographically distributed creativitytraditionally, the creative energy of cities has depended on facetoface contact. so has that of university campuses. even silicon valleyñwhich is a lowdensity, automobileoriented suburban areañclearly depends for its vitality on its dense concentration of specialistswho can readily interact with one another. but there is a downside torelying exclusively on physical proximity to foster creative interaction.it limits the available talent pool, limits access to specialized facilities,and limits cultural diversity. there can be strong reasons for creativetalent to be based far from urban areas.53 so there is a strong case fortaking advantage of digital technology to add remote participants andresources to the mix. these will include talent from developing nations, where it has been leveraged not only for public access, but alsofor creating new kinds of work.51richard florida refers to these specialists as members of the òcreative class,ó whoòseek an environment open to differences. many highly creative people, regardless ofethnic background or sexual orientation, grew up feeling like outsiders, different insome way from most of their schoolmates. when they are sizing up a new company andcommunity, acceptance of diversity and of gays in particular is a sign that reads ônonstandard people welcome here.õ the creative class people i study use the word ôdiversityõ a lot, but not to press any political hot buttons. diversity is simply something theyvalue in all its manifestations.ó see richard florida, 2002, òthe rise of the creativeclass,ó washington monthly, may, available online at <http://www.washingtonmonthly.com/features/2001/0205.florida.html>.52see <http://www.arts4sv.org/>. the simulator was eventually packaged with amonograph that provides context. see john kreidler, kate cochran, and brendan rawson,2002, great cities: a laboratory for cultural policy, americans for the arts, availableonline at <http://store.yahoo.com/americans4thearts/greatcities.html>.53for example, a study of canadian artists suggests that òlandscape appealó inspireswork and influences the decision by some artists to seek rural locations. see trudibunting and clare j.a. mitchell, 2001, òartists in rural locales: market access, landscape appeal and economic exigency,ó canadian geographer 45(2): 268284.a key challengefor the worldõsestablished it hotspots will be toadd a vibrantlayer of arts anddesign to themagic mix.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.institutional issues and public policy195consider, for example, the production of the present report. although the national academies are based in washington, d.c., themembers of the team that wrote the report were scattered widely overnorth america and europe; it would have been far too limiting to relyonly on participants from the d.c. area. some of the creative interaction necessary to generate the report was accomplished through travelto meetings at various locations, but a great deal of it was accomplished electronicallyñthrough email and web interactions. and this,of course, is now typical in group writing projects.in the field of architectural design, major architects now competefor work globallyñnot just in their local regions. they put togetherteams of consultants and specialized subcontractors, as necessary forthe particular job, from around the world. and they rely on digitaltelecommunications facilities and increasingly sophisticated softwareto manage the geographically distributed, crosstimezone process. asa result of the growing emphasis on remote collaboration, computeraided design systems are starting to look increasingly like specializedweb browsers.just as effective facetoface collaboration depends on having theright sort of physical setting, effective remote collaboration dependson having the right it tools. this reality has created intense interest inelectronic design studios54and similar facilities, and in computersupported cooperative work toolsñwhich may support either local orgeographically distributed teams. these tools do, of course, vary agreat deal by field; online collaboration in graphic design requiressupport that differs greatly from that needed for geographically distributed musical ensemble performance.technologysupported networks ofcreativitythe emerging pattern of creative production, in the it era, seemsto be one in which local clusters form intense nodes of activity withingeographically distributed electronic networks. this model allows theformation of effective linkages between complementary but distantclusters. thus, for example, the film industry remains clustered inhollywood, but there is an active electronic link to londonõs sohoareañwhich has particularly strong postproduction capabilities. silicon valley has a strong electronic connection to the complementarycapabilities of bangalore in india and the founding of a west coastcampus of carnegie mellon university.55 universities are beginning toform strategic alliances, supported electronically, with overseas uni54see, for example, jose pinto duarte, joao bento, and william j. mitchell, 1999, thelisbon charrette: remote collaborative design, ist press, libson.55see <http://west.cmu.edu>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity196versities that have complementary strengths; the current cambridgeuniversityðmassachusetts institute of technology alliance is a particularly interesting example. and industrial and financial corporations are increasingly aware of the advantages of locating activityclusters in the different markets and cultures they serve, and electronically linking them.in summary, creativity continues to have an identifiable geography, and the advantages that derive from unique, local subculturescontinue to matter. but it has overlaid onto this geography newpossibilities for the aggregation of geographically distributed talentand resources into creative combinations. and, in particular, localcreative clusters can now extend their potential by strategically forming electronic linkages to other clustersñmaybe very distant onesñwith complementary capabilities. one can begin to think of theseclusters as the specialized professional neighborhoods of the globalvillage.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.197˝upport for information technology and creativepractices (itcp) comes from many sources and is difficultto measure. several questions complicate a full understanding of itcp funding:¥what are the boundaries for such work? (what is an òinformation technology and creative practiceó expenditure? what is not?)¥whereñin marketbased and nonmarket activitiesñdoes itcptake place?¥how much of what is spent on itcp work lies embeddedwithin (and may be difficult to disentangle from) more conventionalforms of information technology (it), the arts, or design activities orprograms?¥what commercial organizations support itcp as part of theway they do business? what commercial organizations support itcpin other ways and for other reasons?¥what governmental and other nonprofit organizations support itcp work? where does one look for such support?all but the last of these questions are the focus of previous chapters, which provide the context for this one. chapters 2 and 5 sketchthe rise of commercial itcpñand implicitly the rise of commercialfunding for itcpñthrough new approaches to design (e.g., industrialdesign, architecture), targeted corporate engagement of artists (e.g.,artistinresidence programs), and new kinds of products and processes in industries that produce creative content (e.g., video games,animated film, music).1 because commercial activity spans only a1one can observe (relative to the overall state of the economy) healthy and evengrowing industrial bases for these activities, but existing data on revenues or evenemployment in these areas do not allow easy inferences as to how much was spent ondeveloping and applying itcp. detailed economic analysis was beyond the scope ofthis project.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity198portion of itcp,2 commercial resources are not sufficient to sustainitcp, to make the most of its potential, or to broaden access to itsbenefits. further, commercial activity is not evenly distributed. forexample, the market for computer music is much smaller than that forcomputer graphics, which itself is skewed toward entertainment products. as in other arenas, nonmarket resources can often be invaluablein exploring areas where a market has yet to be or cannot be established. also, there are nonmarket, public policy reasons for supporting itcp activity, or the infrastructure for such activity, as discussedin chapter 1.this chapter focuses on noncommercialñgovernment and philanthropicñfunding for itcp because (1) it is linked to the most exploratory and least missionconstrained activity;3 (2) in the context ofacademic institutions, in particular, it is linked to education and human capacity building, which benefits activity across sectors; (3) it ismost likely to sustain the non and preinstitutionalized activities thathave been significant in early itcp and are associated with a significant component of the arts; and (4) it is associated with a broader set ofpublicinterest objectives than commercial funding (which tends to belinked to production and distribution of a product). inasmuch ascommercial activities are synergistic with those in nonprofit contexts,spending on itcp in any one arena may be leveraged elsewhere.although government and philanthropic funding for itcp has abroader scope than funding linked to creating and distributing commercial products, it comes with a range of conditions. its effectivenessincreases to the extent that fundsseekers can òseeó itcp through thestrings on a given pool of funds and decreases to the extent that fundsseekers see those strings as constraints on their creativity.4 committeemember attitudes ranged from seeing no substitute for resources theycould use at their discretion to accepting pragmatically the strings thatwould link activities in itcp to fundersõ interests as well as theirown.5 the funding challenge lies in ensuring that practitioners andfunders have enough common interests to nurture a vigorous spec2there are important differences between òartó and òcraft,ó and commercial fundinggenerally applies to òcraft.ó3an analogy can be made to fundamental research for information technology: itresearch and development overall is spread across commercial and educational (nonprofit) organizations. almost all of the commercial activity supports development ofproducts, while the most exploratory workñfundamental researchñis associated withgovernmentfunded activity in universities. see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2000, making it better: expanding informationtechnology research to meet societyõs needs, national academy press, washington, d.c.4artists have their own vision and agenda, which often does not coincide with whatsomeone else wants or needs to have made at a given point in time. these realities putartistic creativity at odds with conventional market forces. see richard e. caves, 2000,creative industries: contracts between art and commerce, harvard university press,cambridge, mass.5their positions varied with the degree to which they saw themselves as artists, andamong the artists, the degree to which they favor a conception of art as selfexpression,versus more collaborative or socially shaped conceptions of art.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices199¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥trum of itcp activities via their combination of creative effort andwherewithal. the committee hopes that this report will encouragemore funders to understand the value of itcp and, given their startingpoint, either become more open to funding relevant activity (i.e., generation of itcp work; its display, performance, or preservation; corresponding education, training, or physical infrastructure) or more informed in allocating the resources they can provide.funding in the united statesthe committee believes that the united states lags other countries(see the section òfunding in the international contextó) in financialsupport for itcp. this is a judgment,6 based on member familiaritywith initiatives and programs in different countries (which are oftenseen as the leading venues for producing or displaying itcpñsee, forexample, descriptions of zkm, ars electronica, and so on in chapter5); the existence of larger and more sustained public support programs for the arts abroad (notably in developed nations), which arecomparatively open to itcp; and the observation that informationtechnology research programs have provided limited and largely incidental support to date. there are no consistent data that support aprecise analysis of relevant funding in the united states, let aloneacross countries.7 major foreignbased activities that focus on itcpappear to be components of national or regional leadership strategiesabroad (often seen as competitive responses to u.s. technical leadership).8against this backdrop, the united states can leverage early effortsworldwideñwhich have helped to demonstrate the itcp potentialand experimented with different approaches to nurturing itcpñtofoster new activities that can elicit and sustain itcp. those activitiescan draw from the substantial base of computer science research support in the united states, a differentiator of the u.s. potential in manyrespects, to support the hybrid character of itcp through more stable,focused funding. this is likely to occur naturally through the evolution of funding patterns for both the advance of computer science and6a comprehensive quantitative analysis of spending trends was beyond the scope ofthe committee, and available data are not necessarily comparable across nations (acommon problem in international comparisons that is aggravated in this instance by therole of taxpolicyinduced private spending relative to direct public spending).7u.s. data, for example, tend to aggregate relevant activity together with other, moreconventional kinds. this problem is typical of economic measurements when newactivities arise, often at levels that are too small to measure using conventional surveymechanisms.8one illustration is europrix, representing òselection and promotion of europeõsbest in multimediaó (see <http://www.europrix.org>); various national initiatives,such as the establishment of zkm (see chapter 5), also have this character.the committeebelieves that theunited states lagsother countries infinancial supportfor itcp.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity200the advance of the arts and design, but it can also occur through theexpress initiation of focused programs and initiatives, which the committee believes it is time to forge. the latter is more direct, but it maybe difficult to obtain government support at a time when researchprograms seem to be reorienting to respond to homeland security,while private philanthropy is constrained by smaller endowments, aconsequence of the decline in the stock market in the 20002002 period.sources of fundsabsent detailed data specific to itcp,9 the funding potential foritcp can be appreciated by examining the historic bases of fundingfor work in the arts, computer science, and other elements of it r&d.10arts funding is dwarfed by the funding for computer science andother itrelevant researchñas one committee member put it, there isòmysticism and longing on the part of artists when it comes to scientific funding.ó typical arts grants are in the low five figures (usingdata sets that begin at the $10,000 level); typical computer sciencegrants are in the six figures. in the aggregate, federal appropriations tocultural agencies and organizations are comparable in magnitude tofederal support for computer science research, but only a small fraction of the former supports the equivalent of researchñthe generationof new expression. arts funding often focuses on display, performance, education, facilities, and other dimensions of public accessñand accordingly is most likely to go to organizations rather thanartists. by contrast, it research funding is more often awarded toindividuals (principal investigators) or groups of individuals. relativefunding potential also reflects this apparent rationale: qualityoflifeconcerns such as widened access to cultural artifacts seem to motivatearts funding, whereas funding for technical research is motivated by alarger set of economic, social, and governmental concerns that together have resulted in higher levels of funding.11 recent efforts totypical artsgrants are in the low five figures;typical computerscience grantsare in thesix figures.9the relative paucity of data on the humanitiesñfunding or otherwiseñis a wellknown phenomenon. see, for example, robert m. solow, 2002, òletõs quantify thehumanities,ó chronicle of higher education, april 19, p. b20.10inasmuch as itcp may embrace other forms of science and engineering (e.g.,biology, mechanical engineering), other categories of research funding may also berelevant.11according to heilbrun and gray, òmost analysts who favor public subsidies forthe arts place a very high value on the objective of improving access for all the people.because it is rooted in the u.s. egalitarian ethic, that position also enjoys wide politicalsupport. . . . survey evidence from australia and canada indicates that the generalpublic does believe the arts produce external benefits and is willing to make substantialtax payments to support them.ó see james heilbrun and charles m. gray, 2001, theeconomics of art and culture, cambridge university press, cambridge, u.k., p. 243 andp. 250. funding a revolution: government support for computing research, (computerscience and telecommunications board, national research council, 1999, nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.) describes the rise of funding for computer scienceresearch and the coevolution of government, industry, and academic interests andactivities over the second half of the 20th century.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices201strengthen the linkage of the arts to economic benefits may motivategreater funding12ñbut doing so causes unease among some artistswho worry about the implications of suggesting that art must beinstrumental. much as in basic research in the sciences, the idea ofexperimentation and research in the arts as contributing to humanunderstanding is often slighted when criteria are reduced to quantifiable return on economic investment. of course, market support foritcpñthrough design and other productrelated activitiesñdoes nurture creativity in the context of some organizational objectives.state and local governments, given their different emphases, andgreater focus on quality of life (extending to economic development aswell as elements of culture) relative to the federal government, aresignificant funders of the arts,13 spending an order of magnitude morethan the national endowment for the arts (nea).14 but they do not(with a few exceptions) fund computer science (or other) research.state arts agency spending varies considerably, ranging in 2002 from ahigh of $4.26 per capita (hawaii) to a low of $0.28 per capita (texas);eight states spent at least $15 million annually and nine less than $1million.15 in 2000, òmedia artsó accounted for 3 percent of state spending; the largest shares went to music (18 percent) and theater (14percent). about 0.03 percent of state arts agency grants went to individual artists in 2000 (48 percent of those dollars were for the visualarts). individual activities supported included fellowships (which constituted about half of the activities), residencies, artwork creation (aboutoneeighth of the activities), apprenticeships, and performance.1612see, for example, national assembly of state arts agencies, 2002, òthe arts inpublic policy: an advocacy agenda,ó the nasaa advocate: strategies for building artssupport vi: 1. available online at <http://www.nasaaarts.org>.13by the mid1970s, each state had an arts council. for an overview of the state ofknowledge about statelevel activities, pointing to ongoing research, see j. mark schuster,2002, òsubnational cultural policyñwhere the action is? mapping state culturalpolicy in the united states,ó working paper of the cultural policy center at the university of chicago, january. available online at <http://culturalpolicy.uchicago.edu/workingpapers/schuster9.pdf>.14see schuster, 2002, òsubnational cultural policy,ó p. 9. note that the aggregatestate legislature arts appropriations have exceeded federal arts appropriations since1985. see national endowment for the arts and national assembly of state artsagencies, 2002, òstate arts agency funding and grant making,ó national assembly ofstate arts agencies, washington, d.c., february.15national endowment for the arts and national assembly of state arts agencies,2002, òstate arts agency funding and grant making.ó16in 1999, òstate legislatures appropriated about $400 million in funding for the arts,while local governments spent in excess of $800 million.ó see national endowment forthe arts, center for arts and culture, 2001, americaõs cultural capital: recommendationsfor structuring the federal role, art, culture, and national agenda series, center for thearts and culture, washington, d.c. available online at <http://www.culturalpolicy.org/pdf/acc.pdf>. the national assembly of state arts agencies has released statistical information on state spending for the arts that shows that òafter nearly a decade ofrobust growth, legislative appropriations for state arts agencies (ssas) contracted slightlybeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity202private philanthropy also favors spending on the arts over computer science research. these conditions make public arts support inthe united states quite decentralized, while also drawing a sharpcontrast with public support for fundamental computer science research, in which the federal government plays a dominant role. nevertheless, the rise of itcp presents the prospect of including more artslike activity as research, more researchlike activity as art, and newmixes of funders for new portfolios of activity. insight into itcp maylead traditional arts funders to support it more and also may expandthe availability of resources for technical research.federal funding for the artsñthenational endowmentsmost of the federal governmentõs art spendingñwhich exceeded$1.5 billion in 2001ñsupports major national organizations, which inturn award funding to other organizations and artists and cover theirown operating costs. major national organizations include the nea(and its organizational sister, the national endowment for the humanities), the commission on fine arts, the institute of museum andlibrary services, the national gallery of art, the smithsonian institution,17 and the kennedy center for the performing arts.18 federalfunding for the arts also comes from a range of programs distributedamong a remarkable range of federal agencies.19 federal arts fundingemphasizes public presentation (e.g., performances and displays) andeducation; accordingly, funding for major federal arts institutions (e.g.,the smithsonian) dominates federal funding.in fiscal year 2002 as both the national economy and state budgets softened. in fiscalyear 2002, appropriations dropped from $446.8 million to $419.7 million. this marks thefirst time in six years that aggregate appropriations fell. however, appropriation declines of $21 million in california and $5 million in new york account for half of nearlyall of this decrease. when they are removed from total appropriations, the aggregateremains flat at zero percent change.ó as discussed in chapter 6, state programs (e.g., innew york and california) have provided some support for computer science research,including research with links to the arts and activities that fall under the itcp umbrella.17in 2001, the office of management and budget proposed transferring smithsonianresearch funds to the national science foundation (nsf) as a means of consolidatingscience research. under such an arrangement, smithsonian staff would apply for nsfgrants. reports from the national research council and the national academy ofpublic administration opposed such a proposal. see <http://www.nytimes.com/2002/11/02/politics/02smit.html>.18state and local funding adds about 50 percent more to the federal contribution; seenational endowment for the arts, center for the arts and culture, 2001, americaõscultural capital.19the national endowment for the arts web site provides links (<http://www.arts.gov:591/federalopportunities02/bfederal.html>) to arts funding programsat widely diverse federal agencies ranging from the federal emergency managementagency to the department of agriculture, in addition to the agencies that one expects,such as the national endowment for the humanities.public artssupport in theunited statesis quitedecentralized.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices203the nea stands out as the largest single public funder of the nonprofit arts. its fy 2002 appropriation from the u.s. congress wasslightly over $115 million, which represented an increase of more than$10 million from the year before.20 the nea divides its grants intoseveral broad categories, including grants to organizations, partnership agreements, leadership initiatives, and fellowships21 (which awardgrants to individual artists). typically, grant amounts range from$5,000 to $100,000,22 with some requiring òat least a 1to1 match innonfederal funds.ó examples of funded projects within these categories include, among other things, dance and theatrical performances,exhibitions, workshops, festivals, apprenticeships, master classes, educational activities for children, and òinnovative uses of technology thatmake the arts more widely available.ó23despite the neaõs important role in administering federal support for the nonprofit arts and the significant impact that it has had onamerican cultural life since its creation in 1965, there are some limitson its usefulness with respect to promoting itcp. for example, morethan 40 percent of the neaõs 2001 budget went to state and regionalarts agencies24ñorganizations that tend to fund primarily traditionalgenres of art (e.g., dance, theater, visual arts, and so on) and to emphasize display, education, and performance. continuing resource demands of traditional activities reinforce the absolute constraint of alimited budget.the same legislation that created the nea also created the national endowment for the humanities (neh).25 the neh budget overthe last few years has been slightly higher than that of the nea at a20it had been slashed by more than 40 percent for fy 1996 in the wake of a great dealof political and cultural controversy. neaõs budget exceeded $150 million per year inthe early 1990s, until it was cut radically for fy 1996, remaining fairly static for the nextfew years. for specific appropriations data, see <http://www.nea.gov/learn/facts/apprhist.pdf>.21these are the neaõs only programs that still award funds to individuals: literature fellowships, american jazz masters fellowships, and national heritage fellowships. grants range from $10,000 to $20,000 and are not open to applications; rather,these awards are based on nominations from the arts community and the public. in theaggregate, these programs represent approximately $1 million of neaõs annual budget.22a listing of nea grant awards since 1995 can be found online at <http://arts.endow.gov/learn/facts/contents.html>.23from <http://arts.endow.gov/learn/neaguide/gto.html>. an example of thetechnology awards is the $62,000 grant awarded in 2001 to the deaf west theatrecompany in california. the grant was awarded to support the design of a backstagecommunication system for deaf and hardofhearing technicians, to install a computerized control board for technical effects, and to develop lighting mechanisms that automatically focus on signing interpreters or actors. the project also hopes to train deaftechnicians for jobs in the theater and to enhance the theater experience for deaf audiences. for more information, see <http://www.deafwest.org/>.24national endowment for the arts, [undated], ònea fact sheet: nea at a glanceñ2001.ó available online at <http://www.nea.gov/learn/facts/nea.html>.25the national foundation on the arts and the humanities act of 1965 (p.l. 89209).beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity204little over $120 million,26 although the amount has remained fairlystatic. the neh provides grants for humanities projects in four areas:preserving and providing access to cultural resources; education; research; and public programs. neh grants typically go to culturalinstitutions such as museums, archives, libraries, colleges, universities, public television and radio stations, and (unlike those of the nea)individual scholars who apply for funds. thus, the neh may supportitcp in the context of creative writing and literature, for example.indirect public funding for the artsaccording to michael kammen, the united states set the precedent for making charitable donations to arts organizations (as well asother nonprofits) tax deductible:27[in 1917, the united states] became the first nation to allow taxdeductions for cultural gifts to museums and nonprofit culturalorganizations. the pertinent legislation[28] has been altered several times since, sometimes in ways that seem inconsistent to thepoint of being bizarre, but the operative principle has been animmense boon to cultural institutions. moreover, the principlehas become increasingly attractive to european countries duringthe past decade or so.29the amount of support generated for the arts through tax incentives is generally not included in statistics on government funding forthe arts, for, as a previously cited paper points out, òforegone revenuesó are ònotoriously difficult to measure precisely.ó30 nevertheless, that paper reports that according to òthe best estimates, indi26national endowment for the humanities, 2002, òsummary of fiscal year 2003budget request.ó available online at <http://www.neh.gov/whoweare/2003budget.html>.27ò[w]hat happens under u.s. tax law is that the donorõs tax liability is reduced byan amount equal to the donation multiplied by the tax rate in that personõs marginal taxbracket. the higher the individualõs marginal tax rate, the greater the tax reduction perdollar given away, hence the less the cost of the gift to the donor . . . . the amount of taxsaved by the individual is also the amount of revenue lost by the government onaccount of the charitable deduction. it is this lost revenue that constitutes the indirectsupport given by government to the nonprofit sector.ó see heilbrun and gray, 2001, theeconomics of art and culture, p. 257.28for example, the revenue act of 1917, the estate tax law of 1921, the gift tax actof 1932, and so on. note that in recent years changes in estate taxes have been contemplated that could jeopardize the incentive for charitable giving of all kinds.29michael kammen, 1996, òculture and the state in america,ó the journal of americanhistory 83(3): 791814.30bruce a. seaman, 2002, ònational investment in the arts,ó art, culture, and thenational agenda issue paper #6, center for the arts and culture, washington, d.c., p.22. available online at <http://www.culturalpolicy.org/pdf/investment.pdf>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices205vidual donors, foundations, and corporations gave more than $10billion to arts, cultural, and humanities organizations in 1999,ó31 approximately five times the level of direct federal support.32 this is ahighly decentralized mechanism, extending to employer matchingprograms33 and private individual largesse. organizations may benefit more than individuals, inasmuch as organizations may be betterpositioned to handle the administrative aspects associated with taxexempt statusñbut some of those institutions, in turn, fund individual artists.funding by private philanthropyfunding for artistic endeavors is available from individuals, foundations large and small, and corporationsñin that order34 and allshaped by tax policy.35 in addition to conventional arts support fromcorporations, there is at least some corporate support specifically foritcp in academia. for example, the media lab at mit receives about80 percent of its funding from corporations, which provide support asmembers of a consortium that shares interests in any intellectual property arising from the media labõs activities. the media lab appears tobe unique in its drawñand dependenceñon corporate philanthropyto support itcp;36 other academic programs (and individuals) associated with the arts receive targeted support from corporations, which is31center for the arts and culture, 2001, americaõs cultural capital, p. 4.32another analysis, examining data through 1998, suggested that private givingprovides about 40 percent of arts and culture organizationsõ revenue. see loren renz,2002, òthe foundation centerõs 2002 arts funding update,ó foundation center, newyork, n.y. available online at <http://www.fdncenter.org>.33for example, texas instruments, through its foundation, encourages and matchestaxdeductible gifts in support of the arts and culture: òthe texas instruments foundation arts and cultural matching gift program was established in 1979 to encouragetexas instruments employees, retirees, and directors to contribute to the arts. it provides an effective way of assisting you in contributing to the quality of community life.dollars you contribute to qualified organizations you wish to support will be matchedby the foundation on a dollarfordollar basis. the foundation will match, one for one,each eligible taxdeductible contribution of at least $50. the total maximum per individual donor that will be matched is $10,000 per calendar year (january 1 throughdecember 31). . . . our cultural organizations are a vital part of the quality of life in ourcommunities. such organizations depend on private support to flourish. we are pleasedthrough this matching gift program to join you in helping to strengthen cultural life.ósee <http://www.tialumni.org/tiaa/2000%20ti26453%20arts%20%20culture%20mgp%20form.pdf>.34 renz, 2002, òthe foundation centerõs 2002 arts funding update.ó35see heilbrun and gray, 2001, the economics of art and culture.36there is the question of whether the corporate support provided to the media labis motivated primarily by intellectual property concerns, in which case the fundingmight be better construed as investments rather than as philanthropy, or is motivatedby a larger rationale for support of academic research (which includes utilitarian motivations such as access to students and graduates), in which case philanthropy might bean appropriate characterization.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity206often linked to their interests in developing or exercising products. asanother example, faculty at the california institute of the arts wereinvolved for many years with yamaha in the development of digitalmusical instruments, especially the piano, as a result of yamahaõsexpectation that meeting the artistic needs of those musicians wouldresult in a better commercial product. university of california at losangeles artist bill seamanõs work on a òhybrid invention generatoró issupported by a grant from the intel corporation. and as noted inchapter 2, ben rubin at the brooklyn academy of music benefitedfrom lucent technologies and rockefeller foundation sponsorshipfor a collaborative project.within private philanthropy, data are most readily available forfoundation activities. grant support in 2000 was on the order of $3.7billion for the arts, culture, media, and the humanities, a doubling offunding since 1996.37 this growth was the result of a combination offactors, including a healthy economy, an increase in the number ofnew foundations, and significant increases in investments by majorfunders. consequently, private foundationsõ share of all private givingto the arts increased from less than 30 percent to about 35 percent.38the economic downturn of 20012002, compounded by extraordinarydemands for resources arising from the terrorist attacks of september11, 2001, appears to have constrained available resources, shrinkingendowments and programs among established foundations and diminishing capacity for personal philanthropy.39as one might guess, the allocation of grant dollars is concentratedin particular areas of the united states. in a 1998 study conducted bythe foundation center, five statesñnew york, california, texas, minnesota, and michiganñand the district of columbia received about 54percent of art dollars and 52 percent of grants.40 the same reportshowed a decrease in the share of grant dollars controlled by the top50 recipients, which declined from 32.1 percent (or 7.9 percent of allarts grants) in 1992 to 28.5 percent (or 7.7 percent of all arts grants) in37òthe nationõs nearly 56,600 grantmaking foundations provided an estimated $3.69billion for arts, culture, media, and the humanities in 2000, more than double the $1.83billion estimated for 1996ó (renz, 2002, òthe foundation centerõs 2002 arts fundingupdate,ó p. 1). note that this $3.69 billion figure is compatible with the $10 billion figurecited earlier: the former represents grants awarded; the latter, total giving.38renz, 2002, òthe foundation centerõs 2002 arts foundation update,ó p. 1.39for example, the david and lucile packard foundation announced that it will nolonger focus on arts and nonprofit effectiveness, consolidating its activities in otherareas after its endowment shrank from $13 billion in 1999 to $3.8 billion in mid2002. seejon boudreau, òpackard foundation facing cutbacks,ó september 19, 2002, availableonline at <http://www.bayarea.com/mld/mercurynews/4112039.htm>.40loren renz and steven lawrence, 1998, arts funding: an update on foundationtrends, third ed., foundation center, new york, in cooperation with grantmakers inthe arts, seattle, p. 22.the economicdownturn of20012002appears to haveconstrainedavailableresources,shrinkingendowmentsand diminishingcapacity forpersonalphilanthropy.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices2071996.41 the size of awards has also changed, with the number ofsmaller grants ($10,000 to $49,999) decreasing and midsized grants($50,000 to $499,999) increasing, each by about 1 percent a year since1996, with larger grants ($500,000+) remaining stable.42 the mediansize of arts grants in 1999 was $25,000, the same as in 1992 and 1996 butslightly lower than the median amount for all foundation grants,which was $25,361.43 funding distribution by category in 2000 foundthe performing arts receiving 32.2 percent of artsgrants dollars, followed by museum activities (29.1 percent), media and communication(9.9 percent), and crossdisciplinary arts (8.8 percent).44foundations seem particularly interested in the role and expression of culture,45 which seems less explicit in many of the governmentprograms and has become more complex as a result of globalizationand multiculturalism. these trends have required foundations to develop a broader understanding of the needs of arts groups and artiststhrough more proactive consultations, seeking advice from the keyfigures from artistic domains, and prompting an increased reliance onresearch.46 the resulting insights have led many foundations to experiment with new funding models, including venture capital; onetime endowments to startup arts and cultural nonprofits; and large,onetime grants. for example, the ford foundationõs education, media, arts and culture program recently initiated the new directions/new donors for the arts program, committing $42.5 million in challenge grants to 28 arts and cultural institutions and nearly quadrupling the foundationõs annual arts appropriations.47foundation grants seem to be a significant source of support forgenerating, as well as providing access to, works of art, often emphasizing the value of art and cultural activities in building and strengthening communities. the at&t foundation, for example, emphasizessupport for projects that òpromote artistic expression or create net41òthe disproportionate concentration of support among a relatively few recipientscharacterizes foundation funding in many fields. in 1996, the top 25 health recipientsaccounted for 29.4 percent of all health grants dollars, while the top 25 educationrecipients benefited from 22.3 percent of foundationsõ education dollarsó (renz andlawrence, 1998, arts funding, p. 9).42a snapshot: foundation grants to arts and culture, 1999, grantmakers in the arts,seattle, wash.43a snapshot: foundation grants to arts and culture, 1999, grantmakers in the arts,seattle, wash., p. 4.44renz, 2002, òthe foundation centerõs 2002 arts funding update,ó p. 2.45arts and culture have been the fourth largest foundation funding priority since themid1980s; the first three are education, health, and human services. see renz, 2002,òthe foundation centerõs 2002 arts funding update.ó46loren renz and steven lawrence, 1999, arts funding 2000, foundation center,new york, in cooperation with grantmakers in the arts, seattle.47the program seeks to òlink prosperity to creativityó by òoffering opportunities forartists to work in new directions and play innovative roles in their communities.ógrantees are encouraged to share best practices with each other and the arts communityat large.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity208works that support artists and/or cultural organizationó and engagelocal communities. a core program is at&t: neat (new experiments in art & technology), which provides support to regionalscience and childrenõs museums to showcase work by artists who usescience and/or technology as their creative medium.48 the rockefellerfoundation provides funding for a range of creative explorations innew media, including fellowships, conferences, publications, digitalart exhibitions in museums and on the web, and experimental laboratories that foster collaborations among artists, scientists, and technologists.49 since 1994, the rockefeller foundation has awarded over 100grants in the area of new media.private philanthropy is more likely to help to sustain individualartists than is government support, which seems more oriented toward institutions. this is particularly true of smaller foundations. forexample, the media arts program of the jerome foundation, whichsupports artists in new york city and minnesota, focuses on providing grants to risky projects by individual emerging artists.50 many ofthe resources provided by private foundations for individual artistsare channeled through nonprofit intermediaries that are focused on aspecific domain. consider the warhol foundation as an example. itdoes not support individual artists directly, but rather gives to òcultural organizations that in turn, directly or indirectly, support artistsand their work.ó51 so, in 2002 the foundation provided a grant tofranklin furnace archive to support the production of live art overthe internet, indirectly funding the production of artwork by individual artists. efforts of the creative capital foundation are describedin box 8.1. in 1999, 3 percent (about $46 million) of larger arts grantsfrom larger foundations supported professional development, whichincludes fellowships and residencies; internships; scholarships; andawards, prizes, and competitions. some private support for individuals comes in the form of commissions, which have some similarities inpractice to research grants because of their reflection of the characterof the commissioning entity. also, when museums do commissionwork, it appears to be driven by their interest in making new art formsaccessible.5248see a description of the program at <http://www.att.com/foundation/programs/arts.html#tech>.49a number of the individuals, organizations, projects, and conferences discussed inthis report received funding from the creativity and culture program of the rockefellerfoundation. for further information, see <http://www.rockfound.org/display.asp?context=3&sectiontypeid=16&preview=0&arcurrent=1>.50see the jerome foundationõs web site at <http://www.jeromefdn.org/>.51see the warhol foundation grant awards at <http://www.warholfoundation.org/fiscalyear2002f.htm>.52for a discussion of commissioning practice, see susan morris, 2001, museums andnew media art, a research report commissioned by the rockefeller foundation (mimeo),october.emergent, smallscale, andexperimentalinitiatives face agreater challengein raising funds.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices209box 8.1creative capital foundationan unusual approach to funding new arts projects is used by the creative capital foundation.1 seenas an attempt to òfill the void left by the nea [national endowment for the arts] when it stopped fundingindividual artists,ó2 creative capital was founded in 1999 as a nonprofit organization in the state of newyork. in its own words, creative capital seeks to òsupport artists creating original work who are pursuinginnovative, experimental approaches to form and/or content in the visual, performing, and media arts.ó3creative capital also hopes to distinguish itself from traditional arts grant programs by providing marketingand other ònonartisticó aid (e.g., helping artists develop audiences for their work). also, unlike mosttraditional funding sources, creative capital shares a portion of the proceeds generated by its artistsõprojectsñif the projects indeed make moneyñto help replenish its funds and continue the cycle of supportfor future projects. one of the main areas where creative capital seeks to focus its attention and funds isemerging fields, which include, among other things, technologybased work. indeed, early in 2000, creativecapital was poised to deliver nearly $100,000 (or 16 percent of the foundationõs total grants) to support12 digital arts projects.4 other funding areas include new media, performing arts, and visual arts. bydecember 2001, creative capital had made grants to individual artists amounting to more than $1.5 million.5for the period from 1999 to 2002, more than 40 other foundations and individual donors provided almost$7 million for creative capitalõs programs and operations. creative capitalõs funders include, to name onlya few, the andy warhol foundation, jerome foundation, rockefeller foundation, ford foundation, bentonfoundation, and home box office.1see the creative capital foundationõs home page at <http://www.creativecapital.org/>.2shayna samuels, 1999, ònew foundation seeks provocative artists for grants,ó dance magazine 73(8): 29.3see <http://www.creativecapital.org/general/html/prospectus.html>.4matthew mirapaul, 2000, òdigital artists draw support from a new foundation,ó new york times, january 1, p.f14.5creative capital, 2001, creative capital: 2001 year end report, creative capital, new york. available online at<http://www.creativecapital.org/news&events/html/rubysreports/2001yearendreport.pdf>.but even though it helps to sustain artists, private philanthropytends to be associated more with grants to institutions than to individuals. foundations and individuals often give to established institutions, which have name recognition; emergent, smallscale, and experimental initiatives face a greater challenge in raising funds. thelargest shares of foundation arts grants go to program and capitalsupport, which tend to be associated with institutions. the smallestshare goes to researchña condition that must be improved to fosteritcp in the long run.among larger foundations, there appears to be some recognitionof the importance of promoting creativity and expanding the uses ofit, but such foundations are just beginning to embrace it as a theme.5353see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1998, advancing the public interest through knowledge and distributed intelligence(kdi), white paper, available online at <http://www.cstb.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity210they have been developing it systems as part of their own infrastructure and as infrastructure for their granteesñbut generally in programs other than those that support the arts, where infrastructure hasnot historically been a concern. this situation began to change in thelate 1990s, when a number of the larger, most visible foundationsbegan selfassessments and started new initiatives featuring someattention to it. and, as the present project demonstrates, foundationshave begun to contemplate the broad potential of itcp.for the most part, computer science research does not benefit fromfoundation support, unlike biomedical and some other forms of scientific research.54 however, individuals and, in particular, corporatephilanthropy support some academic it research (in the form of grantsfor research, donation of computer hardware and software, or endowment of faculty positions). corporate support, both inkind and financial, is considered critical for growing and sustaining the relativelyhigh cost of operations of university computer science departments.corporate interactions are an important element of how those departments do business (e.g., personnel interactions, consultancies, job placement for students and graduates, and so on).55 hence computer scientists often emerge from their education with a relatively positive viewof corporations as employers and sources of support, whereas artistswill generally not have comparable experiences as an integral part oftheir education.prizesone notable source of funding for the arts is prizes (see chapters 5and 7).56 artists value prizes because they are expressly linked to54to put this observation into context, foundation grants for science and technologyoverall amounted to 3 percent of total dollars awarded in 2000, while grants for arts andculture amounted to 12 percent. see òhighlights of the foundation centerõs foundationgiving trends,ó 2002, foundation center, new york. available online at <http://fdncenter.org/research/trendsanalysis/>.55corporate conduct of research falls under the broader heading of commercialactivity excluded from the scope of this discussion. corporate it research tends to beapplied; regardless of label, it may be more development than research. see computerscience and telecommunications board, national research council, 2000, making itbetter.56òawards and prizes have proliferated throughout the arts, suggesting that numerous sponsors stand ready to fill the available ecological niches. the interests of thesesponsors are evident enough. associations of artists seek to advance professional standards and leverage their creative preferences against choices driven by the interests ofhumdrum participants and profit seekers. independent philanthropists who sponsorand support prizes likely have the same objective. prizes given by associations of criticsserve to advertise and dignify the criticsõ regular services. commercial sponsors seekgoodwill for their products among the honorees and the public with more than casualinterest in the relevant art world. . . .ó see richard e. caves, 2000, creative industries:contracts between art and commerce, harvard university press, cambridge, mass., pp.198199.computerscientistsoften emerge fromtheir educationwith a relativelypositive view ofcorporations asemployers andsources ofsupport, whereasartists generallydo not havecomparableexperiences as anintegral part oftheir education.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices211critical appraisal and they provide visibilityña benefit to the entityawarding the prize as well as the recipient. as a canadian arts councilexplains,most organizations that provide assistance for the arts and culturehave established or manage awards for artistic excellence accompanied by cash prizes. this practice has the advantage of combiningthe recognition of artists and their art with their contribution tocultural activity. moreover, it significantly enhances the prestige ofthe role of funding agencies and publicly indicates that theysignificantly support artistic creation.57against this backdrop, prizes have begun to emerge for itcp (seethe section òvalidation and recognition structuresó in chapter 7),building on the foundation laid by traditional supporters of the artsand economic development (e.g., various state and local prizes, orcertain foreign ones, such as europriz). unlike grants, which may bemultiyear or renewable, prizes are onetime infusions of revenue, andthey are awarded ex post facto, which implies that the beneficiaryneeds some other source of support to do the work that competes forthe prize.federal funding for informationtechnology researchit is wellknown that the federal government has a long history ofsupporting it research, which is largely computer science research(including computer engineering) plus some in sister fields such aselectrical engineering. indeed, it can be argued that federal support isat the very root of the informationtechnology world that americansand others inhabit today.58 research funding supports the advancement of a field and associated knowledge, often because that field islinked to economic wellbeing and to the broad base of scientific andtechnical knowledge; it is also tied more specifically to meeting agovernment mission, which varies among agencies. public access toinformation generated or published by an agency, like education, isalso a concern to varying degrees among agencies.funding for it research comes primarily from the department ofdefense, notably the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa), and from the national science foundation (nsf). a varietyof other agencies also support computer science research, both funda57see conseil des arts et des letters qu”bec, at <http://www.calq.gouv.qc.ca>.58for more information on the history of federal support for computing research, aswell as a history of the early internet, see computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council, 1999, funding a revolution, national academy press,washington, d.c.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity212mental and especially applied.59 computer science and related funding that is tracked in the aggregate as the networking and informationtechnology research and development (nitrd) program amountedto about $1.8 billion in 2002 (see box 8.2 for nitrd goals).60the nsf, which funds research across science and engineeringdisciplines, issues grants that tend to be smaller in size (tens to hundreds of thousands compared to hundreds of thousands into the millions) and duration (a few months or 1 to 2 years compared to 3 ormore years) than those awarded by darpa, which supports thedevelopment of large, complex, and often comparatively capitalintensive systems.61 the nsf also supports research centers (for sciencebox 8.2goals for the networking and information technologyresearch and development program1.ensure continued u.s. leadership in computing, information, and communications technologies tomeet federal goals and to support u.s. 21stcentury academic, industrial, and government interests.2.accelerate deployment of advanced and experimental information technologies to maintain worldleadership in science, engineering, and mathematics; improve the quality of life; promote longtermeconomic growth; increase lifelong learning; protect the environment; harness information technology; andenhance national security.3.advance u.s. productivity and industrial competitiveness through longterm scientific and engineering research in computing, information, and communications technologies.source: national science and technology council, 2002, strengthening national, homeland, and economic security:networking and information technology research and development, fy 2003 supplement to the presidentõs budget, july.59the coordinated information technology research and development program suitetracked by the national coordination office is budgeted at between $1.5 billion and $2billion. other participating agencies besides nsf and various components of the department of defense include the department of energy (the office of science and thenational nuclear security administration), the national aeronautics and space administration, the department of health and human services (the national institutes ofhealth and the agency for health care research and quality), the department ofcommerce (the national institute of standards and technology and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration), and the environmental protection agency.60derived from national science and technology council, 2002, strengthening national, homeland, and economic security: networking and information technology researchand development, fy 2003 supplement to the presidentõs budget, july, the annual compendium of federally funded computer science research programs known informally as theòblue book.ó61nsf has begun to experiment with support for larger computer science researchprojects. the early 2000s have witnessed intensive reexamination of program emphasesat darpa, with significant changes in its support for computer science research beginning to unfold but uncertain as of this writing.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices213and technology and for engineering research), which typically involvemore than one discipline and sometimes multiple institutions. forexample, the integrated media systems center at the university ofsouthern california62 has undertaken research on new types of userinterfaces with applications from everyday communication to interaction with art forms.the terrorist attacks of september 11, 2001, have increased attention to security across the government (and industry), which is expected to influence trends in computer science research funding.63projects and programs that can be linked to homeland security areexpected to be favored, with uncertain implications for truly exploratory work for which no such linkage can be posited. prior to september 11, the trend in the predecessor initiatives in what is now known asthe nitrd program was a broadening in the scope of research, including more diverse, crossdisciplinary explorations that included thesocial sciences and humanitiesñan evolution toward greater attentionto itcp interests.the evolution of federal funding programs for computer sciencehas been associated with an erosion of flexibility. when computerscience was a new field, in the latemiddle 20th century, researchsuccesses were tied to a few talented individuals: program managersin government agencies, who selected researchers in universities andawarded money with considerable flexibility. that fabled patterneroded considerably in the latter part of the century, as funding became tied more to specific government program objectives (whichvaried in their flexibility) and program management evolved to bemore conservative overall, thanks to pressures on federal spendingand increases in efforts to promote federal accountability. these circumstances militate against a program managerõs experimentationwith activities that can seem or be seen as new and different, such asitcpñunless the linkage to other kinds of research and national benefits can be established and communicated effectively.funding for infrastructuregrants, regardless of source, fund both specific activities (e.g.,research, development of new works of art) and the development ofassociated human resources, which can increase the likelihood of success and provide capacity for future work. similar rationales drivesupport for relevant physical infrastructure, or tools, a critical aspectof work involving it. accordingly, itcp work increases overall funding requirements on the arts side by introducing a need for hardware62see <http://imsc.usc.edu/>.63for example, the blue book sports the title strengthening national, homeland, andeconomic security: networking and information technology research and development, fy2003 supplement to the presidentõs budget for the edition published in mid2002.the evolution offederal fundingprograms forcomputer sciencehas beenassociated withan erosion offlexibility.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity214and software infrastructure already provided for computer science.64this can add significant costs to budgets.65 however, dramatic improvements in it price/performance ratiosñmaking this infrastructure less expensive than it was just a few years agoñhave enabledsmaller groups or individuals to do things that were prohibitivelyexpensive for them in the past. grant support may be particularlyimportant in building the itcp infrastructure inasmuch as it firms areless likely to provide hardware and software for activities seen as partof the (nonprofit) arts world, tending instead to donate such components for more conventional r&d.66 there are exceptions where marketing publicity may be gained; some artists have served as betatesters for it products and have allowed the use of their names inmarketing in return. as noted above, there is already a history offoundation support for capital projects, the category under which itinfrastructure is likely to fall.one productive approach to infrastructure building, illustrated bythe federal digital libraries initiative (dli) (see box 8.3)ñis the application testbed concept, which is familiar to experimental computerscientists. another approach, illustrated by some dli projects and awide range of other computer science and humanities research projects,is the generation of databases and other information resources that aremade available to the public and could be exploited for itcp. there isalready evidence of artists drawing on government repositories ofimagery, for example.whereas a testbed is associated with developing something, itcpalso presents needs for infrastructure associated with archiving andpreservation, without which too much of it may prove ephemeral. it isfar too often the case that itcpbased works disappear with the closeof the specific, original project. even itcp work of distinction, whichhas been recognized and awarded prizes, often meets that fate when64computer scientists, in turn, tend to complain that research funding budgets, byaggregating support for research per se with support for infrastructure, which oftenbenefits other kinds of scientists, overstates what is available to them.65state and regional economic development that features local investment in networking infrastructure can help educational and cultural institutions. it can also benefitindividuals through initiatives that promote deployment of residential broadband, forexample (see computer science and telecommunications board, national researchcouncil, 2002, broadband: bringing home the bits, national academy press, washington,d.c.). on a national scale, the internet2 project seeks to connect a growing number ofcolleges and universities to comparatively highbandwidth/capacity networking tosupport research and education and longdistance collaboration. the cyber infrastructure exploration at nsf, drawing on multiple initiatives, also links dispersed researchers with a range of networked resources. depending on where practitioners are located,itcp can benefit fromñand provide added motivation forñsuch extended infrastructure investments.66it firms have long recognized that giving their products to educators and researchers helps to develop their customer base. the arts communities seem to lack that kind ofappeal for firms, though there are exceptions (e.g., apple computer has seeded art,music, and architecture departments to be identified with creative users). itcppresents needsfor infrastructureassociated witharchiving andpreservation,without which toomuch of it mayprove ephemeral.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices215the financial and/or institutional support dries up. the creators ofsuch products are sometimes desperate to secure a further applicationfor their work but have no means to carry this idea through to fruition(e.g., a multimedia kiosk presentation accompanying an exhibitioncould well be used for education purposes after the closure of theexhibition for which the presentation was created). thus, works thatare not seen as having commercial value will only be made availablein digital form by the nonprofit and government sectors that allocateresources to do so. largescale digital conversion is likely to incursignificant financial costs, which most nonprofits are not in a positionto absorb.6767see commissioned papers of the art, technology, and intellectual property projectof the american assembly, available online at <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac/atippcp.htm>.box 8.3awards related to itcp under the digital libraries initiativea live performance simulation system: virtual vaudeville ($900,000 over 3 years)the virtual vaudeville project brings together a diverse array of scholars, including computer scientists,threedimensional modelers and animators, theater practitioners, and theater and music historians. theobjective is to use digital technology to address a problem fundamental to performance scholarship andpedagogy: how to represent and communicate the phenomenon of live performance using media. thisproblem becomes especially pressing when the objective is to represent a performance tradition from thepast. neither a written description nor a filmed recreation can convey the experience of attending a liveperformance, an experience that encompasses not only the way the performance on stage looks and soundsfrom different parts of the theatre, but also spectatorsõ perceptions of, and interactions with, one another.the proposed solution to this problem is to recreate historical performances in a virtual realityenvironment. the central objective is to simulate a feeling of òlivenessó in this environment: the sensationof being surrounded by human activity onstage, in the audience, and backstage, and the ability to choosewhere to look at any given time (onstage or off) and to move within the environment.capturing, coordinating, and remembering human experience ($200,000 over 4 years)this work will develop algorithms and systems enabling people to query and communicate with asynthesized record of human experiences derived from individual perspectives captured during selectedpersonal and group activities. for this research, an experience is defined through what you see, what youhear, and where you are, and associated sensor data and electronic communications. the research willtransform this record into a meaningful, accessible information resource, available contemporaneously andretrospectively. this vision will be validated through two socially relevant applications: (1) providing memoryaids as a personal prosthetic or behavioral monitor for the elderly, and (2) coordinating emergency responseactivity in disaster scenarios.source: adapted from <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov/itsprojects.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity216risk preferences and the challenge ofsupporting emerging areasgrants are usually awarded in the context of formal programs(government and private), which define the parameters of activitiessuitable for funding. depending on the source, there will be more orless discretion to support activity that does not fit easily within thestated parameters; sometimes there is an explicit intent to fund opportunistic new ideas, whereas other times there is strict adherence toguidelines, with no flexibility. program emphases change at differentrates and in different directions. in computer science, for example,funding for supercomputing, graphics, artificial intelligence, and othersubdisciplines has waxed and waned over time with perceptions ofneed and opportunity.the risk preferences of grant makers affect what gets funded; theyalso contribute to a greater flow of resources to institutions than toindependent workers. the early darpa, mentioned above, is an oftcited example of grant makers willing to fund risky endeavors; theinformation sciences program of a mid20thcentury sister agency, theoffice of naval research, just happened to be led by an individualwith strong arts interests, which had some effect on funding directions. a tendency toward risk aversion among grant makers can militate against movement into new areas or new types of work processes.risk aversion can arise for many reasons, chief among them the fear offailure and the need to carry out fiduciary responsibilities, becauseany award has an opportunity costñmoney allocated to one recipientis not available to others. on the government side, risk aversion mayarise in response to growing pressures for accountability in spending.for example, the government performance and results act (publiclaw 10362), although tricky to apply to research, requires agencies tolink projects they support to the results achieved. this is easier to dofor applied research than for more exploratory, fundamental research,where some degree of failure is to be expected, as is unanticipated andpossibly delayed success. in addition to precluding some adventurousresearch, risk aversion among grant makers can lead to constraints ongrantees, such as requirements for more frequent (and therefore disruptive) reporting or demonstration of work in progress.68of greatest concern for itcp as an emerging arena for research isrisk aversion related to the selection of topics. some examples areobvious: in an environment with a new, major focus on homelandsecurity and counterterrorism, projects that seem to involve interfering with or destroying a system might not be viewed favorably. youngresearchers in computer science and engineering, who either servedon or briefed the committee, reported a need to package itcp work inmore conventional terms to increase the likelihood of funding. al68this has been a growing complaint among computer science researchers.of greatestconcern for itcpas an emergingarena forresearch is riskaversion relatedto the selection oftopics.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices217though it has always been true that grant seekers have to use care inpresenting their ideas, this phenomenon can limit the exploration of anew arena such as itcp by discouraging applications for funding oreliminating ideas that do not lend themselves to repackaging. absentgrant program definitions that specifically embrace itcp, progress initcp will depend on grant seekersõ ingenuity in influencing programdefinitions and relating their ideas to an existing definition.69the òculture warsó of the 1990s underscore that reactions to artistic endeavors can have political overtones and consequences. theseexternal concerns can influence which arts projects are funded, whereasinfluences on funding in computer science research tend to depend onsuch criteria as relevance to the operational mission of an agency (nsfis an exception) or the objectives of a given program. program definitions and scopes may be more or less inviting of the risk involved innew approaches, and so may the processes of evaluating competingproposals (although the nominal criteria, such as nsfõs òintellectualmeritó and òbroader impacts,ó may not make the potential for variation obvious). on the arts side, there is anecdotal evidence that focusand selection processes can discourage innovation, especially at thepoint when new art forms emerge. at present, these tensions shapethe itcp arena of digital arts or newmedia work, which may betreated as a separate category or recognized as a part of other fields,depending on the funding source. funders are trying to understandwhat is emerging and the nature of its merits as a contender for theirresources. the it elements have engendered mixed reactions amongtraditional arts funders, just as arts elements have perplexed traditional computer science funders.risk aversion also arises among foundations. whereas government agencies have some degree of public oversight and accountability, foundations are intrinsically idiosyncratic, shaped by the preferences of their founders and boards of directors. those preferencesmay constrain the program staffõs solicitations of and reactions toproposals.recently, federal programs have sought to promote crossdisciplinary work related to itñalbeit in areas other than itcp. thissituation has put agency leadership, with grants as the proverbialmotivational carrots, somewhat at odds with the research community:grant seekers have not, on the whole, gravitated easily to crossdisci69one speaker at a committee meeting suggested that there might be limited fundingavailable for a proposal on òcomputer musicó research, but much more funding available if the proposal were relabeled as òdigital signal processingó or òdigital audiosignaló research. a washington, d.c., briefing to the computer science and telecommunications board in september 2002 by chuck thorpe of carnegie mellon universitypresented some pragmatic contrasts: research involving robotic soccerplaying dogscould be seen as illustrating dogs playing or as multiagent collaboration in a hostilesituation. in other instances, principal investigators have skirted innovation by simplyrenaming old proposals to obtain funds.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity218plinary collaboration. whether impelled by government programs orarising through a bottomup process from the grantseeking community, the relative paucity of crossdisciplinary work to date means thatthe researchers serving on the panels that review proposals may lackexperience in this type of work and/or an appreciation for its meritsand potential. anecdotal reports from committee members and grantseekers and program managers who briefed the committee suggestthat these panels are most comfortable with projects that come closestto core disciplinary work, or are unable to select for quality amongcompeting proposals with differing approaches to crossdisciplinarity,especially where new or unfamiliar methodology may be involved.this situation is not unique to itcp; in any context, selection panelsmay have difficulty addressing the reinterpretation of fields or emergence of new fields, inasmuch as it involves work and people diverging from panel membersõ own experience. the problem is wellknownamong federal program managers.the nsf (with some collaboration with other government organizations) has engaged in three notable experiments in supporting crossdisciplinary work with an it component, some of which relates toitcp. (see box 8.4.) the first two, knowledge and distributed intelligence (kdi) and the digital libraries initiative (mentioned above),featured strong internal champions at nsf, who worked with therelevant research communities; the third, information technology research (itr), drew from a broad, crossagency reconceptualization offederal programs for it r&d, also with input from the research community. kdiõs difficulties reflected its attempt to achieve the broadinvolvement of multiple disciplines; the other two may have benefitedin terms of program viability from their greater leaning toward computer science (i.e., a single discipline). the integration of social sciences with computer science is an element of all three, but dli alsomoved to involve humanists, and some itr components are definedin ways that are open to the involvement of humanists and artists.these and other crosscutting research initiatives, through both substantive and procedural emphases, aim to advance the science andpractice of collaboration as a means to achieving creativity in anycontext, another factor that makes them relevant to planning for thesupport of itcp.the committee emphasizes that investigating new areas and exerting leadership are risky, and therefore grant makers need to develop a tolerance for some failures as the inevitable price of exploration. understandably, foundations prefer that all projects succeed,because they feel a responsibility to maintain trust both as a fiduciarybody and as a legacy of a family, company, or community. there is atendency to play it safe. a way to institutionalize risk into the grantmaking process is to allocate a fixed amount or percentage of grantsfor risktaking projectsñinitiatives with potentially large payoffs butalso with a significant possibility of failure. this is grant making asportfolio investing: combining safe, slowgrowth projects with someriskier choices, and expecting some failures as normal. for thisinvestigatingnew areasand exertingleadership arerisky, and grantmakers need todevelop atolerance forsome failures asthe inevitableprice ofexploration.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices219box 8.4crossdisciplinary computer science initiatives pointing toward itcpknowledge and distributed intelligenceknowledge and distributed intelligence (kdi) was an experimental initiative carried out between 1997and 1999 that cut across the national science foundation (nsf) directorates (defined by their emphaseson research in the physical, natural, and social sciences, and education) and confederated multiple programs(such as the digital libraries initiative discussed below, learning and intelligent systems, knowledgenetworking, universal access, and integrated spatial information systems). the initiative revolved aroundthe relationship between research on information technologies and efforts to meet societal needs, broadlydefined.because of the initiativeõs sweeping vision, program management featured not only coordination acrossunits of nsf but also outreach to other agencies (those involved in specific component programs) andprivate foundations. both program managers and the research community grappled with objectives andoptions through formative workshops and other interactions, but a lack of consensus about the initiativeand skepticism among groups of researchers (generally defined along disciplinary boundaries) about eachotherõs roles and their integration weakened the experiment. kdi did not extend beyond its initial 3yearphase, although component programs have continued.digital libraries initiativethe digital libraries initiative (dli) has grown to embrace a widening set of federal agencies, researchdisciplines, and application contexts. its first phase (launched in 1994) involved six universities funded by thensf that developed testbeds and engaged a variety of partners in diverse applications domains. its secondphase, dli2 (beginning in 1998), which has added relevance to itcp, expanded to include as partners thenational endowment for the humanities, library of congress, defense advanced research projectsagency, national library of medicine, and national aeronautics and space administration. the dligenerates infrastructure in applications domains that provide a context for developing new computerscienceñhence the basing of the nsf participation in the computer and information science andengineering (cise) directorate. collaboration between computer scientists and very different communitiesis intrinsic to dli. also see box 8.3 and <http://www.dli2.nsf.gov>.information technology researchinformation technology research (itr) is an umbrella initiative for a wide range of computer scienceresearch projects, including core disciplinary investigations and research that engages other disciplines tovarying degrees. based at nsf, it reflects that organizationõs approach to a larger reconceptualization ofsupport for it research across several agencies. like that larger effort, itr has been widening its scope fromfundamental computer science to computational science and to interactions with multiple disciplinesñthefiscal year 2002 funding was supposed to emphasize òemerging opportunities at the interfaces betweeninformation technology and other disciplinesó that can òelucidate, expand and exploit it.ó1 itr addressessocial, economic, and workforce implications, involving social scientists to address how to design computerbased systems that work better for people, as well as the societal impacts of systems as currently designed(see, for example, nsfõs digital society and technology program).2 the engagement of social scientistsinvolves both the cise and the social, behavioral, and economic sciences directorates.1see <http://www.itr.nsf.gov/aboutitr.html>.2see <http://www.interact.nsf.gov/cise/descriptions.nsf/30ff6e7ea7d05a0d85256659004c0237/976ffb01fa3aea5e852565d90056864d?opendocument>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity220approach to work, program managers must not be subject to sanctionsfor the inevitable failures. in general, tolerance for occasional failuremay be higher in the private sector than in the public sector; hence,private foundations may have to take the leadership with respect tohighrisk initiatives.federal funding agencies have special issues to consider. to beginwith, the agency structures and approaches typical of the it arenañscience and engineering researchñdiffer significantly from those usedin the arts and humanities. the level and allocation of funding, natureof funding agencies, interactions among agencies, and so on, are generally different, although there are some commonalities. experiencesuggests that the success of any new major programs within the u.s.government will be enhanced by the appointment of a champion. thestructure of the federal governmentñin both the executive and congressional branches, the latter strongly influenced by the appropriations processñcan often militate against crossdisciplinary programscutting across jurisdictional and disciplinary lines. without a champion, no one understands the potential benefits or who is accountableand whose budget is at stake.when funding a major new program in itcp, organizations mayincrease their chances for success by following general principles forfruitful research and ògood work.ó funding should be made availableto crossdisciplinary teamsñperhaps a dozen teams or so are neededto attain critical mass, in the committeeõs judgmentñand the budgetshould be adequate to support two or more principal investigators.the program should be òownedó by several units within a foundationor government agency (or multiple foundations or agencies, or possibly even a combination thereof) to obtain real, committed participation by all. commitments should be made for a sufficient period toenable programs to become establishedñon the order of 5 yearsñandallow for no (or very limited) provision for renewals, to avert intentional or accidental empirebuilding.70reexamining funding policies andpracticesreliance on grant support (socalled òsoftó money) shapes themodus operandi of academic researchers and artists, chiefly by building the search for grants into their activities. a characteristic of grantsupport is finite duration: even longerterm grants build in the anticipation of an end to the support. also, with the possible exception ofsupport from a research center, individual grants tend to provide onlypartial support for a computer science researcher or an artist. as aresult, professionals who depend on grant support work to develop70based on norman metzger and richard zare, 1999, òinterdisciplinary research,òfrom belief to reality,ó science 283: 642643.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices221and renew grants, a process with uncertain results that typically involves attempts to seek more grants than one is likely to receive. theawarding of longerterm grants allows the grant makers to get toknow the grant seekers better. inasmuch as grant seeking is a competitive process, participants may benefit from having a track record. butofficials at federal funding agencies also understand that young researchers may need to be evaluated somewhat differently than aretheir senior counterparts.71 it is not clear whether foundations arecomparably sensitive to that problem. committee members seemed toregard foundations as conservative and therefore most likely to fundthose with a track record. some specific disciplines, such as architecture, are structured with the expectation that solo creativity can flowercomparatively late in a career, and job opportunities are structuredaccordinglyñbut architecture operates within a market context.the issue of whether to fund òresearchó or òcontentó also arises;these concepts, which never could be separated with complete clarity,are becoming more intertwined.72 grants that foster itcp are particularly likely to incorporate both content and it in substantive ways. adhoc practices, such as pairing content producers with researchers toqualify them for research funding, can be awkward and inefficientñworking through the challenges of collaborations (see chapter 2), butonly for economic reasons. instead, granting agencies should reviewtheir policies for supporting content development, or consider cooperative projects among consortia of granting agencies in areas of special interest, to meet challenges that cannot otherwise be addressed.on the arts side, private philanthropic collaborations have alreadybegun to nurture itcp. for example, the rockefeller foundation hasjoined forces with the ford foundation and the pew charitable trustsin exploring relevant issues.one interesting experiment is a grant awarded to leonardo/isastto study the feasibility of a hybrid art center and research lab structured to be financially sustainable. called arts lab, the project is anattempt to build a bridge between the creative community exploringnew technologies and the marketplace. arts lab is structured as a notforprofit corporation that is intended to be managed with the discipline of a commercial enterprise. the goal is to be sustainable withlittle compromise of artistic or research values. this type of project canhelp in exploring the boundary between commercial and noncommercial spheres: arts grants, in particular, have been assumed tosupport noncommercial activity, but given the nature of itcp and theneed to promote viability, this boundary bears reexamination.agencies and foundations should structure proposalreview processes that encourage the development of new practices as well as theevolution of existing ones. as has happened previously in variousscientific and engineering disciplines, digital practices are proliferat71nsf, for example, offers career awards to young investigators.72this is one reason for the prominence of design in itcp.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity222ing within all existing categories of the arts, from filmmaking andtheater to the fine arts, as well as in new categories. should the digitalarts be placed in their own category or recognized as a part of everything else? both strategies should be pursued to expand existing definitions as well as recognize new and emerging forms. accordingly, awide range of representation is necessary on panels, and panelists willneed to be familiar with multiple areasña longstanding issue concerning appraisal panels and the peerreview process. as part of thiseffort to nurture innovation, panels should consider making, in lieu ofonly large grants, some modest grants to a larger number of groups orindividuals. to avoid forcing individuals or small organizations tospend disproportionate amounts of time on grantrelated paperwork,care may be needed in program design, or implementation strategiescould be pursued that leverage intermediaries that can absorb some ofthe administrative burdens.73multiple approaches are important, because itcp is evolving at arate that seems to be outrunning the traditional feedback loop ofcriticism, and it is evolving in multiple directionsñthere is no consensus on how to appraise different ideas. how funders react will shapewhether and how schools of thought or practice develop. to fund adiversity of projects, program managers will need more time andleeway to learn about, evaluate, and reach out to accommodate increased numbers of grantees. they need competence to reinterpretexisting fields to accommodate the evolution associated with itcpand to place priority on truly new forms of creative practice thatexploit the power of digital information and networks. they may alsoneed to convene different groups of evaluators who are peers to different kinds of grant seekers and also have an appreciation for how fieldsand creative practices are changing.funders are receiving feedback from their decisionmaking panelsthat indicates it is difficult to review the full spectrum of practice nowoffered within certain granting categories. for instance, a media panelmight have to judge a documentary film alongside an interactiveinstallation or web site. panelists often feel unable to judge botheffectively. how can agencies structure a panel process that will encourage the development of new practices as well as the evolution ofexisting ones? in other words, how can agencies support developmentwithout defining it before it has emerged? one problem can be thatpeople with experience and credentials in a field may feel threatenedor discomfited by the onslaught of new media forms. selection processes need to cover the breadth of evolving practices withoutbalkanizing panels and without slanting choices to the particular expertise represented. it will be important to find ways to function assupport for the incubators rather than as a prescriptive reinforcementof existing and familiar forms of work.73the national alliance of media arts and culture (<http://www.namac.org>)might be an appropriate model for a national umbrella organization to distributefunding to local community media arts centers.programmanagers willneed more timeand leeway tolearn about,evaluate, andreach out toaccommodateincreasednumbers ofgrantees.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices223support for development of new practices also entails recastingwhat is regarded as research, to enable expanding activities in organizations (notably government technical research funders) with comparatively little history in funding artistic practices and activities inorganizations (notably arts branches of foundations) with comparatively little history in funding it research. qu”becbased funding agencies, for example, have identified an entirely new realm of supportableactivity defined by the term òresearchcreation,ó defining a practicethat straddles the artistic and the technical and does not carry some ofthe constraints of technical research. this approach helps to reduce thechances of projects falling through the cracks in a world where, forexample, projects are not funded by the nea because they are perceived as technical research, but also are not funded by the nsfbecause they are seen as cultural projects. as discussed in chapter 3,there would be value in establishing a special granting category fortool building in both software and hardware. additional supportwould be needed to make these tools available (i.e., distribution,documentation, and support) to both artists and industry and generally push forward creative production.as noted above, archiving and preservation concerns also have tobe addressed by funders. the instigators and funding bodies of itcpwork should feel responsible for the longterm preservation and use ofthis work whenever possible (see discussion of archiving in chapter7). the need for longterm archiving and/or preservation can be addressed both through infrastructure support and through augmentation of the creativityoriented grant itself.getting at the itarts intersection involves attention to both thescope of work and the mechanisms of combining different disciplines,whether through the efforts of an individual or crossdisciplinaryteams. by drawing on multiple sources of fundsñwithin a complexorganization like the nsf or across organizationsña program mightreinforce the message that a crossdisciplinary effort is sought, although that raises its own practical problems at the program management end.74experimentation with different approaches to grant making wouldcorrespond to the novelty and dynamism of itcp. one model of noteis the pew charitable trusts venture fund. created during the mid1990s to enable the trusts to explore opportunities that fall outside itstraditional program areas, the venture fund has no restrictions on thesubject matter it can support. key funding decisions include suchquestions as, are we being innovative? are we maximizing our returnon investment? answers to these questions are evaluated based onsocial returns, not financial ones. other questions include the follow74the challenges of combining funding among private foundations and betweennsf and private foundations are outlined in the cstb white paper advancing the publicinterest through knowledge and distributed intelligence (kdi), 1998.by drawing onmultiple sources offunds, a programmight reinforcethe message thata crossdisciplinaryeffort is sought.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity224ing: does the proposed project have a particular urgency? is it addressing an important need? can it produce concrete results in areasonable time frame? will it enable us to explore new partnershipswith other foundations or with public or private funders? if it carries asignificant risk of failure, is there also the possibility of unusually highsocial return if it succeeds? during 2001 the fund issued more than $34million to cover 20 grants. since its inception, the fund has providedseveral grants to organizations associated with information technology and creativity. for example, it joined the rockefeller foundationin providing support to the american assemblyõs art, technologyand intellectual property (atip) project addressing the impacts, challenges, and opportunities resulting from technological advances thatare confronting the arts.75informed analysis of the related issues will require increased evidence gathering and analytical resources for the arts and humanities.76relatively few economists, social scientists, or policy analysts engagein policy research related to the arts and humanities (as compared toother domains), in part because of ambivalence in the united statesabout the public role in this space.77 the empirical base for supportingpolicy analysis is weak, and the academic and practitioner wings ofthe community are largely strangers. interaction among policy makers, practitioners, and policy scholars is much richer in other fields ofpublic policy.78 in addition to building a knowledge base in this area,public policy analysts could build relationships and understandingwith key intermediaries, such as journalists, commentators, think tankresearchers, and political party representatives. policy attention tothese issues is consistent with the longrun shift of the economy toward services, some of which focus on cultural products and contentgenerally, and enduring concern about the quality of life and creativity in general. finally, and complementary to developing better data, adigital art and culture history project would provide valuable context75see <http://www.pewtrusts.com> and <http://www.americanassembly.org/ac>.76see ruth ann stewart and catherine c. galley, 2002, òthe research and information infrastructure for cultural policy: a consideration of models for the united states,óappendix in j. mark schuster, informing cultural policy: the research and informationinfrastructure, rutgers center for urban policy research, center for urban policy research press, new brunswick, new jersey.77a consortium of foundations moved to address this practical problem by underwriting the center for art and culture (see <http://www.culturalpolicy.org/issuepages/infotemplate.cfm?page=history>). the pew charitable trusts made newsby voicing concerns about òcultural policy,ó which is more controversial in the unitedstates than in many other countries. its initiative òoptimizing americaõs cultural policiesó announced in 1999 was renamed òoptimizing americaõs cultural resourcesó inresponse to the ensuing controversy over the appropriateness of this kind of policy. seeschuster, 2002, informing cultural policy.78see margaret jane wyszomirski, 1995, òpolicy communities and policy influence:securing a government role in cultural policy for the twentyfirst century,ó journal ofarts management, law, and society 25(3): 192205.relatively feweconomists, socialscientists, orpolicy analystsengage in policyresearch relatedto the arts andhumanities. theempirical basefor supportingpolicy analysisis weak.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices225and serve as an educational tool for policy makers, educational institutions, and people interested in engaging in itcp.79funding in the internationalcontextinternationally, a variety of itcp funding models have evolved.examples are presented here both to illustrate the diversity of approaches and to draw contrasts between the united states and othercountries. as noted earlier, a nationõs cultural policies influence funding for art and design activities. a case could be made that a strongercentral intervention (e.g., the creation of a ministry of culture, as infrance) can have positive effects, either to get new itcp initiativesgoing, or at least jump started, and/or to help establish an infrastructure. (funding sources may be reluctant to pay for an infrastructureuntil there is a demonstrated need for it; but the need may not materialize until the infrastructure is in place.) however, a case could equallybe made that decentralized funding fosters initiatives that rise fromthe bottom up and thus are more likely to lead to the development ofideas and projects that reflect leadingedge work in itcp.public support for the artsworldwide, funding for the arts has a long history80 that has beenfar from uniform across time or space. indeed, looking primarily ateuropean countries, one is likely to form the opinion that direct government support for the arts is a longstanding and widespread practice. looking at other countries such as the united states or japan,however, one might just as easily conclude that national governmentsleave support for the arts primarily to private (commercial or nonprofit) or local organizations. kevin mulcahy81 provides a succinct79for further discussion, see kevin f. mccarthy and elizabeth heneghan ondaatje,2002, from celluloid to cyberspace: the media arts and the changing arts world, rand,santa monica, calif.80public support for the arts among the nations of the world is almost as old ascivilization itself. indeed, examples of such support in even the distant past are fairlyeasy to find; one need only consult an art history or world history text to find numerousinstances. pisistratus (605?ð527 b.c.), for instance, although known as the òtyrant ofathens,ó is also remembered as a patron of the arts. he arranged citystate support for arange of artistic activities, including building projects, poetry, sculpture, dance, andmusic. he is also credited with starting public arts festivals that were open to all citizensin an effort to enhance the cultural prestige of athens.81see kevin v. mulcahy, 1998, òcultural patronage in comparative perspective:public support for the arts in france, germany, norway, and canada,ó journal of artsmanagement, law and society 27(4): 247264.¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥¥beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity226description of the perceived differences in how europe and the unitedstates, in particular, have dealt with public arts support historically:the conventional wisdom of much discourse about public supportof the arts is that european national governments are longtime,generous, and uncritical benefactors of culture, whereas the u.s.government, by invidious comparison, has been a reluctant supporter, of decreasing generosity and with increasingly dispiritingcriticism. but broad generalizations about comparative publicpolicies often disguise substantial exceptions.82the developing nations present another, much more resourceconstrained picture, but as with economically stronger nations they,too, supportñor receive support from such nongovernmental organizations as foundations forñthe arts in the context of cultural heritageand competitive advantage. in developing nations, the traditions ofart and aesthetics have developed high degrees of sophistication whosepotential for interaction with it has barely been explored. informationtechnology, when combined with the arts and crafts in these countries,can accelerate economic and human development. this can take simpleforms, such as the use of it to create markets for the creative output ofthe populations in these nations. it can also take the form of inspiration for new designs rooted in the aesthetics and traditions of the localculture.83 both could leverage financial support, to the extent it isavailable. see box 8.5.france has a long and rich tradition of public support for arts andculture, dating back at least to the capet monarchy (c. 987). the frenchgovernment is among the worldõs largest funders of art and culture,administered primarily through the ministry of culture and communication.84 created in 1959, the ministry seeks to make art and cultureavailable to as much of the french public as possible, with an annualbudget of nearly 1 percent of the entire national budget.85 a specificdivision of the ministry of culture and communications in francefinances research and development. a major item included in this82the substantial exceptions derive primarily from the indirect public support provided by donors motivated or rewarded (at least in part) by u.s. income tax incentives,as described in the previous section. however, though constrained by available datasources, a comparison of direct government arts funding suggests a huge variation percapita, ranging from $6 in the united states to $46 in canada and $85 in germany. dataderived from national endowment for the arts, 2000, international data on governmentspending on the arts, research division note #74, available online at <http://arts.endow.gov/pub/notes/74.pdf>.83ranjit makkuniõs work is an example; see <http://www.hinduonnet.com/thehindu/2001/04/23/stories/13230074.htm>.84see the ministryõs home page at <http://www.culture.fr>.85one percent of the u.s. federal executive branch budget for fy 2002 is approximately $13 billion.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices227box 8.5four models for public arts funding¥the facilitator state supports the arts through foregone taxes, which is to say that donorsõcontributions are made tax deductible. the objective of this model is to promote diversity of activity in thenonprofit amateur and fine arts, although òno specific standards of art are supportedó by the state. rather,the focus is on òthe preferences and tastes of the corporate, foundation, and individual donors.ó the unitedstates is a good example of a facilitator state.¥the patron state provides support for the arts through armõslength arts councils. in this model, thestate decides on an overall level of support, leaving the actual decisions regarding which projects to supportto the arts councils. the arts councils, in turn, rely on the advice of professional artists working through asystem of peer evaluation. the objective of this model is as much to promote òstandards of professionalartistic excellenceó as it is to support òthe process of creativity.ó the united kingdom is an example of apatron state.¥the architect state provides funds for the arts through government institutions created solely forthat purpose (e.g., ministries or departments of culture or the arts). in this model, the state tends to supportthe arts as part of its national objectives, which can have distinctively different emphases; for example,historically, france has leaned toward professional standards of artistic excellence, whereas the emphasisin the netherlands is much less elitist.¥the engineer state òowns all the means of artistic production.ó in this model, the state supports onlyart that meets certain òpolitical standards,ó and decisions about funding and support are left up to òpoliticalcommissars.ó one example of an engineer state was the soviet union.source: adapted from harry hillmanchartrand and claire mccaughey, 1989, òthe armõs length principle andthe arts: an international perspectiveñpast, present and future,ó whoõs to pay for the arts? the international search formodels of support, m.c. cummings, jr. and j. mark davidson schuster, eds., american council for the arts, new york.available online at <http://www.culturaleconomics.atfreeweb.com/armõs.htm>.budget is the institut de recherche et coordination en acoustique etmusique (ircam), a permanent statefunded institute for computermusic research. this office also offers òstate commissionsó to frenchartists, and on occasion these commissions have been opportunitiesfor international coproduction (e.g., the virtual tunnel under theatlantic, òconstructedó between paris and montr”al in september1995). major institutes such as ircam and germanyõs zentrum frkunst und medien (zkm) described below (and in chapter 5) derivedthe basis for political support of major public expenditures in part torespond to u.s. hightechnology leadership.86the german method for directing public funds to the arts is muchmore decentralized. indeed, the german federal government has beendescribed as òeffectively barredó from cultural activities, a response toearlier times when governmentsupported cultural activities were used86ircamõs efforts to combine high modernist musical experimentalism with technology transfer to the french it sector were fraught with contradictions and confusion,according to one ethnographic study. see georgina born, 1995, rationalizing culture:ircam, boulez, and the institutionalization of the musical avantgarde, university of california press, berkeley.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity228òfor purposes of national glorification,ó or even òabused . . . for propaganda purposes.ó87 accordingly, germany has no central agency tooversee cultural funding; rather, individual l−nder (or states) and localauthorities bear this responsibility. for example, although many ofzkmõs constituencies are outside germany, much of its funding isderived from regional public funds and smallscale industrial sponsorship. such a unique environment comes with a high price tag, andto contribute to the institutionõs discretionary funds, the research institutes also secure contracts for itcp research within european union(eu) research projects, which has caused tension between the institutesõ mission to develop artwork and the need to generate fundingthrough research projects that generally do not directly fund art assuch. local governments account for 47 to 58 percent of public spending on the arts, the states for 40 percent, and the federal governmentfor only 2 to 13 percent; despite tax incentives, private support for thearts accounts for òno more than 1 percentó of the total revenue forgerman art institutions.88 various networks of research institutes (e.g.,the fraunhofer institutes) may have entities whose work relates toitcp. the fraunhofer, for example, even has an outpost in rhodeisland (near brown university and the rhode island school of design)to support its interests in computer graphics.government programs established to support the arts have histories measured in decades rather than centuries in many countries. forexample, the canadian governmentõs main means of supporting thework of individual artists and arts organizations is the canada council for the arts, which was created by an act of parliament in 1957 andwas funded initially by a $50 million endowment to òensure thecouncilõs complete independence of the government.ó89 currently,however, in addition to support from various endowments, donations, and bequests, the council receives the majority of its fundingfrom parliament in the form of an annual appropriation. in 20002001,the canada council made awards and grants amounting to $117 million;90 in april 2002, the council and the national research council(nrc) of canada launched a collaborative program of research grantsto bring leading artists into canadian nrc laboratories across thecountry as researchers.91 this agreement will also create a forum tofacilitate the development of partnerships among other arts, science,and technology organizations in canada. in addition, the canadacouncil will soon complete its first round of awards to joint proposals87annette zimmer and stefan toepler, 1996, òcultural policies and the welfarestate: the cases of sweden, germany, and the united states,ó journal of arts management, law, and society 26(3): 167195.88see zimmer and toepler, 1996, òcultural policies and the welfare state.ó89see john meisel and jean van loon, 1987, òcultivating the bushgarden: culturalpolicy in canada,ó in milton c. cummings, jr., and richard s. katz, eds., the patronstate: government and the arts in europe, north america, and japan, oxford universitypress, new york, p. 289.90from <http://www.canadacouncil.ca/council/aboute.asp>.91see <http://www.canadacouncil.ca/news/pressreleases/co0215e.asp>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices229by groups of artists, engineers, or scientists, which will be reviewedfor the first time by a mixed panel cooperatively managed by the artscouncil and its two sister science councils (the natural science andengineering council and the social science and humanities council).the government of canada also underwrites the national film board,an innovative force in computer graphics (see box 6.3 in chapter 6),and the canadian broadcasting corporation and offers subsidies, taxincentives, and marketing support to creative industries (publishing,music, museums, multimedia, computer games).the japanese experience with public arts support bears only avague resemblance to that of europe, canada, or the united states.currently, most art genres in japanñincluding traditional japanesearts, modern arts derived from europe, and popular artsñare òthoroughly commercial,ó surviving through a mixture of income from,among other sources, ticket sales, advertising, and the sale of relatedproducts or services.92 the flurry of japanese corporate sponsorshipfor art and technology that began in the late 1980s was typicallyjustified as a sophisticated kind of symbiotic corporate philanthropy(which has suffered in the difficult economic climate in japan; seechapter 5). however, the japanese government has built museumsand libraries and preserved important cultural monuments ever sincethe meiji state (a stronger, more centralized government) was established in 1868.93 indeed, the tokyo academy of music was founded in1879, and the academy of art was formed in 1887; these two organizations merged following world war ii to form the tokyo university offine arts, an institution considered to be the center of art and musicresearch and education in japan.in 1968 the agency for cultural affairs (aca), devoted to publicsupport for the arts, was formed and began with an initial budget ofaround $14 million, but over the next 10 years the aca budget swelled,as authorities discovered that the promotion of culture was in thepublicõs interest at home òas well as the national interest abroad.ó94 in1972, the japan foundation was created by a legislative act to be anautonomous nonprofit public corporation whose primary concern iscultural relations abroad. it promotes a variety of cultural exchangeprograms each year, with its overall focus being on personal exchange.in 2002, the association for corporate support of the arts (mecenat)broadened its definition of an arts eventñin the context of authorizingtaxdeductible contributionsñto include media arts.9592meisel and van loon, 1987, òcultivating the bushgarden,ó p. 333.93thomas r.h. havens, 1987, ògovernment and the arts in contemporary japan,óin cummings and katz, eds., the patron state: government and the arts in europe, northamerica, and japan, p. 334.94havens, 1987, ògovernment and the arts in comtemporary japan,ó p. 333. duringthe period from 1968 to 1978, the aca budget grew some 574 percent, while the overallnational budget increased by 489 percent.95dramatic online, òbroadening the definition of arts events in japan,ó availableonline at <http://www.dramaticonline.com/ifacca/web/news/detail.asp?id=24073&from=artscouncilnews>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity230public support for informationtechnology researchinformation technology research is supported by a number ofnational governments around the world. as in the case of the arts, thepolicies and practices of only a few countries are reviewed in thisreport, to provide a broader perspective on, and contrast to, policiesand practices in the united states.canada uses a model that combines tax and funding incentiveswhile also supporting collaboration and information sharing amonggeographically dispersed federal research labs, private r&d facilities,and research universities. a large part of this model is made possibleas a result of the canadian network for the advancement of research,industry and education (canarie),96 which is canadaõs advancedinternet development organization. this nonprofit organization, whichreceives its core funding from the canadian government, has established the worldõs largest and fastest national r&d network. a collaboration involving more than 120 universities and industry partners,canarie has helped to fund more than $600 million in researchprojects related to the internet, including those associated with content distribution.97in addition to the tax incentives open to all forms of industrialr&d (in contrast to the united states98), the canadian governmentfunds a series of research organizations whose focus is promotinginnovation in it. the canadian nrc operates the institute for information technology (iit),99 which, through costsharing collaborativeprojects, assists other organizations with the development of marketdriven technologies. these collaborations can be oneonone with asingle company or multiparty, with several participating organizations combining resources to share costs and risks. a similar program,the networks of centres of excellence (nce),100 promotes partner96see <http://www.canarie.ca>. also mentioned in chapter 5.97as of this writing the canarie project, econtent, is soliciting requests for projectsthat emphasize òcultural research, development and applications in areas such as architecture and design, film and video, 3d graphics, net and web art, digital music, digitalphotography, game design, graphic design, human/computer interface, and copyright/rights management tools; and feasibility studies, including consumer research/testing of broadband cultural products and the monetization of content.ó see <http://www.canarie.ca>.98see canadaõs leadership in information and communications technologies, availableonline at <http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/ssg/it04270e.html>.99see <http://www.iit.nrc.ca/>.100three canadian federal granting agencies, the canadian institutes of health research, the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada, and thesocial sciences and humanities research council of canada, along with industrycanada, have combined their efforts to support and oversee the nce. see <http://www.nce.gc.ca/>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices231ships among industry, universities, and government. the program,which is intellectually diverse and geographically dispersed, consistsof 22 centers, 8 of which conduct research in information and communication technology (usually, networks are funded for 7 years and canbe renewed).101 since 1997, several proposals were made to the nceprogram for hybrid research networks (grouping universitybasedresearchers in it, the arts and humanities, and cultural organizations(like the banff centre and the national film board)). although none ofthese proposals passed the stringent nce competition, they formedthe basis for an alternative program with a regional basis (i.e., supporting geographic clusters) and support for newmedia industrial activity. canadian heritage, the branch of the canadian government responsible for cultural affairs, launched a new grant program in the fallof 2002 as part of its canadian culture online program. called newmedia research networks, it was planned to support multiyear collaborative networks on a pilot basis through march 2004, with fundingfor up to five networks for 3 years for about one million canadiandollars per year. its goals include òdevelopment of an environmentthat is conducive to canada becoming a world leader in digital contextcreation and productionó through òresearch at the intersection of technologies and culture.ó102following a model similar to the nce program is precarn incorporated,103 a national consortium of corporations, research institutes,and government partners that supports innovation in intelligent systems. precarn helps to promote collaboration among canadian companies, universities, and government researchers by providing funding on a casebycase basis for projects that include the participation ofat least two companies and one university.japan is known for a strong national, coordinated policy withrespect to technology, and the situation with it is no different. thepolicy strategy for it that the prime minister, council on science andtechnology policy (cstp), and the ministries currently support is thebasic law on the formation of an advanced information and telecommunications network society, or ejapan for short. the primarygoal of ejapan is to òestablish an environment where the privatesector, based on market forces, can exert its full potential and makejapan the worldõs most advanced it nation within five years.ó104 ejapan is an integrated strategy that emphasizes four points:101for example, the centre of information technology and complex systems involves more than 50 university researchers supported by 379 graduate students, andcarries out research in seven canadian provinces. the network supporting this centerincludes 28 universities, 62 industrial partners, and 27 government departments andagencies. see canadaõs leadership in information and communications technologies, available online at <http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/ssg/it04270e.html>.102see <http://www.canadianheritage.gc.ca/progs/pcceccop/progs/mednete.cfm> and <http://www.pch.cg.ca/progs/pcceccop/pubs/mednetguidee.cfm>.103see <http://www.precarn.ca/>.104see ejapan strategy at <http://www.kantei.go.jp/foreign/it/network/0122fulle.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity232¥enable every citizen to enjoy the benefits of it.¥reform the economic structure and strengthen industrial competitiveness.¥realize affluent national life and creative community with vitality.¥contribute to the formation of an advanced information andtelecommunication networked society on a global scale.under the cstp, a cabinetlevel office sets science and technology(s&t) policy direction and funding levels. the cstp uses a comprehensive overview strategy in its decision making that has resulted in asignificant increase in the involvement of the humanities and socialscience in the discussion. increasingly, this strategy is forcing policiesinto a direction that emphasizes the relationship between society andhuman beings.105 the cstp immediately identified the support of itas one of four strategic fields that the government must emphasizewhen formulating s&t policy and funding r&d. however, while thecstp decides on policy direction and funding levels, it does not fundindividual projects directly; this is left to the ministries. governmentfunding for it r&d comes primarily from three ministries: the ministry of economy, trade, and industry (meti);106 the ministry of education, culture, sports, science and technology (mext);107 and theministry of public management, home affairs, posts, and telecommunications.108 specifically for it r&d, the government has developed an approach whereby it will promote market competition, facilitate commercialization, and promote international cooperation andcollaboration among industry, academia, and government agencies.109a strong, coordinated position has also been taken in europe.most recently, as part of its fifth framework programme for research,technological development and demonstration activities (fp5) (1999ð2002), the european commission identified seven thematic researchprograms intended to promote industrial competitiveness and qualityof life in europe. one of these, the information society technologies(ist) programme, is designed to support r&d in information andcommunication technologies. the ist programme had a working budget of 3.6 billion euros (1998ð2002) to achieve its goal of supporting itresearch òwithin a single and integrated programme that reflects theconvergence of information processing, communication, and media105see a new system for promoting science and technology in japan, available online at<http://www.nsftokyo.org/rm0115.html>.106formerly known as the ministry of international trade and industry. meti oversees about 15 percent of the r&d budget.107the former ministry of education, science, sports, and culture and the scienceand technology agency have been combined to form mext, which oversees about 63percent of the s&t budget.108formerly two separate ministries.109see òoverview of action planó at <http://www.kantei.go.jp/foreign/it/990519overview.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supporting work in information technology and creative practices233110see òbackgroundó at <http:europa.eu.int/informationsociety/programmes/research/indexen.htm>.111see òobjectivesó at <http://www.cordis.lu/ist/cpt/2002cpa15.htm>.112see òist in fp6, priorityó at <http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fp6/fp6.htm>.113see òist in fp6, priorityó at <http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fp6/fp6.htm>.114see òthe radical manifestoó at <http://www.ecb.net/ecb/internal/1027149839>. the radical consortium includes the smartlab at central saint martins college of art and design in the united kingdom, the ecole sup”rieure de lõimagein angoul’mepoitiers in france, and the society for old and new media in thenetherlands, together with a network of artists, creative professionals, and small andlarge businesses participating in the radical program of events and symposia.technologies.ó110 the european commission manages the programwith the assistance of the ist committee, consisting of representativesof each eu member and associated states. a key feature of the program is its emphasis on supporting crossprogram (cp) themes. theobjective of cp projects is to allow grant seekers the flexibility toaddress crossdisciplinary research and ensure that topics associatedwith more than one area are addressed. for example, one cp project,technology platforms for cultural & arts creative expressions, isconcerned with òdeveloping future generic platforms and tools forimproving creative expression and facilitating access to inspirationalmaterial for artistic and cultural content creation.ó111 to achieve thisgoal, the ist seeks to support medium and longterm exploratorywork with an emphasis on digital expression by providing funding tocollaborative projects.as the european commission continues to develop its next framework (6), the ist programme remains one of the main themes and asignificant part of the anticipated s&t needs. specifically, within thesixth framework, information and communication technologies arebeing looked at to òstimulate the development in europe of technologies and applications at the heart of the creation of the informationsociety in order to increase the competitiveness of european industryand allow european citizens in all eu regions the possibility of benefiting fully from the development of the knowledgebasedeconomy.ó112 to achieve this goal, the research supported by the istprogramme will focus on òthe future generations of technologies inwhich computers and networks will be integrated into the everydayenvironment . . . that places the user, the individual, at the center of thefuture developments for an inclusive knowledgebased society forall.ó113 some concerns have arisen, however, about the adequacy ofsupport to be provided for itcp research and development. theradical consortiumñthree european media arts and culturalorganizations engaged in a 2year projectñissued a manifesto in july2002 urging nonmarket support for transdisciplinary itcp activity.its recommendation that òspecific support mechanisms be implemented to promote crossdisciplinary research platforms whichexplicitly include media arts and cultural organisations and creativepractitionerresearchers,ó in the context of the rest of the document,raises questions about the depth and durability of official support foritcp in europe.114beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity234115the primary source of information for this overview was the daniel langloisfoundation web site at <http://www.fondationlanglois.org>. for 2002, the foundation gave priority to west africa and south america.private philanthropyoutside the united states, private philanthropy seems to play animportant, although relatively less prominent, role as a source offunding for the arts and it. although the committee did not attempt acomprehensive survey of relevant programs, one initiative did cometo its attention that deserves mention. the daniel langlois foundationhas established the program for organizations from emerging regions,115 through which it financially supports projects that allowartists or scholars who are not european or north american to immerse themselves in technological contexts that are nonexistent ordifficult to access in their own country. the aim of the program is topromote the integration of knowledge and practices specific to different cultures, and grants may also support research projects that combine traditional artistic practices with advanced technology or thatexplore methods and processes based on the unique aesthetic principles of certain cultures. each year the foundation selects two different priority regions. examples of projects funded through the program include the following:¥lima, peru: alta technologia andina (ata), media laboratory foreducation, research and creation in video and new media. funding wasused to help integrate electronic elements into local artistic practicesand to set up a shared space for crossdisciplinary education and thecreation and distribution of experimental artwork.¥delhi, india: center for the study of developing societies: interfacezone. funding was used to create a physical meeting place in delhi toact as a dynamic node for fostering the exhibition, online dissemination, and pedagogy of newmedia culture.¥sofia, bulgaria: interspace media arts center. funding was usedto support newmedia projects and to showcase projects generated bythe media lab in an effort to foster sustainable growth in the independent artistic scene in bulgaria and to encourage artistic experimentation with new media.¥riga, latvia: the center for new media culture: acoustic spaceresearch lab and program. funds were used to establish two media labsand to develop the acoustic space research program to investigatethe field of streaming media; to coordinate projects in sound art,audio, radio, and streaming media; and to organize international eventson sound and acoustics.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.237william j. mitchell, chair, is professor of architecture and media arts and sciences and dean of the school of architecture andplanning at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit). he hasdemonstrated an unusual interest in how technology and society interact, teamteaching with software innovator mitch kapor and spearheading the development of a new program within the school ofarchitecture/department of urban studies and planning in that area.he has developed software and engaged in distance learning, and heoversees the mit media laboratory, an alternative (to the mainstream)concentration of information technology expertise at mit. mitchellteaches courses and conducts research in design theory, computerapplications in architecture and urban design, and imaging and imagesynthesis. he consults extensively in the field of computeraideddesign and was the cofounder of a california software company. hehas served recently on the council for the arts and technology atcentral state university (ohio). mitchell came to mit in 1992 fromthe graduate school of design at harvard university. from 1970 to1986, he was on the faculty of the school of architecture and planningat the university of california at los angeles. he has also taught atyale, carnegie mellon, and cambridge universities. mitchell holds ab.a. from melbourne university, a master of environmental designfrom yale university, and an m.a. from cambridge university.among his many writings is city of bits.steven abrams manages the business and application modelinggroup in the software technology department at ibm research. withthat team, he researches and develops tools that help people describe,architect, visualize, validate, and develop enterprise applications moreeasily and naturally than traditional tools. he originally joined ibm in1992 to develop twodimensional and threedimensional geometricprocessing algorithms and system architecture for a rapid prototypingbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity238system in the manufacturing research group, while pursuing hisph.d. he then joined stratasys inc., where he helped to commercializethe rapid prototyping technology developed at ibm. after finishinghis ph.d., he rejoined ibm research, working in the computer musiccenter. as manager of that department, he led a series of projects thatrevolve around music, art, and creativity. one goal of the work of thecomputer music center was to develop a better understanding ofhow people work on creative tasks in general, and how technologycan better support people in these tasks. in his new role, abrams istaking lessons learned from the music domain and applying them tothe creative tasks of designing, architecting, and developing softwaresystems. abrams studied at columbia university, where he earnedb.s. and m.s. degrees in computer science from the school of engineering and applied sciences in 1990 and 1991, respectively, and them. phil. and ph.d. degrees from the graduate school of arts andsciences in 1993 and 1997, respectively. his ph.d. thesis was on sensorplanning for robots in an active environment, focusing on multidimensional modeling and manipulation of computer vision constraintsand the computation of threedimensional swept volumes.michael century is chair of the arts department at rensselaerpolytechnic institute, which he joined in august 2002. long associated with the banff centre for the arts, century founded the centreõsmedia arts division in 1988 and instigated the art and virtual environments project (19911994). from 1993 to 1996, century was aprogram manager at the canadian centre for information technologyinnovation (citi), a federal research laboratory located in montr”al,with responsibility for newmedia arts funding. from 1996 to 1998, heserved as policy advisor to the federal department of canadian heritage. since september 1997, he has been the principal of next centuryconsultants, focusing on new media and cultural policy for variouspublic and university sector clients. from 1997 to 2001 he was aresearch fellow and adjunct professor at the graduate program incommunications, mcgill university, montr”al. for the rockefellerfoundation, he researched and wrote a report in 1999 entitled pathways to innovation in digital culture. he was educated in humanities,piano performance, and musicology at the university of toronto (b.a.),the university of california at berkeley (m.a.), and the university ofiowa (m.a). he has recently completed a historical study of thetransition from analog to digital techniques in animation as a doctoraldissertation in science and technology policy studies at the universityof sussex.james p. crutchfield received his b.a. in physics and mathematics in 1979 and his ph.d. in physics in 1983 from the university ofcalifornia at santa cruz. he is currently a research professor at thesanta fe institute (sfi) after 14 years in the department of physics atthe university of california at berkeley (ucb). he maintains a rebeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a239search group at sfi that includes postdoctoral researchers and ph.d.students. currently he is an adjunct professor of physics in the physics department at the university of new mexico, albuquerque. hewas a visiting research professor at the sloan center for theoreticalneurobiology at the university of california, san francisco, apostdoctoral fellow of the miller institute for basic research in scienceat ucb, a ucb physics department ibm postdoctoral fellow in condensed matter physics, a distinguished visiting research professor ofthe beckman institute at the university of illinois, urbanachampaign,and a bernard osher fellow at the san francisco exploratorium. atthe exploratorium, he helped design and mount the òturbulent landscapesó exhibit series on chaos, complexity, and pattern formation.this exhibit series was funded by the national science foundationand department of energy and was on display from june 1996 throughjanuary 1997. it is currently touring the nationõs science museums.crutchfield has several publications, his most recent being quantumautomata and quantum grammars, theoretical computer science (2000).christopher csikszentmihalyi is a member of the faculty atthe massachusetts institute of technology media laboratory. previously, he was an assistant professor of electronic art at rensselaerpolytechnic institute. he has worked in the intersection of new technologies, media, and the arts for 8 years, lecturing, showing newmedia work, and presenting installations in both europe and northamerica. his most recent piece, natural language processor, wascommissioned by the kiasma museum in helsinki, finland. he hasan m.f.a. from the university of california at san diego (1998) and ab.f.a. from the school of the art institute of chicago.roger dannenberg is a senior research computer scientist onthe faculty of carnegie mellon universityõs school of computer science. dannenbergõs current work includes research on music understanding, the automated accompaniment of live musicians, and thedesign and implementation of highlevel languages and systems forrealtime control and signal processing. his current artistic directionis toward realtime integrated computer music and computer graphicsperformance systems, for which he has developed tools for rapidsoftware prototyping. dannenberg has a broad background in electrical engineering and computer science. his publications include workon computer music, humancomputer interaction, program verification, programming language design, computer architecture, and computer networks. dannenberg is also a musician and composer. heperforms frequently on trumpet in classical, jazz, and contemporaryensembles and writes works for electronic and conventional media.dannenberg earned his ph.d. (1982) and an m.s. in computer sciencefrom carnegie mellon university, as well as an m.s. in computerengineering from case western reserve university. he also has a b.s.degree in electrical engineering from rice university.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity240toni dove is an artist who works primarily with electronic media,including virtual reality and interactive video laser disk installationsthat engage viewers in responsive and immersive narrative environments. her work has been presented in the united states, europe, andcanada, as well as in print and on radio and television. her mostrecently completed project, artificial changelings (19931998), is aninteractive narrative installation that uses video motion sensing totrack the location and movements of a viewer standing in front of alarge screen and translates them into changes in image and sound. ascifi romance about shopping, this interactive movie follows the lifeof arathusa, a kleptomaniac in 19thcentury paris during the rise ofthe department store, who is dreaming about zilith, an encryptionhacker in the future with a mission. it debuted at the rotterdam filmfestival in 1998 and was part of the exhibition òbody m”caniqueó atthe wexner center for the arts and at the computing commonsgallery at arizona state university during the performance studiesinternational conference in march 2000. a new piece currently underdevelopment, spectropia, will be a featurelength interactive movie. itwill be performed by two players on multiple screens for an audiencein a theatrical setting or experienced by two individuals interacting atthe same time as a singlescreen serial installation in three parts over amore extended time period. the second phase of the proposal is toport the project to a componentbased dvd system for a shared interactive narrative experience in the living room. a research fellowshipfrom the institute for studies in the arts at arizona state universitywill provide the programming and engineering resources to developthe technology prototype.n. katherine hayles, professor of english and media arts at theuniversity of california at los angeles, teaches and writes on therelationships of science, technology, and literature in the 20th century.her most recent book, how we became posthuman: virtual bodies incybernetics, literature and informatics (1999), won the rene wellek prizefor the best book in literary theory. her current projects include twonew books, coding the signifier: rethinking semiosis from the telegraph tothe computer and linking bodies: hypertext fiction in print and newmedia. her work has been recognized by a guggenheim fellowship,two fellowships from the national endowment for the humanities, arockefeller residential fellowship in bellagio, and numerous prizesand awards, including the distinguished scholar medal from the university of rochester and the medal of honor from helsinki university.j.c. herz (jc@joysticknation.com) is the principal of joystick nationinc., a research and design practice that applies the principles of complex systems to the design of products, services, and brands. drawingfrom an understanding of ecology, online social dynamics, computergames, and information theory, joystick nationõs focus is multiplayerinteraction design and systems that leverage the intrinsic characterisbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a241tics of networked communication. clients include multinational corporations, hightech startups, and military research organizations.she is the author of two books, surfing on the internet (little brown,1994), an ethnography of cyberspace before the web, and joysticknation: how videogames ate our quarters, won our hearts, and rewiredour minds (little, brown, 1997), a history of video games that tracesthe cultural and technological evolution of the first medium that wasborn digital, and explores how it shaped the minds of a generationweaned on atari. herz published 100 essays on the grammar andsyntax of game design in the new york times between 1998 and 2000.1she has conducted workshops on game design and learning and hasspoken at technology and design conferences, including technologyentertainment design (ted) in monterey, siggraph, e3, gamedevelopersõ conference, and the forum on the future of higher education at the aspen institute. herz sits on the defense advancedresearch projects agencyõs study group on patterns of emergentbehavior in massively multiplayer persistent worlds.natalie jeremijenko is a design engineer and technoartist.recently, she was named one of the top 100 young innovators by themit technology review, her work was featured in the tate gallerycream 2, and a large project was commissioned for the opening of themuseum massmoca (<www.massmoca.org>). her work includesdigital, electromechanical, and interactive systems in addition to biotechnological work and has appeared in the rotterdam film festival(2000), the guggenheim museum, new york (1999), the museummoderne kunst, frankfurt, the lux gallery, london (1999), thewhitney biennial ô97, documenta ô97, and prix ars electronica ô96,presented at the museum of modern art in new york. she was a 1999rockefeller fellow. she did graduate studies at stanford university inmechanical engineering and at the university of melbourne in thehistory and philosophy of science department, and her ph.d. is in thedepartment of information technology and electrical engineering,university of queensland. as the director of the engineering designstudio at yale university she is developing and implementing newcourses in technological innovation. she is also affiliated with themedia research lab/center for advanced technology in the computer science department at new york university, where she didpostdoctoral studies. other research positions include several years atxerox parc in the computer science lab and a position at the advanced computer graphics lab, rmit university. jeremijenko hasalso been on the faculty in digital media and computer art at theschool of visual art, new york, and the san francisco art institute.she is known to work for the bureau of inverse technology.1available online at <www.nytimes.com/library/tech/reference/indexgametheory.html>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity242john maeda, sony career development professor of media artsand sciences, is an associate professor of design and computation atthe massachusetts institute of technology (mit) media laboratory.maeda attended mit, where he was awarded bachelorõs and masterõsdegrees in computer science in 1989. he completed his doctoralstudies in graphic design at the tsukuba university institute of artand design in tsukuba, japan. there, he began to experiment withideas on ways to bond the simplicity of good graphic design togetherwith the complex nature of the computer. those experiments grewinto a series of five books, called reactive books, that are a worldwiderecognized standard for highquality digital media design. his commercial work for shiseido cosmetics, sony, and morisawa was honored in 1996 in the oneman exhibition òjohn maeda: paper andcomputeró at the ginza graphic gallery in tokyo, japan, and at thedai nippon duo dojima gallery in osaka, japan. in 1999, he produced design by numbers (mit press), which outlines the theoreticalunderpinnings of his work as a combination of graphical examplesand codes. his latest book, maeda@media (thames & hudson/rizzoli, 2000), outlines his design and technology philosophy. johnmaedaõs awards include the 1994 japan multimedia grand prix foròthe reactive square,ó the 1996 tokyo type directorõs club goldprize for his series of 10 posters for morisawa, the 1997 tokyo typedirectorõs club interactive prize for ò12 oõclocks,ó the 1999 japanministry of culture interactive prize for òoneline.com,ó the 1999 idmagazine gold prize, the 1999 milia dõor nomination, and the 1999new york art directorõs club new media gold award for òtap,type, write.ó he is also a 1999 recipient of the daimlerchryslerdesign award. he is an honorary member of the tokyo type directorõsclub and is on the national board of directors of the american institute of graphic arts.david salesin is a professor in the department of computerscience and engineering at the university of washington, where hehas been on the faculty since 1992, and a senior researcher at microsoftresearch, where he has also worked since 1999. he received his sc.b.from brown university in 1983 and his ph.d. from stanford university in 1991. from 1983 to 1987, he worked at lucasfilm and pixar,where he contributed computer animation for the academy awardwinning short film tin toy and the featurelength film young sherlockholmes. during his years at stanford, he also worked as an intern atthe dec systems research center and paris research lab. in 19911992, he spent a year on leave as a visiting assistant professor in theprogram of computer graphics at cornell university. he has consulted at sogitec audiovisual, aldus (now part of adobe), xeroxparc, broderbund, and microsoft research. in 1996, he cofoundedtwo startup companies, where he served as chief scientist: inklinationand numinous technologies (acquired by microsoft in 1999). salesinreceived an nsf young investigator award in 1993; an onr younginvestigator award, an alfred p. sloan research fellowship, and anbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a243nsf presidential faculty fellow award in 1995; the university ofwashington award for outstanding faculty achievement in the college of engineering in 1996; the university of washington distinguished teaching award in 1997; the carnegie foundation for theadvancement of teaching and the council for the advancement andsupport of education 19981999 washington professor of the yearaward in 1998; and the acm siggraph computer graphics achievement award in 2000. salesinõs research interests are in computergraphics and include nonphoto realistic rendering, imagebased rendering, color reproduction, digital typography, and compositing.lillian f. schwartz is best known for her pioneering work inthe use of computers for what has since become known as computergenerated art and computeraided art analysis, including graphics,film, video, animation, special effects, virtual reality, and multimedia.her work was recognized for its aesthetic success and was the first inthis medium to be acquired by the museum of modern art. hercontributions in starting a new field of endeavor in the arts, art analysis, and the field of virtual reality have recently earned hercomputerworld smithsonian awards. schwartz began her computerart career as an offshoot of her merger of art and technology, whichculminated in the selection of her kinetic sculpture, proxima centauri,by the museum of modern art for its epochmaking ò1968 machineexhibition.ó she then expanded her work into the computer area,becoming a consultant at the at&t bell laboratories, ibmõs thomas j.watson research laboratory, and lucent technologies, bell labs innovations. on her own, and with leading scientists, engineers, physicists, and psychologists, she developed effective techniques for the useof the computer in film and animation. besides establishing computerart as a viable field of endeavor, schwartz additionally contributed toscientific research areas such as visual and color perception and sound.her own personal efforts have led to the use of the computer in thephilosophy of art, whereby databases containing information as topalettes and structures of paintings, sculptures, and graphics by artistssuch as picasso and matisse are used by schwartz to analyze thechoices of those artists and to investigate the creative process itself.her contributions to electronic art analysis and restoration, specifically in italian renaissance painting and fresco, have been recognized.schwartzõs work has been much in demand internationally both bymuseums and festivals. schwartz has always had close ties to theacademic community, having been a visiting member in the computerscience departments and psychology departments of several universities and colleges. she has also been awarded numerous fellowshipsand honors. there are several books that include her work, the mostrecent being the web (2000), by bridget mintz testa. she has alsowritten, with laurens schwartz, the computer artistõs handbook (1992).for other publications, awards, lectures, collections, exhibitions, films,and videos, see <http://www.lillian.com>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity244phoebe sengers is an assistant professor in the computing andinformation science department and in science and technology studies at cornell university. her work synthesizes cultural studies andcomputer science, by building new technology based on a culturalcritique of existing research practices and assumptions. results of thiswork are evident in three areas: technical advances in artificial intelligence, humancomputer interaction, and media research; culturalanalyses of technical practices; and explorations of strategies for crossdisciplinary synthesis between the two cultures of the humanities/arts and the sciences/technology. sengers graduated in 1998 fromcarnegie mellon university with a selfdefined crossdisciplinary ph.d.in artificial intelligence and cultural theory. in 19981999, she was afulbright guest researcher at the center for art and media technology (zkm) in karlsruhe, germany. from 1999 to 2001, she was aresearch scientist in media arts research studies at the german national research center for information technology (gmd). in 1999,lingua franca named her one of the top 20 researchers most likely tochange the way we think about technology.barbara stafford is the william b. ogden distinguished service professor at the university of chicago in the department of arthistory. her special interests include the relationships of art, science,and medicine in the earlymodern period, and the history of perception,visualization, and the intellectual and cultural development of bodyimagery. she also works on contemporary media and visualizationtechnologies. her focus is on the intersections between the arts andsciences in the earlymodern and modern periods. she writes contemporary art criticism and serves as a visiting critic. professor stafford iscontinuing her work on analogy and neurobiology and presented anexhibition on visionary technologies at the getty museum, los angeles, from november 2000 through february 2001. stafford has writtenseveral books, including visual analogy: consciousness as the art ofconnecting (mit press, 1999), good looking (1996), and essays on thevirtue of images (1996). she has also written several articles, includingòa range of critical perspectives: digital imagery and the practices ofart history,ó arts education policy review (julyaugust 1998), and òtocollage or ecollage?ó harvard design magazine (fall 1998). staffordhas also delivered several lectures, her most recent being òold mind/new mind: the role of images in the consciousness debatesó (wonder conference, santa barbara, march 2000). in may 1998 she spokeon computers and writing at the university of florida, gainesville,and in april 1998 she was a speaker in the jurassic technology seriesat the school of the art institute of chicago. stafford received herph.d. in art history from the university of chicago, as well as an m.a.in art history and a b.a. in philosophy and comparative literaturefrom northwestern university.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a245staffalan s. inouye is the study director for the committee on information technology and creativity, which created beyond productivity:information technology, innovation, and creativity, and is a senior program officer at the computer science and telecommunications board(cstb). inouye has a wide range of interests at the intersection of thesocial sciences (especially sociology, economics, political science, andorganization theory) and information technology. his current projectsinclude congressionally mandated studies on internet navigation andthe domain name system and improving cybersecurity research inthe united states. his recently completed cstb studies include lc21:a digital strategy for the library of congress (2001), the digital dilemma:intellectual property in the information age (2000), and trust in cyberspace(1999). prior to joining cstb, inouye completed a ph.d. from theschool of information management and systems at the university ofcalifornia at berkeley. in a previous life, inouye worked in siliconvalley, as a programmer (atari corporation), statistician and programmer/analyst (verbatim corporation), and manager of information systems (amdahl corporation). inouye also completed otherdegreesñin information systems (m.s.), systems management (m.s.),business administration/finance (m.b.a.), liberal studies (b.s.), andmathematics (b.a.).marjory s. blumenthal is the executive director of the computer science and telecommunications boardña 20member board ofleaders from industry and academiañand its many expert projectcommittees and staff. she designs, develops, directs, and overseescollaborative study projects, workshops, and symposia on technical,strategic, and policy issues in computing and telecommunications.these activities address trends in the relevant science and technology,their uses, and economic and social impacts, providing independentand authoritative analysis and/or a neutral meeting ground for seniorpeople in government, industry, and academia. marjory is the principal author and/or substantive editor of numerous reports and articles.the majority of her work has been crossdisciplinary. before joiningcstb, marjory was a manager of competitive analysis and planningfor ge information services. there she directed an analytical teamsupporting business development, product marketing, and field salesand developed business alliances for domestic and international network services. previously, she was a project director at the former u.s.congress office of technology assessment, evaluating computer andcommunications technology trends and their social and economicimpacts. there, among other things, she produced an internationallyacclaimed study of computers in manufacturing and their implications for industries and employment. she is a member of the santa feinstitute science board, the advisory board of the pew internet &american life project, the tprc board of directors, the editorialboard of acm transactions on internet technology, and the acm, aea,beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity246and ieee. in 1998 marjory was a visiting scientist at the massachusetts institute of technology, laboratory for computer science. atmit she developed and taught a course on public policy for computerscience graduate students and pursued personal research interests.marjory did her undergraduate work at brown university and hergraduate work (as an nsf graduate fellow) at harvard university.margaret marsh huynh, senior project assistant, joined thecomputer science and telecommunications board in january 1999and has worked on several projects. currently, she is working on theprojects on internet navigation and the domain name system and thefuture of supercomputing. ms. huynh also assists with cstb boardmeetings and has worked on such recent projects as òexploring information technology issues for the behavioral and social sciences,ó aswell as those leading to the reports it roadmap to a geospatial future(2003), building a workforce for the information economy (2001), and thedigital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age (2000).ms.huynh assists on other projects as needed. prior to coming to thenational academies, ms. huynh worked as a meeting assistant atmanagement for meetings for 4 months and as a meeting assistant atthe american society for civil engineers from september 1996 toapril 1998. ms. huynh has a b.a. (1990) in liberal studies, with minorsin sociology and psychology, from salisbury state university, salisbury,maryland.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.247august 1415, 2000national research councilwashington, d.c.steve dietz, walker art centerjon ippolito, guggenheim museumjoan shigekawa, rockefeller foundationbruce sterling, writernovember 89, 2000american instituteof graphic artsnew york cityzoe beloff, artistkathy brew, thundergulchtimothy druckrey, curator, critic, and writerrobert gehorsam, cbs/viacomrichard gref”, american institute of graphic artsmark hansen, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesperry hoberman, artistjaron lanier, advanced network & services inc.daniel lee, bell labspaul miller (aka dj spooky), music and art management inc.warren neidich, artistdaniel oppenheim, ibm t.j. watson research centeranne pasternak, creative timebeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity248marah rosenberg, avaya labsjakub segen, bell laboratories, lucent technologiesmark tribe, rhizome.orgnovember 8, 2000new york universitycenter for advancedtechnologynew york citysite visitjohn johnson, eyebeam ateliercaroline jones, boston universityneil sieling, media arts curator and television producernoah wardripfruin, new york universityjanuary 1113, 2001stanford universitypalo alto, californiachris chafe, stanford universityrichard gold,1 xerox parcken goldberg, university of california at berkeleykris halvorsen, hewlett packard laboratoriesbarbara hayesroth, stanford universitytim lenoir, stanford university and extempogeorge lewis, university of california at san diegomichael mateas, georgia institute of technologyrobert morris, ibm almaden research centerstuart parkin, ibm almaden research centerarati prabhakar, u.s. venture partnersrick prelinger, prelinger archives & internet moving images archivehal varian, university of california at berkeleygio wiederhold, stanford university1rich gold (richard goldstein) of menlo park died in his sleep on january 9, 2003.born on june 24, 1950, he received a b.a. from sunyalbany and an m.f.a. from millscollege.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b249january 12, 2001pixar animation studiosemeryville, californiasite visitgreg brandeau, pixar animation studiossharon calahan, pixar animation studiosed catmull, pixar animation studiosrikki clelandhura, pixar animation studiostony derose, pixar animation studiosoren jacob, pixar animation studiosrandy nelson, pixar animation studiosbill reeves, pixar animation studiostasha wedeen, pixar animation studiosmay 3031, 2001massachusetts institute oftechnologymedia laboratorycambridge, massachusettsbruce blumberg, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn guttag, massachusetts institute of technologyhiroshi ishii, massachusetts institute of technologyjohn maeda, massachusetts institute of technologyrehmi post, massachusetts institute of technologyjuly 2930, 2002daniel langlois foundationthe centre for research anddocumentationmontreal, quebec, canadasite visitalain depocas, daniel langlois foundationbeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.251the computer science andtelecommunications boardas a part of the national research council, the computer science and telecommunicationsboard (cstb) was established in 1986 to provide independent advice to the federal governmenton technical and public policy issues relating to computing and communications. composed ofleaders from industry and academia, cstb conducts studies of critical national issues andmakes recommendations to government, industry, and academia. cstb also provides aneutral meeting ground for consideration of complex issues where resolution and action maybe premature. it convenes discussions that bring together principals from the public andprivate sectors, assuring consideration of key perspectives. the majority of cstbõs work isrequested by federal agencies and congress, consistent with its national academies context.a pioneer in framing and analyzing internet policy issues, cstb is unique in its comprehensive scope and effective, crossdisciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, andpolicy issues. beginning with early work in computer and communications security, cyberassurance and information systems trustworthiness have been a crosscutting theme in cstbõswork. cstb has produced several reports known as classics in the field, and it continues toaddress these topics as they grow in importance.to do its work, cstb draws on some of the best minds in the country and from around theworld, inviting experts to participate in its projects as a public service. studies are conductedby balanced committees without direct financial interests in the topics they are addressing.those committees meet, confer electronically, and build analyses through their deliberations.additional expertise is tapped in a rigorous process of review and critique, further enhancingthe quality of cstb reports. by engaging groups of principals, cstb gets the facts and insightscritical to assessing key issues.the mission of cstb is to¥respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations, and private industryfor advice on computer and telecommunications issues and from the government for advice oncomputer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization and modernization;¥monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science and telecommunications,with attention to issues of human resources, information infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, technology, and telecommunications as critical resources; and¥foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing and telecommunicationstechnologies and other fields, at large and within the national academies.cstb projects address a diverse range of topics affected by the evolution of informationtechnology. a sample of cstbõs completed reports includes cybersecurity today and tomorrow:pay now or pay later; youth, pornography, and the internet; broadband: bringing home the bits; thedigital dilemma: intellectual property in the information age; idsñnot that easy: questions aboutnationwide identity systems; the internet under crisis conditions: learning from september 11; andit roadmap to a geospatial future. for further information about cstb reports and activeprojects, see <http://www.cstb.org>.beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativitycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.