detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10685critical information infrastructure protection and the law:an overview of key issues102 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309088787 | doi 10.17226/10685stewart d. personick and cynthia a. patterson, editors; committee on criticalinformation infrastructure protection and the law; computer science andtelecommunications board; division on engineering and physical sciences;national research council; national academy of engineeringcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on critical information infrastructure protection and the lawcomputer science and telecommunications boardnational academy of engineering stewart d. personick and cynthia a. patterson, editorsthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.educriticalinformationinfrastructureprotection and thelawan overview of key issuescritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsiblefor the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard forappropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national academy of engineering.any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsor.international standard book number 030908878x (book)international standard book number 0309506379 (pdf)copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifthstreet, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, d.c. 20055, (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 in the washington metropolitan area. internet, http://www.nap.educopyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americacritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of itsmembers, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility foradvising the federal government. the national academy of engineering alsosponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourageseducation and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr.harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academys purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair andvice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on critical information infrastructureprotection and the lawstewart d. personick, drexel university, chairmichael collins, lockheed martinwilliam j. cook, freeborn & petersdeborah hurley, harvard universitydaniel schutzer, emerging technologies, citigroupw. david sincoskie, telcordia technologiesrichard r. verma, council on foreign relationsmarc j. zwillinger, sonnenschein nath & rosenthalstaffcynthia a. patterson, study director and program officermarjory s. blumenthal, directord.c. drake, senior project assistantivcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chaireric benhamou, 3com corporationdavid borth, motorola labsjohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstthomas e. darcie, university of victoriajoseph farrell, university of california at berkeleyjoan feigenbaum, yale universitywendy kellogg, ibm thomas j. watson research centerbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationdavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universityhector garcia molina, stanford universitydavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt, chicagokent college of lawdaniel pike, gci cable and entertainmenteric schmidt, google, inc.fred schneider, cornell universityburton smith, cray inc.lee sproull, new york universitywilliam stead, vanderbilt universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitymarjory s. blumenthal, executive directorkristen batch, research associatejennifer bishop, senior project assistantjanet briscoe, administrative officerdavid drake, senior project assistantjon eisenberg, senior program officerrenee hawkins, financial associatephil hilliard, research associatemargaret marsh huynh, senior project assistantalan s. inouye, senior program officerherbert s. lin, senior scientistlynette i. millett, program officerdavid padgham, research associatecynthia a. patterson, program officerjanice sabuda, senior project assistantcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vibrandye williams, staff assistantsteven woo, dissemination officerfor more information on cstb, see its web site at <http://www.cstb.org>; write to cstb, national research council, 500 fifthstreet, n.w., washington, dc 20418; call at (202) 3342605; or email thecstb at cstb@nas.edu.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academy of engineeringprogram committeepeter staudhammer, trw inc., chairrodica a. baranescu, international truck & engine corporationcorale l. brierley, brierley consultancy llcpallab k. chatterjee, i2 technologieswoodie c. flowers, massachusetts institute of technologygordon e. forward, txirenato fuchs, transkaryotic therapies, inc.martin e. glicksman, rensselaer polytechnic institutethomas e. graedel, yale universitybruce hajek, university of illinoisgeorge m. hornberger, university of virginiakenneth h. keller, university of minnesotamargaret a. lemone, national center for atmospheric researchrichard j. lipton, georgia institute of technologyeugene meieran, intel corporationfrederick g. pohland, university of pittsburghc. paul robinson, sandia national laboratoriesfrieder seible, university of california, san diegolaurence c. seifert, at&t corporationchris g. whipple, environ, inc.ex officio membersgeorge m.c. fisher, eastman kodak company, nae chairsheila widnall, massachusetts institute of technology, nae vicepresidentwm. a. wulf, national academy of engineering, presidentstaffproctor reid, national academy of engineering, associate director,program officejack fritz, national academy of engineering, senior program officer,program officeviicritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacecritical infrastructure protection emerged as a national concern in thelate 1990s. the establishment in 1996 of the presidents commission oncritical infrastructure protection (pccip), its 1997 report critical foundations: protecting americaõs infrastructures, and the issuance in 1998 of presidential decision directive 63 and the establishment of the critical infrastructure assurance office (ciao) promoted awareness of criticalinfrastructure issues. among the many forms of critical infrastructuresuch as transportation, energy, and waterthe information infrastructure, which combines computing and communications systems, standsout as important in its own right and as a crosscutting factor in all otherinfrastructures. like power, information infrastructure is a critical infrastructure that all other critical infrastructures depend upon. the bushadministrations review of critical infrastructure protection activities, thetragic events of september 11, and the new national focus on homelandsecurity in general (and cyberterrorism in particular) signal a need forbroader reflection, as well as action, on these issues. progress, however,will require the development of a clear legal framework, in addition tofocusing on the technology and current business practices in the publicand private sectors.the national academy of engineering asked the computer scienceand telecommunications board to organize a symposium to illuminatethe range of legal issues and the range of perspectives on issues associated with protection of the critical information infrastructure. cstb convened the committee on critical information infrastructure protectionixcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefaceand the law (see appendix a for committee biographies) to undertakethe project, asking it to focus on information sharing and liability. whileprevious cstb efforts addressed technical, procedural, and policy aspects of [information] security and crisis management, this project emphasizes the role of the law as a barrier to or a facilitator of progress.the committee met in june 2001 to plan a 2day symposium, whichwas held october 2223, 2001 (the agenda is listed in appendix b). thecommittee met again in december 2001 to plan the structure and formatof this summary report, which evolved through the end of 2002.the attacks of september 11, 2001, had a major impact on this project.the tragic events forced some expected participants to cancel their travel,while other initially reluctant parties became willing to participate. thesubject matter of the symposium became even more relevant to participants who were not speakers, and the tone and subject matter of presentations and discussions were tailored to and colored by the attacks. as aresult, the symposium was larger than anticipated. the discussions wereless abstract or hypothetical and more rooted in various realities. concerns that were expressed at the symposium about issues such as privacyrights and the legal and business risks of sharing information appeared tosome committee members to be surprisingly muted. law enforcementrepresentatives at the symposium expressed a surprising willingness toshare information in ways that might impair their ability to prosecutesuspected criminals and terrorists, in exchange for improving the abilityof the broader community to prevent attacks. the committee does notknow if this is a shortlived, politically correct retrenchment or a permanent shift to a new balance of the tradeoffs associated with these complexissues.meanwhile, responses to september 11 continued to unfold throughoutthe period in which this report was drafted, greatly complicating the taskof describing contemporary conditions and prospects. the dynamism ofthe situation would make any report with concrete recommendationsobsolete before it was published. against this backdrop, the committeechose to highlight enduring observations, focusing on two issues thatcould potentially facilitate critical information infrastructure protectioneffortsinformation sharing and the liability of unsecured systems andnetworks. the committee sought to summarize the debate surroundinguse of the freedom of information act (foia), antitrust, and liability lawsthat lie at the heart of critical information infrastructure protection, attempting to maintain that focus in the face of substantial blurring between thoseissues and the larger set of homeland security issues facing the country.the content of this report reflects the issues identified at the symposiumand during subsequent deliberations by the committee. the value of thecritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexireport lies in its integration of a very diverse set of perspectives to providea roadmap and stimulus for future more focused and indepth inquiries.the committee is particularly grateful to wm. a. wulf, whose commitment to addressing the problems posed by critical infrastructure protection (cip) and whose recognition that the law presents challenges andopportunities in that arena helped to shape this project. his engagementwith members of the national academy of engineering (nae), amongthem john harris, and with its program committee provided most of theprojects funding.the committee thanks the symposium participants (see appendix bfor a list of speakers) as well as the many people who responded to itsrequests for briefings and discussions. lee zeichner and timothy nagleprovided informed discussion on how to frame the project. the committee appreciates the thoughtful comments received from the reviewers ofthis report. these comments were instrumental in helping the committeeto sharpen and improve the report.the chairman and the entire committee wish to express their deepappreciation for the herculean efforts of the study director, cynthiapatterson, and the project assistant, david drake, who performed thelions share of the work required to organize and run the symposium, tocreate this report, and to shepherd it through the necessary review andrevision processes. we would also like to express our deep appreciationfor the guidance, leadership, encouragement, and advice provided to usby marjory blumenthal, the director of the computer science and telecommunications board of the nrc.stewart d. personick, chaircommittee on critical informationinfrastructure protection and the lawcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment ofreviewersthis report was reviewed by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approvedby the national research councils (nrcs) report review committee.the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and criticalcomments that will assist the authors and the nrc in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness tothe study charge. the contents of the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in thereview of this report:kent alexander, emory university;david a. balto, white & case llp;stanley m. besen, charles river associates;nicholas m. donofrio, ibm corporation;marc d. goodman, decision strategies;john c. klensin, at&t labs;david j. loundy, depaul university college of commerce;alan b. morrison, stanford law school;robert murphy, congressional budget office;debra pearlstein, weil, gotshal & manges llp;xiiicritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.abraham d. sofaer, stanford university; andsuzanne spaulding, american bar associations standing committeeon law and national security.although the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the reportbefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by chrissprigman of king & spalding llp. appointed by the national researchcouncil, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutionalprocedures and that all review comments were carefully considered.responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with theauthoring committee and the institution.xivacknowledgment of reviewerscritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary11introduction and context8rise of cip as a policy issue, 9events of september 11, 2001, 14this report, 152increasing the flow of information17information sharing framework, 20(perceived) barriers to information sharing, 24freedom of information act, 25antitrust, 30concluding observations, 333liability for unsecured systems and networks35criminal law, 35domestic jurisdiction, 36international jurisdiction, 39civil liability, 40contract law, 44tort law, 45standards and best practices, 50regulation, 56xvcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvicontents4moving forward61motivating the private sector, 62market failure?, 62insurance: motivator for good behavior, 65r&d to alter the costs of security, 66awareness, 67security and privacy tensions, 69a trust network, 72appendixesa committee member and staff biographies77b symposium agenda83critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summaryall critical infrastructures (transportation, finance, electric power,water, etc.) are increasingly dependent on the evolving information infrastructureñthe public telephone network, the internet, and terrestrial andsatellite wireless networksñfor a variety of information management,communications, and control functions. september 11 significantlyincreased the nationõs awareness of the interdependencies of critical infrastructures, and it heightened the governmentõs sense of urgency regarding the need for increased private sector and public sector informationsharing with respect to cyber and physical threats. the committee oncritical information infrastructure protection and the law held a symposium october 2223, 2001, to outline issues related to the protection of thecritical information infrastructure. this symposium, which had beenscheduled well in advance of september 11, was profoundly influencedby those tragic events. twentyfour presentations, over 2 days, illustrated the wide range of perspectives and concerns that complicate policymaking and the development of an adequate legal regime when it comesto critical information infrastructure protection (ciip). subsequent crafting of new law and administrative activity under the rubric of homelandsecurity have kept the legal framework for ciip a moving target. thisreport examines the range of legal issues associated with informationinfrastructure protection, particularly those that affect the willingness ofprivate sector companies and organizations to cooperate with the government to prevent, detect, and mitigate cyberattacks. it considers separatelydifferent aspects of information sharing and liabilityñrecognizing thatcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2critical information infrastructure protection and the lawthere is a tension between these approaches that strategies for criticalinformation infrastructure protection must ultimately resolve.information sharingalthough the sharing of information has been the centerpiece of boththe governmentõs and the private sectorõs efforts over the past severalyears to protect critical information systems, most information sharingstill occurs through informal channels. fundamental questions persistabout who should share what information, when, how, why, and withwhom. one reason for the lack of progress, according to private industryrepresentatives, has been the lack of clarity regarding the benefits andassociated liabilities in sharing information within and between industrysectors and with the government. for example, information sharing couldlead to allegations of price fixing, restraint of trade, or systematic discrimination against certain customers; it could raise privacy concerns,expose proprietary corporate secrets, or reveal weaknesses and vulnerabilities that erode consumer confidence and invite hackers. overcomingthese concerns requires an informed position on the existing legal frameworkñan imperfect understanding of the law is both excuse and explanation for some observed limits to sharing.freedom of information actmany private sector companies believe that proprietary ciiprelatedinformation shared with federal government entities may be disclosed tothird parties under the freedom of information act (foia). therefore,private sector companies have proposed amending foia to create a newexemption that would protect critical infrastructure information from disclosure. opponents of such an exemption argue that the case law andagency interpretations demonstrate that the informationñthat is, information that is a trade secret or information that is commercial or financial,obtained from a person, and privileged or confidentialñalready is protectedunder the existing foia exemption 4. changing the foia, opponentsargue, could upset the existing foia framework and open up the possibility for new litigation. although the homeland security act of 2002 didfeature such an exemption, the fundamental issues remain.a key problem is whether the federal government has the processesin place to protect information that should be protected under existingfoia rules from inappropriate or accidental disclosure. the governmentmay need to strengthen its formal controls on disclosure of informationunder foia, disclose to the private sector what those controls entail, andcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3strengthen its programs to better educate federal agency employees (whorespond to the foia requests) about the types of information that cannotbe released under existing law.antitrust lawan additional concern of many in the private sector is that sharingciiprelated data with competitors could be viewed as a violation of theprovisions of the sherman antitrust act. as a result, many in the privatesector have called for a new antitrust exemption. opponents argue that anew exemption is not needed to protect firms from allegations of anticompetitive behavior. they suggest that firms can obtain informal legaladvice from antitrust experts or formal advice from the department ofjusticeñin the form of a business review letterñon whether its proposedfuture conduct would be viewed as a violation of the antitrust laws. inaddition, an exemption would create a new body of law that would upset30 years of case history and lead to years of new litigation. hence, theamerican bar association opposes new antitrust exemptions. like foia,the existing antitrust law does not prevent the private sector from sharingcritical infrastructure information. however, because official reviews ofproposed information sharing activities require time and money to obtain,the use of such reviews may be a barrier to the types of ad hoc informationsharing that are most likely to uncover wellplanned attacks on the infrastructure. also, as with foia, there are persistent perception problemsrelated to what may be deemed permissible and what may be deemedillegal. liabilityexperts observe that criminal law alone is not sufficient to deterhackers and prevent cybercrime; civil liability is necessary to ensure properdisincentives are in place to deter wouldbe cybercriminals. ideally, civilliability allows a victim to recover losses from third parties if such partieswere negligent or engaged in intentional misconduct and if such negligence or misconduct was the proximate cause of the loss. because contract law does not provide an adequate remedy for third parties that haveno privity of contract, many experts have suggested the use of tort law asa model for computerrelated cases. proponents of tort liability argue thatcompanies that control the computer networks are in the best position toimplement appropriate security measures. if a company knows or hasreason to know that its computer network is being used to cause harm,and it has the capacity to stop such harm from occurring, the companycould be subject to liability if it does not take some corrective action. thecritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4critical information infrastructure protection and the lawapplicability of tort law and the potential for civil lawsuits and monetarydamages could encourage companies to invest in computer security measures. debate continues in the private sector on whether there is a legalduty on the part of the company to secure its critical information infrastructure.standards, best practices, and auditsestablishment of operational best practices for network administratorsand users, combined with ongoing training and enforcement of the practices through random tests, is one possible way of increasing computersecurity. an obvious option is for firms to begin immediately to sharebest practices, including attack scenarios and practices to protect againstthese attacks. best practices should focus on policies that improve computer network security rather than on procedures and rituals, which onlycreate a perception of protection. in addition to playing a role in tortliability determinations, best practices can also serve as a benchmarkagainst which firms can be audited. routine audits based on wellacceptedprinciples of testing and analysis, principles that need to be developed forcomputer security, can help firms avoid litigation or reduce liability.as a force motivating industry to adopt best practices, tort law can bea significant complement to standardsetting practices, since compliancewith industrywide standards is often an acceptable demonstration ofdue care. if tort liability were more directly applicable in computersecurity cases, implementing security standards would be a way for acompany to minimize its liability. adopting a nationally recognized computer security standard of care is not, however, a simple process, owingto the evolving nature of security vulnerabilities and the diverse playersthat have an internet presence. in addition, the meaning of òreasonablecareó is never static, and firms must adapt the standard as technologychanges.the participantsbecause legal liability often depends on which actors are best positioned to prevent the harmful activities (in this case, computer attacks),some experts suggest that the diverse entities in the internet communityshould not all be held to the same standard of care with respect to computer network security. given that certain internet service providers(isps) may know (or should know) about risks and have the capability tomitigate attacks, many experts suggest that isps should face significantliability if their systems are insecure. it is possible to reduce (although notcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5eliminate) the frequency and severity of errors through the use of toolsand testing methods prior to the release of a product. if the use of suchtools and testing methods were part of industryaccepted best practices, itwould be possible for vendors who do not perform such tests to facegreater exposure under theories of negligence. allowing vendors to beheld liable for negligence may change the costbenefit calculation, encouraging the development and delivery of more secure computer products.home users represent an important source of potential security hazards (as well as potential victims) since they often do not have the knowledge or expertise needed to secure their computers to prevent hackersfrom using them in a denialofservice attack. efforts to educate homeusers about the use of firewalls or antivirus software undoubtedly willhelp, but thought should be given to assigning liability to those otherentities who are best positioned to mitigate the risks related to the systemsand services used in the home.regulationthe patchwork of regulations relevant to ciip complicates efforts todevelop a regulatory framework for critical infrastructure protection. thegrammleachbliley act (glb), which resulted in regulations promulgated by several government agencies (including the banking agencies,the securities and exchange commission, and the federal trade commission), outlines the responsibilities of financial institutions with regardto protecting consumer privacy. the glbimplementing regulations helpset the stage for best practices and may become a de facto standard inassessing negligence liability. regulatory compliance and the desire toavoid new regulations serve both to require and to motivate all parties topay more serious attention to securing our critical infrastructure againstcybercrime. the mere threat of such regulation could motivate vendorsand corporations to selfregulate, providing their own standards and auditpolicies. the heightened interest in private sector information sharingand analysis centers (isacs) in the last few years is a sign of movementtoward selfregulation. the government could periodically review suchselfregulation efforts and provide reports showing deficiencies thatwould need to be corrected by a given deadline if regulation is to beavoided. the federal trade commission, for example, has done this forweb site privacy policies. another approach to encouraging companiesto protect the critical infrastructures that they own and operate is to adoptrequirements for disclosing the steps that have been taken to evaluaterisks and mitigate them, similar to the requirements of the securities andexchange commission for y2k.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6critical information infrastructure protection and the lawthe big picturethe legal framework for critical information infrastructure protectionmust be considered in the larger context of the business, social, and technical environment. the increasing dependence on common technologyand interconnected systems suggests that many of the technical vulnerabilities can be overcome only through collective, concerted action. externalities are common in computer network security; the incentive that onenetwork owner has to invest in security measures is reduced if the ownerbelieves that other connected networks are insecure. insurance can play arole in motivating the private sector by transferring the risk of computersecurity losses from a company to the insurance carrier. the few cyberinsurance policies in effect today require companies to employ appropriate security measures. most policies also require firms to undergo aninitial independent security evaluation of network defenses and ongoingintrusiondetection tests during the life of the policy.prior to september 11 the security of information systems and theprotection of personal data and privacy were considered to be mutuallyreinforcing and compatible goals. many experts suggest that the crisismanagement mentality in the aftermath of september 11 has pushed asideissues of privacy and civil liberties. technical mechanisms proposed toaid government efforts in the war on terrorism appear, to some, to sacrifice privacy and civil liberties for only the illusion of an increased abilityto protect the nationõs infrastructures. mechanisms should be implemented to ensure that surveillance conducted to combat terrorists andhackers does not result in a loss of privacy for innocent citizens. symposium participants noted that the seriousness and urgency of protectingthe nationõs infrastructures make it even more important to protect wellestablished constitutional and statutory principles of privacy and civilliberties in crafting a solution.trust among those sharing information is one of the most importantprerequisites for successfully protecting the nationõs critical informationinfrastructures. trust is necessary to achieve an atmosphere of opennessand cooperation. although trust has been a central component of thegovernmentõs ciip efforts over the past several years, the government hasfailed to build sufficient trust between the public sector and the privatesector for four reasons. first, the governmentõs message to the privatesector has vacillatedñat times it stresses national security, at other times,economic vitalityñraising concerns about whether the priority of the daywill trump prior promises. second, the government has so many focalpoints for ciip that firms often do not know which agency to contact orwhat authority and established processes underpin the promises of thatagency to protect information from disclosure. third, the governmenthas been slow to reciprocate in sharing information with the private sector.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7finally, in the aftermath of september 11, the government took actionsthat produce a perception (right or wrong) that it may unilaterally suspend prior agreements with respect to the nondisclosure of information ifit deems that circumstances warrant. the government should clearly andconsistently explain to the private sector what its objectives are for ciip,how it has organized itself to accomplish those objectives, what the information flows are, what kind of information should be shared and in whatform, what the government is willing to share with the private sector, andwhy all of this is important (i.e., what the threat is, and how the proposedactions will address that threat). this message should clearly and consistently articulate what protections already exist for information sharingand what safe harbors exist (or will be established) to encourage information sharing in light of foia and antitrust concerns in the private sector.consolidation of critical infrastructure protection functions in the newdepartment of homeland security will create a focal point; the tasks ofclarifying the policies and communicating with the public remain. aclear and consistent message from the government to the private sectorwill go a long way toward building the trust that is necessary to protectthe nationõs critical information infrastructures.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.81introduction and contextthe information infrastructure is the combination of computer andcommunications systems that serve as the underlying infrastructure fororganizations, industries, and the economy.1 all critical infrastructures(e.g., transportation and electric power) are increasingly dependent ontelecommunicationsñthe public telephone network, the internet, and terrestrial and satellite wireless networksñand associated computing assetsfor a variety of information management, communications, and controlfunctions.2 private industry and other organizations, in turn, dependdirectly on their own information infrastructures and on various criticalinfrastructures. this dependence has a national security component, sinceinformation infrastructure undergirds and enables both economic vitalityand military and civilian government operations. in particular, the government and military information infrastructures depend on commercialtelecommunications providers for everything from logistics and transport to personnel and travel functions.3 the importance of the telephonesystem during crises was recognized 40 years ago, when presidentkennedy established the national communications system (ncs) to pro1computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999.trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c.2an information infrastructure includes not only the networks but also the networkmanagement systems, such as the domain name system.3based on a presentation by colonel timothy gibson, u.s. army, at the symposium onoctober 22, 2001.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and context9vide better communications support to critical government functions during emergencies.4 that provided an important basis for an expanding setof activities associated with national security and emergency preparedness (ns/ep) communications. the rise of the internet has introducednew elementsñsystems, applications, and playersñinto the conceptualization of critical information infrastructure and policy options for itsprotection.issues in the protection of critical information infrastructure were thefocus of an october 2001 symposium and subsequent discussions by thecommittee on critical information infrastructure protection and the law,which form the basis of this report. twentyfour speakers presentedtopics ranging from information sharing to legal issues (see appendix bfor the agenda and speakers). the quotations (and attributed ideas) fromparticipants in the symposium that are included in this report illustratethe wide range of perspectives and concerns that complicate policy making when it comes to critical information infrastructure protection (ciip).rise of cip as a policy issuethe presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection(pccip) was created in 1996 to assess the physical and cyberthreats to thenationõs critical infrastructures and to develop a strategy to protect them.5certain infrastructuresñtelecommunications, electric power, gas and oilstorage and transportation, banking and finance, transportation, watersupply, emergency services, and government servicesñwere deemed socritical that their òincapacity or destruction would have a debilitatingimpact on the defense and economic securityó6 of the united states. box1.1 provides an overview of the key critical infrastructure protection (cip)activities over the past several years. early efforts were dominated by afocus on national security, emergency preparedness, and law enforcement, although from the beginning outreach to industry was attempted.because of the private ownership of critical infrastructures and the prominence of private parties in the use of these infrastructures, forming publicprivate partnerships was thought to be one of the keys to cip progress.the leadership role was assigned to the critical infrastructure assuranceoffice (ciao), although its placement within the department of commerce (with limited resources and authority) resulted in programs that4information about the presidential memorandum signed on august 21, 1963, to establishthe ncs is available online at <http://www.ncs.gov/ncs/html/ncshistorybkgrd.html>.5presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection. 1997. critical foundations.washington, d.c.6ibid., p. 19.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10critical information infrastructure protection and the lawbox 1.1brief history of the nationõscritical infrastructure protection activitiesprepccipafter communications problems between critical entities threatened to heightenthe cuban missile crisis, president kennedy appointed a commission to investigate underlying problems and recommend a solution. the commission recommended a unified emergency communications capability, and president kennedyformally established the national communications system (ncs) by a presidentialmemorandum on august 21, 1963. ncs is an interagency organization whosemission is to ensure reliability and availability of national security and emergencypreparedness communications. president reagan and president bush broadenedthe ncsõs national security and emergency preparedness (ns/ep) capabilitieswith executive order 12472 in 1984 and executive order 13231 in 2001.1after recognizing that the private sector needed to be included in infrastructure protection efforts, president reagan created the national security telecommunications advisory committee (nstac)2 by executive order 12382 inseptember 1982. composed of up to 30 industry chief executives, nstac provides industrybased expertise to the president on issues related to implementingns/ep communications policy.the national coordinating center (ncc) was established in 1984 as a resultof a nstac recommendation to develop a joint governmentindustry nationalinformationsharing mechanism for ns/ep communications. in january 2000,nstac expanded nccõs responsibilities to include functioning as the informationsharing and analysis center (isac) for the telecommunications sector.following the morris internet worm incident in november 1988, the federallyfunded cert coordination center (cert/cc)3 was established at the softwareengineering institute (sei) at carnegie mellon university to coordinate communication among experts during security emergencies and to help prevent futureincidents. cert/ccõs role has expanded to include handling computer securityincidents and vulnerabilities, publishing security alerts, researching longtermchanges in networked systems, and developing and publishing security practicesto ensure the survivability of networked systems. other focused certs havebeen established too.presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protectionin the wake of the oklahoma city bombing in 1995, president clinton established the presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection (pccip)4 injuly 1996 by presidential executive order 13010. pccip was the first comprehensive effort to address the vulnerabilities of national critical infrastructures.divided into five sectors (information and communications; physical distribution;energy, banking and finance; and vital human services) to evaluate risks,threats, and vulnerabilities, the pccip formulated a national strategy for protectingcritical infrastructures from physical and cyber threats. in its 1997 report criticalfoundations: protecting americaõs infrastructures, pccip recommended severalcomponents to protect critical infrastructures: a toplevel policymaking office inthe white house, councils composed of industry executives and governmentleaders at all levels, education and awareness programs and federal research andcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and context11development programs, industry information clearinghouses, publicprivate partnerships, a realtime attack warning capability, and a streamlining of the legaltenets that address infrastructure issues, updated to keep pace with technologyadvances. after submitting its report, the pccip was dissolved.presidential decision directive 63presidential decision directive 63 (pdd63),5 issued by president clinton onmay 22, 1998, created a national structure to accomplish the goals laid out in thepccipõs report. pdd63 created the office of national coordinator at the nationalsecurity council to serve as the toplevel office in the white house to guide policyfor federal agencies and advise nongovernmental entities on protective measuresfor the nationõs information infrastructure. the critical infrastructure assuranceoffice (ciao)6 was formed at the department of commerce to provide support tothe national coordinatorõs work with government agencies and the private sector indeveloping a national plan. ciao serves a number of functions, including coordinating a national education and awareness program, administering legislative andpublic affairs, and assisting in developing longterm research. project matrix, aciao program, was designed to identify and characterize the assets and associatedinfrastructure dependencies and interdependencies among and between federalagencies and the private sector.to facilitate realtime warnings, pdd63 established the national infrastructure protection center (nipc), an interagency unit at the fbi, to serve as the u.s.governmentõs focal point for threat assessment, warning, investigation, and responsefor threats or attacks against critical infrastructures. nipc created the infragardinitiative to facilitate the sharing of information on cyber intrusions, exploited vulnerabilities, and infrastructure threats with private sector infrastructure owners andoperators.7 members have access to an alert network and a secure web site tovoluntarily report intrusions, disruptions, and vulnerabilities of information systems.the federal computer incident response center (fedcirc),8 the federalcivilian agenciesõ focal point for computer security incident reporting, providesassistance with incident prevention and response.the national plan for information systems protection version 1.0,9 releasedin january 2000 by president bill clinton and richard clarke (then the nationalcoordinator for security, infrastructure protection, and counterterrorism),focused on tightening cybersecurity in the federal government and promotingpublicprivate partnerships. version 1.0 of the national plan addresses the complex interagency process for approaching critical infrastructure and cyberrelatedissues in the federal government. progress on version 2.0 carried into the bushadministration but was superseded by new activities carried out in response toseptember 11 (see below).in response to encouragement from the government, private industry beganforming sectorspecific isacs to facilitate sharing critical infrastructure informationbetween companies in a given industry and between private industry and the government (for more on isacs, see chapter 2). another private sector initiative, thepartnership for critical infrastructure security (pcis),10 was established in december 1999 as a publicprivate forum to address issues relating to infrastructuresecurity. pcis, incorporated as a nonprofit organization in february 2001, is operated by companies and private sector associations representing each of the criticalinfrastructure industries.continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12critical information infrastructure protection and the lawsince september 11in response to the september 11 attacks, president bush extended andamplified pdd63 in executive order 13231, replacing the earlier executive order13010. e.o. 13231 established the critical infrastructure protection board. theboard recommends policies and coordinates programs for protecting informationsystems for critical infrastructure through outreach on critical infrastructure protection issues with private sector organizations; information sharing; the recruitment,retention, and training of executive branch security professionals; law enforcementcoordination; research and development; international information infrastructureprotection; and legislation. the board consults with affected executive branchdepartments and agencies and communicates with state and local governmentsand the private sector, as well as communities and representatives from academiaand other relevant elements of society. the board coordinated with the office ofhomeland security (ohs) on information infrastructure protection functions thathad been assigned to the ohs by executive order 13228 of october 8, 2001.the board is chaired by the special advisor to the president for cyberspacesecurity (often referred to as the cybersecurity czar). this office replaced thenational coordinator. as cybersecurity czar, richard clarke now reports to boththe assistant to the president for national security affairs and to the assistant to thepresident for homeland security.11 the director of ciao was also appointed as amember of the board.in february 2003 the directorate of information analysis and infrastructureprotection in the department of homeland security absorbed ciao, nipc, fedcirc, and the national communications system,12 but the infragard programremained in the fbi. an executive order issued on february 28, 2003, abolishedthe presidentõs critical infrastructure protection board, but a special coordinatingcommittee may be created to replace it.131more information on the ncs is available online at <http://www.ncs.gov/>.2more information on the nstac is available online at <http://www.ncs.gov/nstac/nstac.htm>.3more information on cert is available online at <http://www.cert.org>.4see <http://www.ciao.gov/resource/pccip/intro.pdf> and <http://www.infosec.com/pccip/web/backgrd.html>.5for more information on pdd63: <http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd63.htm>.6more information on ciao is available online at <http://www.ciao.gov>.7more information on nipc and infragard is available online at <http://www.nipc.gov> and<http://www.infragard.net/>.8more information on fedcirc is available online at <http://www.fedcirc.gov>.9the national plan is available at <http://www.ciao.gov/publicaffairs/np1final.pdf>.10more information on pcis is available online at <http://www.pcisforum.org>.11for more information, <http://www.whitehouse.gov/news/releases/2001/10/2001101612.html>.12michael fitzgerald. 2003. òhomeland cybersecurity efforts doubled.ó security focus.march 11.13diane frank. 2003. òfilling the cybersecurity void.ó federal computer week. march 6.box 1.1 continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and context13focused on generating awareness in the private sector of critical infrastructure vulnerabilities and exhorting communication between industryand the governmentñand within industryñabout infrastructure weaknesses and incidences of attacks and other failures. until september 11,2001, the backdrop for these efforts was a steady rise in hacking incidentsand computer crime.7 estimates from market researchers, publicizedlargescale incidents (such as the distributed denialofservice attacks ofearly 2001), growth in the sales of antivirus software and firewalls, andgrowth in prosecutions of computer crimes are among the indicators thatthe need to protect information infrastructure had begun to attract moreattention by the beginning of this centuryñalbeit less than security experts would have liked to see.in 2002, development of the national strategy to secure cyberspaceprovided a focal point for bush administration efforts in critical information infrastructure protection. originally, the administration had plannedto release the report in its final version in september 2002; however,ongoing negotiations between the administration and the other partiesinvolved in the strategyõs formulation led to the draft version and a 60daycomment period in which input at all levels was solicited. the administration also convened a number of townhall meetings across the countryto gather additional input. early drafts included proposals to suspendwireless internet service until security holes were addressed, requireinternet service providers to include firewall software, recommend thatgovernment agencies use their power as a major purchaser of computersoftware to push software vendors to improve the security of their products, provide financial incentives for vendors to improve the security oftheir products, and impose legal liability for failing to meet basic securitystandards.9 however, the final version, released february 14, 2003, scaledback on the governmentõs role and emphasized voluntary industry initia7computer crime, or cybercrime, can encompass a wide range of situations involving itin the context of crime. the absence of a definition is problematic and often hamperscooperation and funding, not to mention legal cooperation and policy coordination. thereare important differences (both in the challenges and the solutions) between protectingnetworks from attacks by hackers and protecting them from a resourceful, determinedadversary. for an indepth look at the use of information technology to protect against thethreat of catastrophic terrorism, see computer science and telecommunications board,national research council. 2003. information technology for counterterrorism: immediateactions and future possibilities. the national academies press, washington, d.c.8available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/pcipb>.9jonathan krim. 2003. òcybersecurity strategy depends on power of suggestion.ó washington post, february 15, p. e01.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14critical information infrastructure protection and the lawtives.10 consumer education, partnership between the private and publicsector, and investment in research are among the proposals in the finalcyberspace plan.events of september 11, 2001the terrorist attacks of september 11, 2001, resulted in a massivedestruction of property and loss of human life, but the attacks also demonstrated the vulnerability of americaõs information infrastructure and itsimportance to crisis management.11 in the wake of those events, expertsnoted that attacks on information infrastructure can amplify the effects ofattacks on physical infrastructure and interfere with response activities,such as by overloading surviving communications networks.12 ronalddick, then director of the national infrastructure protection center(nipc), noted at the symposium that september 11 had increased awareness of the interdependencies of critical infrastructures and heightenedthe sense of urgency surrounding information sharing on cyber and physical threats. for example, mr. dick commented that nipc was holdingmultiple daily briefings with the electric power and financial servicesisacs to provide threat and vulnerability assessments.legislative initiatives have been prominent among the responses toseptember 11. although those responses have been framed as supportingòhomeland security,ó several policy measures were introduced that recognized the importance of critical infrastructures to national security.the usa patriot act,13 enacted in october 2001, calls for actions necessary to protect critical infrastructures to be carried out by a publicprivatepartnership. the office of homeland security (ohs) was established byexecutive order 13228 and was tasked with coordinating efforts to protectcritical infrastructures. executive order 13231 established the presidentõscritical infrastructure protection board on october 16, 2001 (it was abolished on february 28, 2003). a new position, the special advisor to thepresident on cyberspace security, was established to provide leadershipin the protection of information infrastructure, and that function was10jennifer lee. 2003. òwhite house scales back cyberspace plan.ó new york times, february 15, p. a12.11computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2002.internet under crisis conditions: learning from september 11. national academy press, washington, d.c.12national research council. 2002. making the nation safer: the role of science and technology in countering terrorism. national academy press, washington, d.c.13pl 10756.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction and context15integrated with the evolving activities of both the ohs and the nationalsecurity council and coordinated with relevant activities associated withthe office of science and technology policy. executive order 13231 alsoplaces more emphasis on cooperation with the private sector. this raisesquestions about the role of government, as well as that of industry, inachieving cooperation. the new team of cybersecurity leaders began todevelop a cybersecurity strategic plan, echoing earlier efforts to developcip strategic plans. both early 2002 proposals for consolidating the functions associated with cip into ohs and mid2002 proposals for organizing a new department of homeland security have created some confusion about who is in charge of cip activities. a recent general accountingoffice (gao) report14 found that over 50 organizations (including fiveadvisory committees; six organizations in the executive office of the president; 38 executive branch organizations associated with departments,agencies, or intelligence organizations; and three other organizations) areinvolved in cip. adding in state and local entities would greatly enlargethe total number. as the establishment of the department of homelandsecurity in early 2003 underscores, the organizational structure of cipñand within it, ciipñmay continue to evolve for quite some time, and theform it eventually takes will determine the extent to which infrastructureprotection is singled out from or integrated within other elements ofhomeland, national, and economic security. the organizational approachmay interact, in turn, with policy decisions about the role of law, technology, and procedure in addressing cip/ciip needs. current trends suggest that law will play a growing role, inasmuch as the increasing focuson homeland security seems to have accelerated the formation and implementation of relevant laws.this reportthis report examines legal issues15 associated with information infrastructure protection, with an emphasis on information sharing and liability. it is not a general description of computer crime or cybercrime. sincethe private sector owns the majority of the critical infrastructures, the14u.s. general accounting office. critical infrastructure protection: significant challengesneed to be addressed. gao02961t. july 24, 2002.15the pccip issued a series of reports, known as the legal foundations reports, thatidentified many legal issues associated with information assurance, including the freedomof information act (foia), antitrust, tort liability, the defense production act, and thestafford act. these reports are available online at the ciao web site <http://www.ciao.gov/resource/pccip/pccipdocuments.htm>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16critical information infrastructure protection and the lawlaws examined are those that affect the willingness of industry to cooperate with the government to prevent, detect, and mitigate attacks. a centralissue is the framework for sharing information associated with information system vulnerabilities and their exploitation. security experts wouldlike to see more such sharing, and private parties and some governmentagencies have been reluctant to comply. chapter 2 outlines the situationand comments on the two laws most frequently cited as discouraginginformation sharing: the freedom of information act and the antitrustlaws. although the intent of criminal law is to deter future crime andpunish perpetrators, some experts suggest that it is not sufficient to preventattacks on the nationõs critical information infrastructures. the ability toimpose civil damages on infrastructure owners who are proven negligentcould motivate them to invest the necessary resources to improve thesecurity of the nationõs information infrastructures. chapter 3 discusseswhere liability currently lies for producing, maintaining, or operatingunsecured systems and networks, and how changing the assignment ofliability could contribute to infrastructure protection. the final chapterexamines the larger business, social, and technical context. the reportidentifies issues and differences of opinion, providing an overview ratherthan an exhaustive analysis.the symposium noted that privacy and civil liberties could becomecasualties to more aggressive cip/ciip, depending on how legal mechanisms are designed and enforced. these concerns have grown since thattime owing to new legislative and administrative developments, noted inchapter 4. this report notes the tension between security and civil liberties but given the limited resources of the project does not address them indetail.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172increasing theflow of informationthe sharing of information has been the centerpiece of both the governmentõs and the private sectorõs efforts over the past several years toprotect the information systems underlying our critical infrastructures.the assumption is that information sharing can help crystallize the threat,identify vulnerabilities, devise better defenses, establish best practices,and detect and mitigate attacks. eric benhamou, chairman of 3com,suggests that the one thing that would have the greatest return is for firmsto begin immediately sharing information about attack scenarios, bestpractices to protect against attacks, and perpetrators. the most usefulthing the government can do, according to craig silliman, director of thenetwork and facilities legal team at worldcom, is to facilitate the establishment of a single technical point of contact that would enable theadministrators at the backbone isps to share, in real time, information tocombat a crossindustry attack (such as code red1 or nimda2). coordi1code red was a worm that exploited buffer overflow vulnerabilities in unpatched versions of internet information server (iis) web software. several variants of the wormspread throughout the world in the summer of 2001. infected hosts were used to launchdistributed denialofservice attacks and deface web pages. information about the vulnerability was released in midjune of 2001 and the worm began spreading in midjuly. thecooperative association for internet data analysis (caida) provides an analysis of thecode red worm at <http://www.caida.org/analysis/security/codered/>.2the nimda worm exploited the same vulnerability in iis web servers that code redused. nimda, which spread via email, network scanning, and web surfing, modified fileson the infected systems and caused denial of service. see the cert advisory for moreinformation, <http://www.cert.org/advisories/ca200126.html>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18critical information infrastructure protection and the lawnation among the technical experts during a distributed denialofservice(ddos) attack, for example, would help them to identify the source of anattack, identify potential solutions to block the attack, and restore thenetwork to operational capacity more quickly.3 informal communicationand coordination do take place, but there is interest in increasing thescope and scale of such activity, in tandem with the evolution of theinternet itself.the federal government has made a number of attempts to promoteinformation sharing relevant to critical information infrastructure protection. nipc created the infragard initiative to facilitate the sharing ofcritical infrastructure information with the private sector. ronald dicksuggests that confidentiality in the reporting of incidents is one of the keyelements in the infragard program that help to build trust between thegovernment and private sector entities. however, the general accounting office (gao) reported4 that nipc has had mixed success in formingpartnerships with private industry and other government agencies. thepresidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection recommendedindustrybased vehicles known as information sharing and analysiscenters (isacs, see box 2.1). while several isacs have been created,many are still in their infancy and many others are in the planning stages.gao notes that only three isacs had been created before december 2000.5although formal informationsharing arrangements are slowly beingestablished, most information sharing occurs through informal channels.one deterrent, according to private industry representatives, has been thelack of clarity regarding the benefits and associated liabilities in sharinginformation with one another and with the government.whitfield diffie, distinguished engineer at sun microsystems, notesthat regulated industries have a tradition of sharing some informationwith the government and the public, even when disclosure puts them at adisadvantage from a business viewpoint. for example, airlines are required(upon request) to disclose arrival and departure times of all flights, eventhough it is clearly a disadvantage to have the customers know that theyare frequently late. retailers and credit card issuers worry that disclosingany loss of online transactional security (e.g., hackers gaining access to3because an attacker has the advantage of being able to deliberately exploit any weaknessthat he can identify, network administrators need to be able to rapidly disseminate anyinformation while the attack is under way to recapture the advantage and prevent theattack from succeeding.4u.s. general accounting office, òcritical infrastructure protection: significant challenges in developing national capabilities,ó gao01323, april 25, 2001.5u.s. general accounting office, òinformation sharing practices that can benefit criticalinfrastructure protection,ó gao0224, october 15, 2001.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information19box 2.1information sharing and analysis centerspdd63 called for the creation of sectorspecific information sharing and analysis centers (isacs) to encourage industry to gather, analyze, sanitize, and disseminate information to both industry and, as deemed appropriate, the government. isacs have now been created in several industry sectors, including financialservices, information technology, electric power, telecommunications, chemical,and surface transportation (rail industry). each isac operates independently anddetermines what corporate structure to adopt, how it should operate, and how itshould share information with its own members, with other isacs, and with thegovernment. for example, the financial services isac (fsisac) is a nonprofitcorporation open to eligible members of the banking, securities, and insuranceindustries.1 fsisac members can submit either anonymous or attributed reportsabout information security threats, vulnerabilities, incidents, and solutions. members have access to information provided by other members and analysis of information obtained from other sources (including the u.s. government and law enforcement agencies and the cert coordination center). although the fsisacdoes not allow any u.s. government agency, regulator, or law enforcement agency to access their membersõ information, it does share information with the government and other isacs through meetings and other arrangements.2 by contrast,the national coordinating center for telecommunications isac (nccisac)brings together industry and government participants in a government facility.1according to the fsisac web site, ò[m]embership is open to the following categories ofu.s. entities registered, and in good standing, with their appropriate regulators: fdic insuredbank, nasd licensed investment firm, designated financial services exchanges and financesector utilities, specialized u.s. or statelicensed banking companies, u.s. or statelicensedinsurance companies.ó see <http://www.fsisac.com/faq.cfm>.2see <http://www.fsisac.com/aboutus.cfm>.credit card numbers or purchase history) may undermine public confidence in internet commerce, to the detriment of their businesses. however, the companies that own and operate the information infrastructuresinclude both regulated telecommunications providers and others, such ascable and other isps, who are regulated differently, if at all. although thetraditional telecommunications players have a history of successful information sharing with each other and the government through the nstac/ncc, the telecommunications industry is changing. the convergence ofvoice and data networks is enlarging the number of players involved inthe telecommunications sector. w. david sincoskie, committee memberand vice president of the internet architecture research laboratory attelcordia technologies, noted that the internet now carries more trafficthan the public switched telephone network (pstn). captain j. katharinecritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20critical information infrastructure protection and the lawburton (u.s. navy), assistant deputy manager at the national communications system, noted that wireless networks, a new and important component of national security and emergency preparedness activities, didnot have the ability to give priority to national security applications during the september 11, 2001, crisis.6 a lesson from the wireless experienceon 9/11 may be to think early about how to incorporate new and emerging media into emergency response. unlike the traditional telecommunications players, these new players (including the owners and operators ofthe internet, wireless networks, and the underlying transmission networks)7 do not have 40 years of established history, nor do they have aculture of sharing information for national security purposes.information sharing frameworkinformation sharing remains an ambiguous, even an opportunisticconcept. one reason progress may be slow is that what it means dependson what is asked of whom. fundamental questions persist about whoshould share what information, when, how, and whyñas well as withwhom. note that in the middle of the last century, these questions wereobviated by the domination of the telecommunications and computerindustries by single large players with whom the government couldñand didñcommunicate in the event of a crisis. they first surfaced in theearly 1980s, when the telecommunications industry was transformed bythe at&t modified final judgment, which led to a relatively effectivevehicle for government communications with the regulated telecommunications providers (nstac); government efforts to communicate with6in 1995, the president directed the national communications system, in cooperationwith industry, to implement a priority access service for wireless ns/ep users. the fccresponded in july 2000 with a òreport and orderó that made wireless access priority servicevoluntary (see <ftp://www.fcc.gov/pub/bureaus/wireless/orders/2000/fcc00242.txt>).in response to the events of september 11, the national security council issued guidance tothe national communication system to provide immediate wireless priority access serviceto limited geographic areas. initial operating capability for the ncs wireless priorityservice (wps) was achieved in december 2002. nationwide endtoend wireless prioritycommunications capability for all ns/ep personnel is scheduled for december 2003. wpscomplements the government emergency telecommunications service (gets), which provides landline priority service to ns/ep personnel. more information is available online at<http://63.121.95.245/wps/> and <http://gets.ncs.gov/>.7there are also many more of these actors than there were before, and there are practically no barriers to entry. because a potential attacker could easily establish an isp (eitherwithin u.s. territory or outside it), information sharing among isps (or between isps andthe government) might result in unfortunate or even damaging disclosures. the increasingnumber of players in the telecommunications sector needs to be considered when developing informationsharing strategies.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information21the computer industries about computer security risks in the 1980s didnot fare as well, for a variety of reasons, including difficulties in formulating a compelling message and in reaching and persuading an increasingly diffuse set of industries. many of these problems persist in todayõsciip efforts.in thinking about what information should be shared,8 lieutenantgeneral (retired) david j. kelley, vice president of information operations at lockheed martin, suggested that threats, vulnerabilities, networkstatus, intrusion reports, best practices, and tools should all be shared.companies need to be able to share information in ways that (and whosenature) may not be predictable in advance. like sherlock holmes solvinga difficult case, seemingly unconnected bits of information, when ingeniously combined, produce clues and evidence that can help to detect,prevent, and mitigate network attacks. if companies are not sure whatinformation can and should be shared, they risk losing the potential foridentifying largescale, crosscutting attacksñessentially putting anadversary at a great advantage. on the other hand, sharing critical infrastructure information raises interestbalancing challenges because theinformation can carry with it additional risks9 to public and private interests. information sharing could be construed as price fixing, unreasonable restraint of trade, or systematic exclusion of or discrimination againstcertain customers. it also could raise privacy concerns, expose proprietary corporate secrets, and reveal weaknesses and vulnerabilities thaterode public confidence and invite hackers. erosion of public confidencecould be particularly damaging to a publicly traded corporation, so information sharing could constitute a breach of fiduciary duty in some cases.for example, craig silliman noted that releasing a top ten vulnerabilitieslist to the public could provide hackers with the information they need tosuccessfully attack atrisk networks.10 however, vendors need to be8for example, a partnership for critical infrastructure security (pcis) working groupproposed (in a white paper dated september 5, 2001) that information that fits into thefollowing categories should be shared: publicized system failures or successful attacks;threats to critical infrastructures; system degradations; vulnerability information; obviousinterdependencies [and] incidents of perceived limited impact; other useful information,including remediation methodology, risk management methodology, and research anddevelopment goals and needs.9for a discussion of the inherent tension between the benefits and risks of disclosinginformation on critical infrastructure vulnerabilities, see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1990. computers at risk: safe computing inthe information age. national academy press, washington, d.c., pp.2021.10the sans institute and the fbi maintain a prioritized list of the top 20 security vulnerabilities. the list is intended to help systems administrators focus on correcting the flawsthat are most often targeted in computer network attacks. see <http://www.sans.org/top20/> for more information.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22critical information infrastructure protection and the lawinformed of vulnerabilities to create patches. private companies also relyon the alerts to implement timely preventative measures. some peopleargue that companies are slow to fix vulnerabilities without the threat ofpublicity. a lag time between private notifications sent to vendors andthe public announcements is one approach that would give vendors andprivate sector entities sufficient time to implement preventative measureswithout facilitating hacker attacks. this example also highlights theimportance of analyzing both benefits and risks in determining when torelease sensitive information.since many of the isacs were established only in the last couple ofyears, they are still troubled by the difficult question, with whom shouldinformation be shared? each isac needs to create a process that outlineshow decisions are made regarding the sharing of information collected bythe isac. most isacs are funded through membership fees. should theinformation collected by an isac be shared only with paid members?when should information be shared with other companies in the sameindustry sector (e.g., smaller businesses who may not have the resourcesto become a full isac member)? most of the current members of isacsare large, multinational corporations. what should the isacs do to encourage small and mediumsize businesses to participate in informationsharing activities? who should fund these efforts? if isacs choose toshare information with the government, they must decide which agenciesshould receive the information (e.g., dhs and agencies that have regulatory authority over that industry). should all information be shared withthe government, and if so, should it be anonymized first? what measuresdo the isacs need to put in place to encourage the government to provide (possibly classified) information on suspected pending attacks?informationsharing models must also consider the public interest. doesthe general public have a right to information about the infrastructure(s)on which it depends? is it sufficient for the government to hold thatinformation as the publicõs representative? one reason why debates overthe scope and barriers to information sharing seem to elude resolution isthat the fundamental issues outlined above remain to be worked through.selecting the appropriate informationsharing model requires ascertaining the costs and benefits. isacs can add value by providing ananalysis of the information gathered from their members. for example,isacs can use aggregated time series data to identify attack patterns.isacs also can use the data to develop guidelines for security best practices. in spite of the benefits of doing so, companies are reluctant to shareinformation. they are concerned that shared information may be disclosed, causing irreparable harmñfinancial harm, public relationsdamage, competitive damage, litigation liability, or possible governmentintervention/investigation. underlying the reluctance is a lack of trust.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information23lack of trust has been an issue in both the public and private sectors (e.g.,historically, the government has been reluctant to share with industryinformation that is classified). companies often do not trust each other(or the government) with sensitive corporate information.11 anonymizinginformation is one way to alleviate concerns and build trust both betweenthe government and industry and within industry. issues such as theseare crystallized in debates over the implications for information sharingof antitrust and freedom of information laws, which are covered inò(perceived) barriers to information sharing,ó below.while most attention has been focused on sharing information withother members of a given isac, information shared across isacs has thepotential to be of much more value in identifying threats to the criticalinfrastructures of the united states and in analyzing trends. the pcis hasorganized joint publicprivate meetings and developed white papers tohighlight crosssector informationsharing issues.12 identification of thekey common elements in sharing might be a first step toward the development of a crossindustry sharing mechanism, since differences in jargonand culture across industries will compound the information sharing challenges that already exist.with all of this uncertainty, it is not surprising that information sharing is evolving only slowly. progress may also be constrained by thevehicles launched to achieve it: both the isacs and pcis are limited bytheir membership, which includes private sector representatives whoregistered an early interest in critical infrastructure protection and earlywillingness to engage with the government on cip issues. the isacs andpcis both include primarily large firms with much at stakeñeither fromcritical infrastructure risks or from the direction that cip policy mighttake. the symposiumõs broad range of participants underscored thatmaking progress on information sharing calls for addressing multipleissues affecting the public and private interests.11the weak security of the governmentõs own computer systems is often cited as a deterrent to information sharing. many companies in the private sector fear that sensitive corporate information shared with the government may be compromised by hackers able tobreak into the governmentõs computer systems.12a pcis working group has proposed the creation of an isac policy management board,to be staffed with representatives from each isac that will òfacilitate the coordination anddissemination of the standardized information sharing documentationó (information sharing white paper, september 5, 2001).critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24critical information infrastructure protection and the law(perceived) barriers to information sharingphil reitinger laments, òi wish that government and industry were asgood at sharing information as hackers are.ó corporations point to anumber of legal concerns that hinder full participation in informationsharing activities. corporations fear they could be liable if they provideflawed information to the isac. what happens if the information is validbut the isac prepares a flawed analysis that causes harm to members?what happens if a member of the isac fails to protect anonymous orproprietary data? what if a member fails to share or disclose informationthat could have prevented or minimized an attack? what happens if onemember fails to implement adequate security measures and by that failure causes harm to another member of the isac? these difficult questions have raised awareness about the importance of isac membershipagreements and the need to allocate risk among the isac, its members,and the service provider. while these issues are being examined in thecontext of isac formation and operation, two other legal concerns areperceived as impediments to successful information sharing between theprivate sector and the government and within the private sector: (1) thefreedom of information act (foia) and (2) antitrust laws.fear of foia and antitrust concerns are the two main factors ofteninvoked as the reasons for lack of progress on information sharing. corporations fear that information shared with the government may bereleased to third parties under a freedom of information act request.most foia concerns are based on an unwillingness to trust the government with information provided to it. antitrust concerns stem from thepotential for collaborative exchanges of information among competitorson pricing or production levels or customer allocation, joint endorsementof particular suppliers/vendors, or singling out or otherwise damaging aparticular competitor. public interest advocates, however, are skepticalthat these barriers really stand in the way of information sharing. theybelieve that the current foia and antitrust laws are adequate to protectindustry and the general public and that they encourage information sharing. this section outlines both sides of the foia and antitrust debates.since drafting of this report began, a provision of the homeland securityact of 2002 (hsa)13 protects some critical information infrastructure datafrom disclosure under foia. it is too soon to know what this will mean inpractice, but it makes some of the discussion moot. nevertheless, thefundamental issues remain, and there is always the possibility of newlegislation.1413pl 107296.14on march 12, 2003, the restoration of freedom of information act of 2003 (s. 609) wasintroduced in the senate. supporters of the bill argue that òfoia provisions passed lastyear as part of the homeland security act are too broad and could undermine public accesscritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information25freedom of information act15what is the freedom of information act?16congress enacted the foia (5 u.s.c. 552) in 1966. foia is an information disclosure mechanism whose basic purpose is to ensure that certain records in the possession of the u.s. government are accessible to thepeople.17 the supreme court has said that the motivation behind foia isòto ensure an informed citizenry vital to the functioning of a democraticsociety, and to hold the governors accountable to the governed.ó18 inaccomplishing that end, as the court has also said, ò[d]isclosure, not secrecy, is the dominant objective.ó19foia requires all agencies of the u.s. government to disclose information upon receiving a written request, except for information protectedfrom disclosure by nine statutory exemptions.20 of the nine specificstatutory exemptions that are contained in the act, it has been argued thatexemption 4 might be available to protect information on critical infrastructure protection disclosed to the government by a private party. forinformation to come within the scope of exemption 4, it must be shownthat the information is (a) a trade secret or (b) information that is (1)commercial or financial, (2) obtained from a person, and (3) privileged orconfidential.21 the latter category of information (commercial information that is privileged or confidential) is directly relevant to the issue ofcybersecurity information. opponents to creating an additional foiaexemption for cybersecurity information argue that exemption 4 shouldbe sufficient because most information submitted by the private sector toto information about the government and public safetyó (dan verton, 2003, òprogress oninfo sharing threatened by changes to foia law,ó computerworld. march 19).15the focus in this report is information voluntarily provided by the private sector to thefederal government.16this section is largely adapted from a presentation by david sobel at the symposium.17see <http://www.usdoj.gov/04foia/referenceguidemay99.htm#intro>.18nlrb v. robbins tire & rubber co., 437 u.s. 214, 242 (1978).19department of the air force v. rose, 425 u.s. 352 (1976).20the nine statutory exemptions are classified documents; internal agency rules andpractices; information that is prohibited from disclosure by another law; trade secrets andother confidential business information; interagency or intraagency communications thatare protected by legal privileges; information involving matters of personal privacy; certaininformation compiled for law enforcement purposes; information relating to the supervision of financial institutions; and geological information on wells. see <http://www.pueblo.gsa.gov/cictext/fedprog/foia/foia.pdf>.21exemption 4 is described in the department of justiceõs freedom of information actguide, may 2002, available online at <http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/exemption4.htm>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26critical information infrastructure protection and the lawa government agency is assumed to be commercial information, broadlydefined. cybersecurityrelated information may be commercial in nature,but is it always òprivileged or confidentialó? according to the d.c. circuitcourt decision in the national parks case, commercial or financial information is deemed to be confidential if disclosure would (1) impair the governmentõs ability to obtain the necessary information in the future or (2)causesubstantial harm to the competitive position of the person from whom theinformation was obtained.22the argument for expanding foia exemptionsgiven that the purpose of foia is to ensure that records in the possession of the government are accessible to the public, private sector companies have expressed concern that critical infrastructure informationshared with the government might be released to third parties via anfoia request. attempts to prevent disclosure by private entities couldresult in disclosureñfor instance, an foia request for information on allentities with a certain type of vulnerabilityñand could not be respondedto with a reverse foia suit without the plaintiff implicitly identifyingitself as having the vulnerability. a recent letter from the national security telecommunications advisory committee (nstac) to the presidentsaid, òto properly protect our critical national infrastructure and respondto attacks in a timely manner, private sector entities must be able to freelyexchange critical infrastructure protection information with each otherand the government. real or perceived barriers to sharing the information must be removed.ó23 some companies, such as those represented onnstac, argue that it is not clear that the existing exemptions (exemption4 in particular) would provide the certainty of protection needed beforethey would release sensitive information to the government. even if theinformation is protected, companies argue that it requires costly legalaction to block the intended disclosure of the informationñthis represents money, time, and resources spent (see below for actions available torequesters of information). they do not have confidence that informationshared with the governmentñincluding sensitive or proprietary information and vulnerabilitiesñwill be kept secure. finally, because past courtrulings and interpretations can be reversed and do not stay constant overtime, companies tend not to trust case law even though it may seem toprotect the information today. in addition, companies fear that future22national parks and conservation association v. morton, 498 f.2d 765, 770 (d.c. cir. 1974).23copy of letter shown by david sobel at the symposium.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information27rulings and interpretations could result in the release of previously submitted information.the presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection,realizing that companies might not be willing to participate in information sharing activities without special protection, called for a new statutory exemption from the foia for critical infrastructure information.24congress has considered two bills to respond to the concerns of the privatesector. senator bennett introduced s. 1456,25 the critical infrastructureinformation security act of 2001. one of the goals of the bill is to òencourage the secure disclosure and protected exchange of critical infrastructureinformation.ó section 5 of that bill states that critical infrastructure information shall not be made available under section 552 of title 5, u.s. code(foia). representatives davis and moran introduced the cyber securityinformation act of 2001 (h.r. 2435) to òencourage the secure disclosureand protected exchange of information about cybersecurity problems,solutions, test practices and test results, and related matters in connectionwith critical infrastructure protection.ó section 4 states that cybersecurityinformation shall be exempt from disclosure under section 552(a) of title5, united states code (foia), by any federal entity, agency, and authority.the legislation creating a new department of homeland security exemptsòcritical infrastructure information voluntarily submitted to a coveredfederal agency for its use regarding the security of critical infrastructureand protected systems, analysis, warning, interdependency study, recovery, reconstitution, or other informational purposeó26 from disclosureunder foia.the argument against expanding foia27opponents suggest that case law shows that the existing foia exemptions are sufficient to protect critical infrastructure information; theysay efforts to amend foia (e.g., through a new cybersecurity exemption)are based largely on a misperception of the current law. many wouldargue that ensuring the government is able to obtain critical infrastructure information from the private sector on a voluntary basis comes within24presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection. 1997. critical foundations. washington, d.c., p. 32.25both bills are pending in committee. the latest major action on the senate bill wasoctober 9, 2001, and july 10, 2001, for the house bill.26crs summary of homeland security act of 2002, available at <http://thomas.loc.gov/cgibin/bdquery/z?d107:hr05005:@@@d&summ2=m&>.27this section largely adapted from a presentation by david sobel at the symposium.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28critical information infrastructure protection and the lawthe purview of exemption 4. the courts have found that where information is voluntarily submitted to a government agency, it is exempt fromthe disclosure if the submitter can show that it does not customarilyrelease the information to the public.28 david sobel, general counsel ofthe electronic privacy information center, argues that the case law indicates that courts tend to defer to the wishes of the private sector submitterof the information and will protect the confidentiality of information thatthe submitter does not itself make public.even before the new homeland security act of 2002, the legal protections available to the private sector submitter did not end with the abovecase law. because of general industry concerns about disclosure of information submitted to government agencies, president reagan in 1987issued executive order 12600 (predisclosure notification procedures forconfidential commercial information). this eo requires all federal agencies to implement regulations that provide procedures for the notificationto the submitter of private sector information if a foia request is receivedfor that information. once that procedure is triggered, if a request isreceived for the information and the agency decides that there is no legalbasis for withholding it, the agency is required to provide an opportunityfor the submitter to offer objections to the proposed release. eo 12600 isyet another layer of protection (and at least a delay) that is available toprivate sector submitters under existing law. in addition, the supremecourt has recognized that the private sector submitter has standing to filewhat is called a òreverse foiaó lawsuit to block the intended disclosureof the information.29 finally, the u.s. attorney general issued a newfoia guidance memorandum30 on october 12, 2001, that establishes anew standard that the justice department will apply when determiningwhether or not to defend agency decisions to withhold requests for information. that standard states that when there is a òsound legal basisó (incontrast to òforeseeable harm,ó as stated in the earlier standard) for with28critical mass energy project v. nuclear regulatory commission, 975 f.2d 871 (d.c. cir.1992) (en banc), cert. denied, 113 s.ct. 1579 (1993). in this case, critical mass had requestedinformation from the nuclear regulatory commission concerning the results of inspectionreports dealing with nuclear plant safety compliance. this information, revealing potentialvulnerabilities at a nuclear power plant, is similar to the types of information involved incritical infrastructure protection. the court in this case concluded that because the nuclearpower companies would not voluntarily release to the public this information, which theyconsidered confidential, it was not subject to disclosure. this was an en banc decision ofthe full d.c. circuit and further appellate review was denied by the supreme court, whichis significant because the d.c. circuit is where 95 percent of the foia litigation takes place,and this is the circuit court that is deferred to by all of the other circuits.29gte sylvania, inc. v. consumers union, 445 u.s. 375 (1980).30the foia post is available online at <http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/foiapost/2001foiapost19.htm>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information29holding the information, the justice department will defend that agencydetermination in court.the american civil liberties union (aclu) sent a letter to senatorslieberman and thompson urging them to oppose senator bennettõs billto amend the foia.31 the aclu argues that when the courts havedebated the publicõs need for disclosure against the harms of disclosureunder foia, they have shown deference to industry concerns for confidentiality. they suggest further that an allencompassing cip exemptionwould undermine security, rather than enhance it, because it would allowcompanies to shield from the public the actions they are not taking toprotect their infrastructures from attack.according to mr. sobel, no one has identified what type of criticalinfrastructure information would escape the protection afforded byfoiaõs exemption 4. he asserts that the current foia law is sufficientboth to enable ciprelated information sharing between the private andpublic sectors and to protect collected information.can the government protect cip information?glenn schlarman, from the office of management and budget, argues that the bennett bill and the davismoran bill were not addressing(at least on the foia exemption side) the reality of the issue that information can be protected once it is in the governmentõs possession. thesebillsñand presumably the homeland security act of 2002ñaddress theperception that the government will not protect it or cannot protect it. heargues that the critical mass case is the òlaw of the land,ó which meansthat voluntarily provided, customarily protected industry information isexempt under foia. the problem, according to mr. schlarman, is thatgovernment personnel who respond to foia requests do not read thedepartment of justice office of information and privacy case law on foiato know what is exempt today. although the (prehsa) law has beensufficient to protect ciprelated information, he suggests it is not clearthat agencies know how to protect it. a key issue is whether governmentagencies have processes in place to protect the information from inappropriate or accidental disclosure.32 hence, mr. sobel suggests that a better31see <http://www.aclu.org/congress/l040302b.html>. the aclu sent a similar letterto representatives burton and waxman urging them to oppose h.r. 2435; see <http://www.aclu.org/congress/l040302c.html>.32for example, corporations fear that their sensitive proprietary information shared withthe government might be leaked or misused by a government employee who migrates to ajob with the corporationõs competitor.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30critical information infrastructure protection and the lawapproach is to educate the employees in federal agencies who respond tothe foia requests about the types of information that cannot be releasedunder existing law.antitrustmany companies fear that sharing ciprelated data with competitorscould be viewed as a violation of the antitrust provisions of the shermanantitrust act (15 u.s.c.).understanding antitrust33the goal of antitrust law is to promote competition in the marketplace. therefore, to prohibit restraint of trade, the antitrust law seeks todiscourage collusionñinappropriate collective actionñand inappropriate exclusion.34 collusion occurs when rival firms act jointly to raiseprices and reduce output, thereby harming consumers and the economyas a whole. exclusion occurs when competitive constraints normallyoffered by rivals are removed, thus making it possible for a firm to exercise market power.while information sharing among competitors in its own right is notillegal, it can be unlawful if it contributes to anticompetitive conduct eitherthrough an actual agreement (e.g., on price) or to the facilitation of coordinated behavior. for example, a joint venture of competitors could establish a standard for computer security that excluded one provider.35 theòantitrust guidelines for collaborations among competitors,ó issued in2000 by the federal trade commission and the department of justice,stressed that the sharing of information among competitors may be procompetitive and may be reasonably necessary to achieve a procompetitivebenefit. if the information is reasonably necessary for achieving procompetitive efficiencies, those efficiencies are taken into account inassessing the overall effect on competition.if the information to be shared could be competitively sensitiveñtypically that means information on price, costs, future business initiatives, and the likeñthen certain factors can serve as guideposts in tryingto determine whether information sharing is likely to facilitate collusion.33this section, òunderstanding antitrust,ó is excerpted from a presentation by william e.cohen at the symposium.34some forms of exclusion are acceptable under the law, such as protection of intellectualproperty rights to prevent their use by others, or not permitting access to valuable assets,which is permitted in all but a few circumstances.35see addamax v. open software foundation, inc., 152 f.3d 48 (1st cir. 1998).critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information31who is receiving the information? if only one side of the partnership isusing the information, then collusion concerns might have merit. howold is the information? sharing contingent or future information is generally more troubling than sharing historical information, since it could beused to help in achieving agreement among competitors or in coordinating their conduct. how specific is the information? information thatidentifies the conduct of individual firms is likely to raise greater concernthan information that is aggregated. for example, information reviewinga particular firmõs pricing conduct may identify individual disclaimersand discourage them from cutting a collusive price. finally, how accessible is the information? sharing unique information is more likely toraise concerns than sharing information that is already publicly available.for example, standards settingñwhich can be relevant to criticalinfrastructure protectionñillustrates that not all collective action is considered bad from an antitrust perspective. setting standards is, by itsnature, inherently a collective activity carried out industrywide, but howit is done determines whether it serves to facilitate price setting or otheranticompetitive behavior, which may be aimed against the buying publicor a competitor.the argument that an antitrust exemption is neededmany in the private sector are concerned that sharing ciprelatedinformation may expose participating companies to antitrust enforcementactions. in addition, many are concerned that determination of the safeharbors for ciprelated information sharing is a complex, expensive, andrisky process that will discourage smaller firms from ciprelated information sharing. further, although formal advice from the governmentcan be obtained in the form of a òbusiness review letteró (see next section), that mechanism has its limitations36 and does not provide absoluteimmunity from government enforcement actions or private litigation.concerns of this nature have led congress occasionally to pass limitedantitrust exemptions to combat perceived antitrust risk. one example is36first, over time, a business review letter can become outdated and may no longer berelied on. second, the letter is only as good as the facts presented. if a firm departs fromthe stated facts, it would be required to get a supplemental letter or risk losing protection.finally, while the letter may provide substantial protection with regard to federal enforcement agencies, there is always the possibility of private litigation. a business review letteris not binding on any private litigants. a clear statement from the federal government thatit does not view a particular set of facts as being in violation of antitrust laws will strengthenthe case of a firm in antitrust litigation. however, even if a firm wins in litigation, it still hasto bear the transaction costs of the lawsuit.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32critical information infrastructure protection and the lawthe national cooperative research act of 1984,37 amended and renamedthe national cooperative research and production act of 1993.the presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection suggested that firms should be offered limited assurances and guidelines toprotect them from antitrust enforcement actions.38 the congressionalbills mentioned earlier (h.r. 2435 and s. 1456) include language thatwould exempt companies that share information about computer virusesand other network vulnerabilities from antitrust prosecution.the argument that antitrust offers sufficient protectionopponents to creating a new antitrust exemption argue that a newexemption is not needed to protect firms sharing critical infrastructureprotection information from allegations of anticompetitive behavior.39they further argue that experience with antitrust exemptions in othercontexts reveals practical problems with exemptions that may cause moreharm than good. for example, if a blanket exemption were granted,people working to protect critical infrastructures could (try to) agree toraise prices 20 percent. they could also (try to) agree to share relevanttechnology only with each other and not with anyone offering a competing product. although most industry officials would agree that suchconduct is not protected by a new exemption, it is important to recognizethe possibility of such consequences. past efforts to develop exemptionsfrom antitrust (e.g., research cooperation) indicate that conduct can beexempt so long as it does not involve price fixing or boycott activities.the american bar associationõs antitrust section has voiced its opposition to further narrowing of exemptions.40some decrease in uncertainty can be obtained via a business reviewletter. this procedure allows firms to get formal advice from the department of justice (doj) on whether proposed future conduct would beviewed as anticompetitive. under this procedure, doj indicates whether,on the basis of the facts presented in the request, it currently has any3715 u.s.c. ¤¤ 430105.38presidentõs commission on critical infrastructure protection. 1997. critical foundations. washington, d.c., p. 32.39for examples of authority addressing the antitrust treatment of the type of informationexchange or standard setting discussed in the text, see antitrust law developments (5th ed.)114.40see, for example, <http://www.abanet.org/antitrust/tele97.html>, which notes that òtheamerican bar association section of antitrust law disfavors antitrust exemptions directed tonarrow industry categories.ó see also <http://www.abanet.org/antitrust/coalitionact.html>;<http://www.abanet.org/antitrust/agmerger.html>; <http://www.abanet.org/antitrust/basebl97.html>; and <http://www.abanet.org/antitrust/hcact97.html>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.increasing the flow of information33box 2.2epri business review letterin october 2000, the electric power research institute, inc. (epri) receiveda business review letter from the department of justice regarding a proposedinformation exchange program designed to reduce computerbased security risksposed by the increasing interconnection, interdependence, and computerization oftheir systems. epri indicated that the energy companies planned to exchangetwo principal types of information: best practices (including methodologies forconducting vulnerability assessments, stress tests, and plans to identify, alert, andprevent cybersecurity breaches) and product vulnerability information.the business review letter announced that the doj had no intention to challenge the informationsharing arrangements proposed by epri. doj found thatanticompetitive harm was unlikely, provided that the information was confined tophysical and cybersecurity issues and did not provide companyspecific information related to pricing or any agreements on purchasing decisions or any recommendations in favor of or against the products of particular vendors. the letteradds, òto the extent that the information exchanges result in more efficient meansof reducing cybersecurity costs, and thus savings redound to the benefit of consumers, the information exchanges could be procompetitive in effect.ó11the u.s. doj business review letter to epri is available online at <http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/busreview/6614.htm>.intention of bringing an enforcement action. doj has issued severalbusiness review letters41 (see box 2.2) relevant to critical infrastructureprotection activities, indicating that the proposed information sharingarrangements would not be viewed as a violation of antitrust laws. forexample, two business review letters announced that the government hadno intention to challenge efforts to develop solutions to y2k problems,including the sharing of test results and information on proposed solutions.several doj business review letters noted the potential procompetitivebenefits of information sharing that created databases to help industrymembers avoid fraud or high credit risks.concluding observationssymposium participants noted that trust (with respect to how theinformation will be used, how it will not be used, how it will be protected41a list of the business review letters issued by the department of justice is availableonline at <http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/busreview/letters.htm>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34critical information infrastructure protection and the lawfrom disclosure, and whether legal tools can be used by the governmentand private parties against those sharing information) among those sharing information is the most important prerequisite for achieving successful protection of the nationõs critical information infrastructure. the development of trust is necessary to achieve an atmosphere of openness andcooperation that can lead to sharing of vulnerabilities, best practices, andother critical information. while the passage of legislation will not automatically create trust, many believe it would create an environment wheretrust could develop.mr. sobel argues that passing legislation to remove a perceived (asopposed to a real) barrier is a bad way to make policy, and the antitrustsection of the american bar associationõs steady opposition to antitrustexemptions, for example, corroborates that point of view. legislationcarries risks and costs as well as benefits, and the changes over the pastyear underscore the importance of considering the total effect, as well asthe implications of any one piece of legislation.no major reform to the freedom of information act is explicitlyrequired to allow for ciprelated information sharing between the privatesector and the public sector. however, there is some risk and a perception that proprietary ciprelated information shared between privatesector firms and federal government entities may be disclosed to thirdparties under foia. the new hsa provision reduces any such risk.there needs to be greater education and awareness on foia in the federalagencies when staff are responding to foia requests and in the privatesector where this information is held. to lower apprehension in the private sector, the government should examine its processes and monitorthem to ensure they will protect private information and should makesure its employees are appropriately trained.like foia, the existing antitrust law does not prevent the privatesector from sharing information on cyberthreats within and betweensectors. however, also as with foia, there are persistent perceptionproblems and the need for better education and awareness about the law.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.353liability for unsecuredsystems and networksthe existing legal framework for critical infrastructure protection consists of a patchwork of state and federal laws that are generally aimed atdeterring certain types of conduct on computer networks. in addition,there are laws aimed at deterring certain types of conduct, including protection of electronic information pertaining to individual consumers andpatients, for specific sectors, such as the grammleachbliley (glb) act1for the financial services sector and the health insurance portability andaccountability act of 1996 (hipaa)2 for the health services sector. thereare no comparable regulations, however, that require entities to conformto any specific practices designed to promote critical infrastructure protection. symposium participants differed on whether it would be moreeffective to target hackers and other perpetrators (for the intentional harmcaused) or vendors/service providers (for harm caused through negligence). this chapter explores the legal theories supporting internetrelated liability.criminal lawthe purpose of criminal law is generally to deter future crime andpunish perpetrators. criminal threats to critical information infrastruc115 usc, subchapter i, sec. 68016809. pl 106102.2pl 104191.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36critical information infrastructure protection and the lawtures include unauthorized access to computer networks (either from aninsider or an outside hacker), malicious code (such as viruses and worms),and distributed denialofservice attacks. the conventional wisdom isthat prosecution of computer crimes will help reduce the number of futurecomputer attacks. this approach depends on the private sector entitiesñthe owners of the information infrastructuresñto report criminal computer activities. however, to use prosecution as a deterrent, the attackand subsequent prosecution must be publicized. this may be acceptablewhen criminals are caught in the process of attempting an attack (which istherefore rendered unsuccessful) but may not be desirable when the attacksucceeds. craig silliman suggests that a victimõs decision to report acomputer attack to law enforcement depends on a careful balancing ofinterests. for example, an isp differentiates itself based on the qualityand service of its networks; a single advertised attack could lead to a lossof customers and revenue. in addition, information in the public domainabout the vulnerability of a network could lead to copycat attacks. hence,it would take a large number of prosecutions, mr. silliman argues, tocompensate an isp for the corresponding bad publicity. these concernsñechoed by companies in many industries (e.g., financial institutions)ñhave contributed to private informationsharing efforts (such as isacsand cert) to reduce attacks and to detect and prevent the successfulconclusion of an attack.domestic jurisdictioncongress has passed a number of laws related to computer crime.3these laws are generally focused on hackers and other individuals whouse computer networks for illegal purposes.4 this section provides abrief overview of the key computer crime laws.53many states also have computer crime laws that may affect critical information infrastructure protection.4many of the attacks that occur today are the result of malicious or indifferent acts byindividuals (often referred to as òscript kiddiesó). they generally do not have the sophistication to develop their own attacks, but rely on programs (òscriptsó) written by others and/or other readymade tools to launch network attacks. an indepth analysis might be helpful to consider a variety of issues surrounding these hacker kits such as whether such kitsare protected under the first amendment rights (e.g., bombmaking is protected, so arguably hacker kits should be as well); whether these kits are circumvention tools; when it isappropriate to use these kits (e.g., security firms that use them to conduct audits for insurance purposes).5there are many laws that pertain to conduct on computer networks that are not designedsolely for online environments (e.g., the espionage act, 18 u.s.c. sec. 793, 794, and 798;wire fraud, 18 u.s.c. sec. 1343; and the economic espionage act, 18 u.s.c. sec. 1831 et al.).the laws cited in this section are all part of title 18, òcrimes and criminal procedures.ócritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks37computer fraud and abuse actthe computer fraud and abuse act (cfaa) of 1986 (18 u.s.c. ¤1030)was the first federal law specifically directed at computer crime. it wasinitially aimed at protecting òfederal interestó computers as well as computers used by financial institutions but now protects any computer usedin interstate commerce. the cfaa imposes penalties on individuals whoknowingly and with intent to defraud gain unauthorized access to computers. for example, in united states v. morris6 (an early case demonstrating some of the challenges associated with criminal computer prosecutions), the court found morris liable for damages caused by his actionsbecause he knowingly accessed a computer even if he did not intentionallycause harm.7 although the cfaa does not include provisions for criticalinformation infrastructure protection per se, it has played a major role inprohibiting and sanctioning cyberattacks.8 congress has continued toamend the cfaa over the last several years to increase its effectiveness asthe threat and technology have evolved.9electronic communications privacy actthe electronic communications privacy act of 1986 (ecpa; 18 u.s.c.¤ 2701) updated the legal framework for electronic surveillance of oraland wire communications established in title iii (the omnibus crimecontrol and safe streets act of 1968) to include electronic communications.10 ecpa provides criminal and civil penalties for accessing andobtaining or altering without permission stored electronic communica6u.s. v. morris, 928 f.2d 504 (2d cir. 1991).7sarah faulkner. 2000. òinvasion of the information snatchers: creating liability forcorporations with vulnerable computer networks,ó journal of computer & information law,vol. 18: 10191047.8for example, in u.s. v. david l. smith (d. n.j. may 1, 2001), mr. smith was convictedunder 18 u.s.c. 1030(a)(5) for launching the melissa virus (see <http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/melissasent.htm>) and in u.s. v. bret mcdanel (c.d. cal june 25,2002), mr. mcdanel was convicted under cfaa for maliciously bombarding a companycomputer system with thousands of email messages (see <http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/mcdanelconvict.htm >).9the u.s. house of representatives recently approved h.r. 3482, the cyber securityenhancement act, which raises the penalty for computer crime to a maximum of lifeimprisonment. the bill was received in the senate and read twice and then referred to thecommittee on the judiciary on july 16, 2002. for more information, see <http://thomas.loc.gov/cgibin/bdquery/z?d107:hr03482:@@@d&summ2=m&>.10for more information on electronic surveillance, see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1996. cryptographyõs role in securing theinformation society. national academy press, washington, d.c., appendix d. availableonline at <http://www.cstb.org/pubcrisis>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38critical information infrastructure protection and the lawtions. it also governs what an applicant must do to be granted access toevidence of computer crime possessed by isps. the unlawful access tostored communications provision, like the cfaa, protects the criticalinformation infrastructure by enabling the prosecution of individuals whoattempt to halt the flow of information to or from electronic storagesystems.fraud and related activity in connection with access devicessection 102911 in title 18 of the u.s. code is the òfederal statute condemning various crimes involving . . . access devices.ó12 the law definesan access device as òany card, plate, code, account number, electronicserial number, mobile identification number, personal identification number,or . . . other means of account access that can be used, alone or in conjunction with another access device, to obtain money, goods, services, or anyother thing of value. . . .ó13 section 1029 provides for penalties rangingfrom fines toñin some casesñimprisonment for up to 20 years.wire and electronic communications interception and interception oforal communicationssection 2511 in title 18 of the u.s. code òprovides specific criminaland civil penalties for individuals (law enforcement officials and privatecitizens alike) who conduct electronic or wire surveillance of communications . . . in a manner that is not legally authorized. legal authorizationfor such surveillance is provided for specific circumstances in law enforcement and foreign intelligence collection. . . .ó14 section 2511 includeswhat is referred to as the oneparty consent provision, which allows federal law enforcement officials to monitor telephone conversations without obtaining a court order provided they obtain the consent to do sofrom one of the parties engaged in the conversations.11the access device law was primarily developed for lowtech prosecutions, such ascredit card fraud, but has since been adopted for use in more complex cases involvingcomputers.12charles doyle. 2002. the usa patriot act: a legal analysis (rl31377). washington,d.c.: congressional research service. available online at <http://www.fas.org/irp/crs/rl31377.pdf>.13the text of 18 u.s.c. 1029 can be found online at <http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/usc1029.htm>.14computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1996.cryptographyõs role in securing the information society. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 396. available online at <http://books.nap.edu/html/crisis/>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks39usa patriot actthe usa patriot act of 2001,15 designed as a collection of amendments to existing laws, includes a number of provisions related to criticalinfrastructure protection: revisions to cfaa (increased penalties forhackers who damage protected computers; a new offense for damagingcomputers used for national security; and an expansion of the coverage ofthe statute to include computers in foreign countries so long as there is aneffect on u.s. interstate or foreign commerce); increased information sharing; strengthened criminal laws against terrorism; and enhancements tothe governmentõs legal authorities to conduct electronic surveillance.international jurisdictionthe nature of modern communications, including the internet, makesinternational cooperation in cybersecurity of increasing importance. theperpetrators of many recent cybercrimes (such as the òi love youó virusand the distributed denialofservice attacks in february 2000) werehackers in foreign countries. the recent case of u.s. v. gorshkov,16 inwhich an fbi agent conducted a crossborder search of a russian computer to obtain evidence to indict a russian citizen on extortion charges, isan example of how courts look at crossborder searches in the currentenvironment and how it might become the norm in the absence of formalinternational coordination.increasing crossborder criminal activity highlights the need for common international standards and objectives for cybersecurity. differentcountries have different laws and practices, making prosecution of thesecriminals very difficult.17 in august 2000, sofaer and goodman (center15uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism act (usa patriot act) of 2001, pl 10756.16u.s. v. gorshkov, 2001 wl 1024026 (w.d.wash.). after a series of computer hackerintrusions into u.s. businesses, the fbi identified a russian as one of the intruders. the fbilured him to the united states on the pretext of a job interview, during which the defendantwas asked to prove his computer hacking and security skills. the defendant logged into hishome computer network to access computer hacker tools. the fbi were able to obtain thedefendantõs userid and password to his home computer by using a tool to capture allkeystrokes on the computer provided during the interview. the userid and passwordallowed the fbi to download the information contained on the defendantõs home computer,which confirmed that the defendant was involved in the computer hacker intrusions. atissue is whether the fbi violated the defendantõs fourth amendment rights by breaking intohis space. the court found that the defendant should not have had an expectation ofprivacy during the interview; hence he intended to disclose the userid and password.17one notable exception is the arrest and prosecution of ehud tenebaum, an israelicitizen, for his part in the solar sunrise cyberattacks. for more information on solar sunrise, see <http://www.sans.org/newlook/resources/idfaq/solarsunrise.htm>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40critical information infrastructure protection and the lawfor international security and cooperation, stanford university) proposeda multilateral convention on cybercrime and terrorism that wouldencourage international cooperation.18 the council of europe developedthe convention on cybercrime (with the united states participating as anobserver), which was signed (as of december 2001) by 26 members of theeuropean union as well as the united states, canada, and japan.19jack goldsmith, professor of law at the university of chicago lawschool, argues that remote crossborder searches and seizures are a necessary tool in fighting cybercrimes.20 such measures, he asserts, are notprohibited by existing norms of territorial sovereignty and furthermoreare not without precedent. there remains a debate about when and howa nation can attempt to enforce its own laws to affect those outside its ownterritory, and for that reason enforcement is still an ambiguous conceptthat should be clarified as sovereign governments adjust to the realities ofnew technology.21 box 3.1 provides a general discussion of criminalliability with respect to international cybercrime.civil liabilityelliot turrini, former assistant u.s. attorney from the district of newjersey, argues that criminal law alone is not sufficient to deter intrudersand prevent cybercrime. civil liability, he argues, is òessential to insureproper incentives to create an optimal computer crime strategy.óalthough tortbased liability with regard to cip is not well developed atpresent, many experts believe that a few ciprelated liability suits could18abraham d. sofaer and seymour e. goodman. 2000. a proposal for an internationalconvention on cyber crime and terrorism. stanford, calif: center for international securityand cooperation. their proposal calls for adoption of laws making certain cyberactivitiescriminal, enforcement of laws or extradition to the united states for prosecution, cooperation in investigating criminal activities, and participation in efforts to adopt and implementstandards and practices to enhance security.19the european convention is somewhat controversial in the cybersecurity arena. someexperts argue that the convention has several major flaws, including these: it does notinclude all the states that should be included; it is restricted to criminal law cooperation;and it does not encourage cooperation in the development of standards and practices thatwould make cybercommunication safer. information on the convention is available at<http://www.coe.int>.20jack l. goldsmith, òthe internet and the legitimacy of remote crossborder searches,óuniversity of chicago law school, october 2001.21for a discussion of the relationship between global information networks and localvalues (political, economic, and cultural norms), see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2001. global networks and local values: a comparative look at germany and the united states. national academy press, washington, d.c.available online at <http://www.cstb.org/pubglobalnetworks>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks41box 3.1offshore cybercrime and jurisdictionbyjack goldsmithprofessor of law, university of chicago law schoolthe anonymity made possible by cyberspace is one reason why attacks oncritical infrastructures from hackers, cybercriminals, and cyberterrorists are hard tostop. another reason has to do with borders. when these activities take placefrom abroad, they are hard to stop for a different, independent reason.a nationõs power to enforce its laws is limited by territory. the restatement(third) of foreign relations law states these limits as follows: òit is universallyrecognized, as a corollary of state sovereignty, that officials in one state may notexercise their functions in the territory of another state without the latterõsconsent.ó1 the restatement adds that one stateõs law enforcement officials òcanengage in criminal investigation in [another] state only with the stateõs consent.ó2even with the territorial limits of enforcement jurisdiction, nations can often doa good job of controlling internet transmissions from abroad by regulating personsand property within the territory. they can, for example, seize the foreign contentproviderõs local assets, penalize instate endusers severely, regulate instate hardware or software through which offending transactions are made, and regulateinternet access providers and local financial intermediaries that facilitate unwantedinternet transactions.3 in these and other ways, a territorial government exercisingpower solely within its territory can indirectly regulate offshore content providers byraising their costs, often significantly.unfortunately, these forms of enduser and intermediary regulations tend notto work well with respect to the cybercrimes and cyberterrorism committed fromabroad. because these crimes are (usually) onetime, discrete events, it is hardfor local internet intermediaries to identify and screen out the pertinent crossborder data flows. moreover, there is a special need in this context to secureevidence of the crime immediately. pseudonymity is relatively easy to achieve inthe commission of these crimes. and perhaps most importantly, evidence of thecrime can be destroyed relatively quickly.for these reasons, enforcement authorities face two distinct jurisdictionalchallenges with respect to cybercrimes and cyberterrorism committed from abroad.the first challenge concerns evidence. authorities often must take immediatesteps to identify the computer sources of the criminal activity and seize (or at leastfreeze) information on the computers relevant to the crime before all records of thecrime are erased. the second challenge concerns prosecution. authorities mustsecure the presence of the offshore perpetrator so they can punish him.there are basically three ways to achieve these goals, consistent with theprinciple that enforcement jurisdiction is territorial.cooperation by treatythe nation subject to the attack can cooperate with the nation (or nations)from which, or through which, the attack occurs. officials in the originating state(s)can assist officials in the target state in identifying, freezing, and retrieving evidence related to the crime and in apprehending the author of the crime and eithercontinuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42critical information infrastructure protection and the lawbringing him to justice in the originating state or extraditing him to the subject statefor prosecution.this, in a nutshell, is the strategy of the council of europe draft cybercrimeconvention. in addition to harmonizing domestic definitions of cybercrime, theconvention aims to enhance fast and effective international cooperation in the enforcement of cybercrime. it requires each nation to enact laws authorizingexpedited searches, seizures, and preservations of computer data within the territory. it also provides for a system for rapid enforcement assistance. for example,the convention contemplates that nations where the crime originates will, at therequest of the nation where the crime is causing damage, preserve and disclosestored computer data. it also contemplates that each treaty signatory will establisha roundtheclock point of contact to ensure immediate assistance for the purposesof crossborder information requests. finally, the treaty contemplates extraditionof criminals from the nation where the attacks originated to the nation where theattacks occurred.there are at least four problems with this approach. first, treaties take years,and sometimes decades, to draft and ratify. the council of europe convention hasnot yet been ratified, and it will take years before major nations outside europeratify it (assuming they ever do). second, any nation that does not ratify the treaty(and there will be many) can serve as a haven for cybercriminals and cyberterrorists. for the treaty to work, state parties will need to impose significantcollateral sanctions on nations that fail to ratify, implement, or enforce the convention. fourth, the convention does not authorize remote crossborder searches(i.e., unilateral searches by one nation on computers in another nation for thepurpose of seizing and freezing evidence). assuming that the convention eventually comes into force, it will be necessary for a nation pursuing a cyberterrorist toconsult with local officials before seizing, storing, and freezing data on computerslocated in their countries. even with the contemplated roundtheclock consultationand mutual assistance machinery, this extra and unwieldy step will give cybercriminals precious time to cover their tracks.informal cooperationeven in the absence of treaties, enforcement authorities from many nationscooperate in the fight against cybercrime by (1) swapping information and(2) cooperating in the seizure of evidence on local computers.informal cooperation is crucial and does not require lengthy treaty processes.but it is uncertain. in the absence of an official treaty framework, many nations donot provide adequate cooperation. moreover, extradition of cybercriminals is difficult to do in the absence of a treaty. this is because of the principal of doublecriminality, which requires as a precondition to extradition that the allegations be acrime in both the rendering and receiving state. laws against cybercrimes areunderdeveloped in most nations and not harmonized across nations. a treatyregime can, over time, rectify these shortcomings (as the european treaty aims todo). but in the meantime, extradition for cybercrimes is difficult. consider the fateof the author of the òi love youó virus, which caused over $10 billion in damagearound the world. he was not prosecuted in the philippines because that countrylacked adequate criminal laws. and because he did not violate philippine law, thebox 3.1 continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks43double criminality principle precluded him from being extradited to other countriespursuant to general extradition treaties.crossborder searches and seizuresthe nation attacked can also act unilaterally. sitting at their desks in onecountry, law enforcement officials can take unilateral steps on computer networksto trace the origins of the cyberattack and explore, freeze, and store relevant datalocated on a computer in the country where the crime originated. these actionsare known as remote crossborder searches and seizures.there are two problems with these unilateral acts. first, many believe theyviolate the principle of territorial sovereignty and thus violate international law. (inòthe internet and the legitimacy of remote crossborder searches,ó4 i argue,contrary to conventional wisdom, that crossborder searches and seizures areconsistent with international law.) and second, crossborder searches cannot produce the criminal defendant himself.1restatement (third) of the foreign relations law of the united states 432, comment b.2ibid.3for an elaboration of these truncated points, see jack l. goldsmith, òagainst cyberanarchy,ó 65 university of chicago law review 1199 (1998); jack l. goldsmith, òthe internetand the abiding significance of territorial sovereignty,ó 5 indiana journal of global legalstudies 475 (1998).4jack l. goldsmith, òthe internet and the legitimacy of remote crossborder searches,óuniversity of chicago law school, october 2001.change the costbenefit analysis of securing critical infrastructures. civillaw is intended to deter undesirable or wrongful conduct and compensate those harmed by such conduct. an important component of civilliability is that it would allow a victim to recover losses from third partiesif such parties were negligent or engaged in intentional misconduct andsuch negligence or misconduct was the proximate cause of the loss. in theinternet environment, such third parties may be the only source ofrecovery,22 since criminal law offers no compensation to the victim if thecomputer criminal cannot be identified or is judgmentproof (a likelyscenario given the anonymity of the internet and the lack of financial22civil lawsuits may be ineffective at recovering losses against third parties located outside the united states. as noted earlier, the european convention on cybercrime is limitedto criminal law cooperation.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44critical information infrastructure protection and the lawassets of many computer hackers).23 the ability to impose civil damageson a third party, such as a communications carrier or a service providerwho is proven to be negligent, could motivate that party to invest thenecessary resources in improving security (e.g., by closing known software bugs to help deter hackers). civil liability can arise from contractlaw, tort law, or regulation.contract lawcontracts are agreements between two parties that create an obligation to do, or not do, a particular thing. if one party breaches its contractual obligations, the law provides a remedy to the aggrieved party.contract law is generally viewed as the only basis for bringingcomputerrelated cases because other theories of liability are inapplicablefor several reasons: (1) damages from computer crimes are almost alwaysmonetary, and courts have traditionally denied negligence claims forpurely economic losses (see òtort lawó section);24 (2) there is no specificstandard of conduct for negligencebased claims; and (3) the interveningcriminal act, not the network ownerõs negligence, is generally viewed asthe proximate cause of the harm. by contrast, liability between twoentities is easily facilitated by contract. say, for example, company acontracts with isp b to provide network services. if isp b fails to upholdits contractual bargains, then company a can seek remedy in court. inthis way, contracts can be a positive force in helping secure critical infrastructures.contract law, however, often fails to provide an adequate remedy forthird parties. suppose a hacker breaks into company aõs inadequatelysecured network and then uses company aõs network to launch an attackagainst company b. the attack against company b disables its networks,thereby causing company b to fail to deliver promised services to itscustomers.25 if company b is not in privity with company a (i.e., the twocompanies do not have a contractual relationship), company b cannotseek remedy for business losses from company a under contract law.company b is often referred to as the òdownstreamó victim in this type ofcomputer attack. this scenario is quite common in distributed denialofservice attacks. hence, the limitations of contract law have caused com23erin e. kenneally. 2000. òthe byte stops here: duty and liability for negligentinternet security,ó computer security journal, 16(2).24david gripman. 1997. òthe doors are locked but the thieves and vandals are stillgetting in: a proposal in tort to alleviate corporate americaõs cybercrime problem,ó thejohn marshall journal of computer and information law 16(1):167.25ibid.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks45mentators to suggest the use of tort law as a model for computerrelatedcases.tort lawa tort is a wrongful act other than a breach of contract for which reliefmay be obtained in the form of damages or an injunction. the purpose oftort law is to deter wrongful conduct and compensate those harmed.while contract law rests in large part on obligations imposed by negotiation or bargain, tort law rests seminally on obligations imposed by law(either case law or federal or state regulation).26 for example, in the caseof a distributed denialofservice attack, there is no question that thehacker who intentionally caused harm should be held responsible in tort.the question, however, is whether tort liability should also apply to entities (companies, vendors, service providers, universities, or individuals)whose systems or products were used or accessed in the course of acomputer attack and who failed to take reasonable steps prior to theattack to protect against misuse of their networks. to date, no u.s. courthas addressed the issue of liability for failure to secure a computer network adequately.27 if tort law is found to apply to computer security,then the potential for civil liability lawsuits (with the likelihood of monetary damages) could encourage companies to invest in computer security measures. it would also influence decisions about computing systemdevelopment. as a consequence, the ability of tort law to motivate actionon critical information infrastructure protection is one possible avenue toexplore.a key conceptual question is whether tort law should allow recoveryof damages from a company whose networks were not properly securedand then were used by a third party to cause harm. generally, to recoverdamages in tort, the plaintiff must show that the defendant was negligent.negligence has four basic elements: (1) a legal duty; (2) a breach of thatduty (i.e., a failure to conform oneõs conduct to the required standard ofcare, such as òreasonable careó);28 (3) causation (i.e., the damage was the26sarah faulkner. 2000. òinvasion of the information snatchers: creating liability forcorporations with vulnerable computer networks,ó journal of computer & information law,18:10191047.27erin e. kenneally. 2000. òthe byte stops here: duty and liability for negligentinternet security,ó computer security journal, 16(2).28reasonable care is often defined as òthe degree of care that a reasonable person wouldexercise under the circumstances.ó david gripman. 1997. òthe doors are locked but thethieves and vandals are still getting in: a proposal in tort to alleviate corporateamericaõs cybercrime problem,ó the john marshall journal of computer and information law16(1):167.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46critical information infrastructure protection and the lawproximate cause or foreseeable consequence of the risk created by thedefendantõs act or omission); and (4) actual damage. before liability willbe imposed, a plaintiff must substantiate all of the necessary elements tosupport its claim.under existing law, a plaintiff would have some difficulty meeting allof the required elements in the computer security context. although acorporation might be deemed to have an existing legal duty to protect theinformation of its customers or clients (especially if it is a financial institution or a custodian of medical records),29 currently no legal duty existsbetween a service provider and other unrelated or òdownstreamó partieson the internet. if such a duty were to be recognized, it would have to bebased on (1) a public policy determination that the victim needs legalredress, (2) the foreseeability of risk of harm to the victim, (3) the defendantsõ ability to control or minimize the risk of harm, and (4) the determination that the defendant is the party best positioned to protect againstthe harm.30with regard to the foreseeability of harm to third parties in thenetwork environment, several cases demonstrate that this question isinextricably related to the question of whether the defendant knew orshould have known that certain illegal or wrongful conduct was, in fact,occurring on its networks (and not just òlikelyó to occur). these casesñalthough decided in the very different contexts of copyright infringementand defamation lawñalso suggest that holding defendants liable, eitherdirectly or indirectly, for harm caused as a result of known and unaddressed computer security vulnerabilities would be a reasonable extension of traditional legal principles. as indicated in the cases set forth inbox 3.2, if a corporation (or service provider) knows or has reason toknow that its computer networks are being used to cause harm, and it hasthe capacity to stop such harm from occurring, the corporation may berequired to take action to avoid liability, especially if it derives a financialor other benefit from allowing its networks to be accessed by others.clearly, however, the determination as to the òcapacity to controló theunwanted network behavior will be a matter of significant dispute.as to the fourth factor, proponents of tort liability argue that the29it could be argued that financial institutions have an existing duty under the grammleachbliley implementing regulations to provide immediate and effective incident response to protect the confidentiality of consumer data maintained on their own networks.these regulations, however, would not apply to unregulated parties whose networks arebeing used to cause harm.30kimberly keifer and randy sabett. 2002. òopenness of internet creates potential forcorporate information security liability,ó electronic commerce and law report, vol. 7, no.24, june 12, p. 10.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks47box 3.2liability based on knowledge of misconduct oncomputer networkscubby v. compuserve1in october 1991, a federal judge in new york found that compuserve was adistributor of general online information services and was therefore not liable fordefamatory messages carried on one of the 150 computer bulletin boards on theservice. the court found that compuserve had no contractual relationship withthe bulletin boards on its service and that an intermediate entity known as cis hadaccepted the contractual responsibility to edit the bulletin board that had carriedthe defamatory messages. the court also noted that compuserve received nocompensation from the bulletin board and had no opportunity to review the contents of the bulletin board before the defamatory comments were published.the court concluded that compuserve was the modern equivalent of thecorner news vendor selling numerous newspapers and magazines. as such,compuserve could not be held responsible for defamatory information carried onindividual bulletin boards. the court indicated that the network administrator couldonly be held civilly liable if he òknew or should have knownó about improper orillegal network traffic. the court also observed that if a network administrator isviewed as a publisher, he is held to a higher level of responsibility. moreover, thecourt observed that while compuserve had received some information about problems on the bulletin board system in question, that information was not sufficient toprompt a further inquiry. thus, the nature of the traffic played a significant role.stratton oakmont v. prodigy2in 1995, a new york state court came to the opposite conclusion as the court incubby v. compuserve, finding that prodigy could be held responsible for defamatorymessages posted by one of the users of its service. at the time, this case expandedthe potential liability of commercial online computer service providers, by determining that prodigy could be held liable as a publisher of defamatory material forinformation posted on its network even though prodigy maintained it was nothingmore than a passive conduit of information and therefore should be treated only asa distributor (like a newsstand or a library) of news or information. in determiningthat prodigy knew or should have known about the content of the defamatorymaterial posted on prodigy bulletin boards, the court recognized that prodigy hadput into effect a series of content review policies and had utilized editorial softwareto screen messages uploaded to the network. accordingly, prodigy did haveaffirmative responsibility for the contents of the messages posted by prodigy users.the ultimate decision in this case, however, was superseded by the principles ofliability and safe harbor contained in the communications decency act of 1996.rtc v. netcom3in november 1995 a federal judge in california ruled that an internet serviceprovider could be held liable for contributory infringement for copyrighted materialit made available online if it had notice of the copyrighted nature of the material andrefused to delete it from its archives.continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48critical information infrastructure protection and the lawrtc was the exclusive licensee to certain unpublished copyrighted works.rtc and its licensees maintain extensive security over these materials, which arecentral to the advanced spiritual development of church of scientology members.when rtc discovered some of its materials being posted in text file format on theinternet in late 1994 and 1995, it brought three lawsuits against the posters of thematerials and the owners of the bulletin boards posting the materials. in two of thecases, netcom and another isp were named as defendants after they refused toremove the copyrighted information contained in the notice from rtc.netcom moved for summary judgment, arguing that they could not be heldliable under principles of direct, contributory, or vicarious liability. the court partiallyagreed, granting summary judgment on the direct and vicarious copyright infringement liability theories. however, the court held that netcom might be found liablefor contributory infringement since, despite warnings from the rtc, it allowed newpostings by the defendants and did not remove prior postings. on august 4, 1996,the rtc and netcom4 announced that their litigation had been settled on undisclosed terms. after the settlement, netcom posted new guidelines for protectingintellectual property on its internet service, allowing copyright holders to complainto netcom about alleged postings of their copyrighted material. of course, thelegal duty to refrain from participating in copyright infringement flows directly fromthe copyright act.a&m records, inc. v. napster, inc.5the decision of the court of appeals for the ninth circuit in the napster litigation again demonstrates that operators of computer networks can be held liable formisconduct that occurs on such networks if they know or should know of the illegaluses. in napster, the defendants created a filesharing system that allowed individual users to, among other things, share copyrighted music files. in its suitagainst napster for copyright infringements, the plaintiffs contended that napstershould be liable under theories of contributory and vicarious copyright infringement. as to contributory infringement, one key question was whether napsterknew or had reason to know of the direct infringement committed by napsterõsusers. on that issue, the court, relying on the prior netcom decision, concludedthat napster had both actual and constructive knowledge that its users wereengaged in illegal activities. similarly, with regard to the issue of vicarious liability,the court concluded that napster could be held liable for the activities of users onits network because of napsterõs failure to police its system to rid it of illegal usesand the fact that napster benefited financially from the continuing availability ofillegal activities on its network.cyber promotions v. apex global information servicesthe suggestion that there may be best practices with regard to online computer security is found in cyber promotions v. apex global information services(agis).6 in this case, agis had contracted to be the internet service provider forcyber promotions. at the time of the contract, agis knew that cyber promotionsregularly sent unsolicited commercial email (òspamó), and it imposed a 30daywithout cause termination provision in the contract. in september 1997, only 6months after the contract was signed, agis suffered a massive flood attack directbox 3.2 continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks49ed at cyber promotions that completely consumed agisõs bandwidth. agis responded by immediately terminating cyber promotionsõ use of its service.cyber promotions then filed a temporary restraining order (tro) and preliminary injunction. in granting the tro against agis, the court noted that securityrequirements evolve, and agis had not taken significant steps to deal with pingattacks. the court noted that the only security step taken by agis was to removecyber promotions from its network; agis had not hired a security expert orattempted to install a router to control potentially hostile ping attacks. the courtõsbasic approach to agis was this: òother isps are able to mitigate retaliatoryactions by pingers, why not you?ó the tro was granted and agis was directedto reinstate service to cyber promotions. this result appears to have been substantially influenced by the fact that the court noted that agis had not taken thesame measures as other reputable internet service providers had taken to mitigatesimilar attacks.1cubby v. compuserve, 776 f. supp. 135 (s.d.n.y. 1991).2stratton oakmont v. prodigy, 1995 wl 323710 (n.y.sup.ct.).3rtc v. netcom 3, 907 f. supp. 1361 (n.d.cal. 11/21/95).4rtc v. netcom 3, 907 f. supp. 1361, at 14.5a&m records, inc. v. napster, inc., 239 f.3d 1004 (9th cir. 2001).61997 wl 634384 (e.d. pa. 1997).companies that control the computer networks are in the best position toimplement appropriate security measures31 and are therefore the òlowestcost avoiders.ó this costbenefit analysis owes its origins to judgelearned handõs equation b < pl, in united states v. carroll towing co.32according to handõs logic, a party is negligent if the cost (b) of takingadequate measures to prevent harm is less than the monetary loss (l)multiplied by the probability (p) of its occurring.33however, courts have traditionally limited thirdparty liability in twoways: (1) by excluding damages in negligence actions for purely eco31alan charles raul, frank r. volpe, and gabriel s. meyer. 2001. òliability for computer glitches and online security lapses,ó bna electronic commerce law report, 6(31):849.32united states v. carroll towing co., 159 f.2d 169, 17374 (2d cir. 1947).33see alan charles raul, frank r. volpe, and gabriel s. meyer. 2001. òliability forcomputer glitches and online security lapses,ó bna electronic commerce law report,6(31):849 and erin e. kenneally. 2000. òthe byte stops here: duty and liability fornegligent internet security,ó computer security journal, 16(2).34margaret jane radin. 2001. òdistributed denial of service attacks: who pays?,ó <http://www.mazunetworks.com/whitepapers/radinprint.html>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50critical information infrastructure protection and the lawnomic losses34 and (2) by holding that intervening criminal acts break thechain of causation such that any breach of duty by the defendant wouldnot be deemed the proximate cause of the harm to the plaintiff. theeconomic loss doctrine prohibits parties from recovering financial losses,absent injury to person or property, under tort law.35 many courts, however, are beginning to reject the economic loss doctrine. for example, inpeople express airline v. consolidated rail corporation, the new jersey supremecourt concluded that òa defendant who has breached his duty of care toavoid the risk of economic injury to particularly foreseeable plaintiffsmay be held liable for actual economic losses that are proximately causedby its breach of duty.36 similarly, if a court found that the likelihood ofmisconduct on networks was so great, the fact of the òinterveningó criminal act would not necessarily be sufficient to break the chain of causation.standards and best practicesas a motivating factor for industry to adopt best practices, tort lawcan be a significant complement to standardsetting, because compliancewith industrywide standards is usually an acceptable demonstration ofdue care. if tort liability were recognized in this area, implementingsecurity standards would be a way for a company to minimize its liability.gripman argues that corporations have òa duty to select and implementsecurity measures, to monitor the security measuresõ effectiveness, and tomaintain and adapt the security measures according to changing securityneeds.ó37 however, today there is no such duty and no nationally recog35sarah faulkner. 2000. òinvasion of the information snatchers: creating liability forcorporations with vulnerable computer networks,ó journal of computer & information law,18:10191047.36in people express airlines v. consolidated rail corporation, 495 a.2d 107 (n.j. 1985), arailway accident caused a tank of flammable liquid to spill and ignite near the plaintiffõsbusiness. the fire caused no physical damage, but the plaintiffõs business operations wereinterrupted, causing severe financial loss. the court rejected the economic loss doctrineand allowed the plaintiff corporation to prosecute its claim for purely economic loss.37david gripman. 1997. òthe doors are locked but the thieves and vandals are stillgetting in: a proposal in tort to alleviate corporate americaõs cybercrime problem,ó thejohn marshall journal of computer and information law 16(1):167.38the international organization for standardization (iso) adopted in august 2000 thecode of practice for information security management (also known as iso 17799), which isbased on the british standard bs 7799. the standard has faced criticism from several countries and security experts, who argue that iso 17799 is too vague because it focuses ongeneral policies and best practices rather than concrete mechanisms for auditing compliance. however, some insurance companies, such as aig, are using iso 17799 as a basis tomeasure the security of cyber insurance policy holders. an analysis of iso 17799 conducted by the information technology laboratory of the national institute of standardsand technologies is available at <http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/secpubs/otherpubs/critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks51nized standard of care38 among computer security experts. adoptingsuch a standard is not a simple process due to the evolving nature ofsecurity vulnerabilities and the wide variety of the size and resources ofindividuals and entities that have an internet presence. for example,applying security patches promptly may be one component required fordemonstrating òreasonable care,ó but how often should patches beapplied? should a corporation be deemed negligent if its security policyis to search for and apply patches once a month but the corporationõsservers were hacked in the third week after a patch was released? determining the duty that a corporation should have is complicated by the factthat although a patch may close one vulnerability, it could open a newvulnerability when installed in a local environment. should a corporationbe deemed negligent if it installs a patch that leaves the system morevulnerable?eric benhamou suggests that the one action that firms should takeimmediately is to begin sharing best practices (including attack scenariosand practices to protect against these attacks). establishment of operational best practices for network administrators and users (combined withongoing training and enforcement of the practices through intrusiondetection tests) is one possible way of increasing computer security. thecert coordination center at carnegie mellon university (a federallyfunded research and development center) and the sans institute are twoexamples of organizations working to develop and disseminate suggestedbest practices for computer security. even with such organizations, adopting good security practices will not happen overnight, and implementation will vary.in addition to playing a role in tort liability determinations, best practices can also serve as a benchmark against which firms can be audited.audits, a normal part of business management, can be beneficial in thecomputer security arena. a firm is more likely to avoid litigation orreduce its liability if it is routinely audited and if its auditors apply wellaccepted principles of testing and analysis, which do not yet exist in thesecurity environment. moreover, by forcing a corporation to understandwhat it will be audited for, auditing serves to educate the corporation onrevisofaq.pdf>. meanwhile, industryspecific standards are emerging. for example,grammleachbliley, implemented by the sec, imposes rules that financial institutionsmust follow. the health insurance portability and accountability act outlines the responsibilities that health care providers and insurers have with respect to security measures toprotect electronic information.39for example, the government recently announced that it was creating a security seal ofapproval that consists of a set of software standards that all dod computers must meet. seeògovernmentõs seal of security,ó wired news, july 16, 2002, <http://www.wired.com/news/politics/0,1283,53901,00.html>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52critical information infrastructure protection and the lawwhat is expected of it. audits or certification programs39 would alsoserve as a mark of acceptance for the corporation that will help it gaincustomer acceptance for its products and services and could result inreduced insurance premiums.if a liability regime is imposed, entities may still be held negligenteven if they comply with industry standards. in t.j. hooper v. northernbarge corporation,40 two barges towed by two tugboats sank in a storm.the barge owners sued the tugboat owners, claiming negligence and noting that the tugboats did not have weather radios aboard. the tugboatowners countered by noting that weather radios were not the industrynorm. judge learned hand found the tugboat owners liable for half thedamages even though the use of weather radios had not become standardindustry practice. he observed: òindeed in most cases reasonable prudence is in fact common prudence; but strictly it is never its measure; awhole calling may have unduly lagged in the adoption of new and available devices. . . . courts must in the end say what is required; there areprecautions so imperative that even their universal disregard will notexcuse their omission.ó this case shows that the meaning of òreasonablecareó is never static and must constantly be reevaluated as technologychanges. industryõs failure to develop a standard or to adapt the standardto changes in technology could lead courts to develop their own standard.given the relatively novel nature of liability for insecure computersystems, one option is to create a safe harbor (immunity from tort liability)for corporations that comply with standards that are disseminated by adesignated body. care must be taken, however, to ensure that the establishment of best practices and associated safe harbor provisions does notdeteriorate into a substitution of ritual for effective practices. in rapidlyevolving areas, procedures or rituals may be all that can be standardized.hence, although a liability regime could result in more compliance withthe procedures and policies set forth in applicable standards, it may notactually improve network security. a corporation that is given safe harbormay not have sufficient incentive to surpass the prevailing standard (e.g.,by implementing security policies, such as aggressive local testing ofpatches, that would provide it with a better level of protection) or todevelop innovative solutions (e.g., to detect and resist computer attacks).moreover, any improvement in network security achieved through a liability regime also could result in increased corporate liability for failingto follow sound information security procedures, even when data, systems, and networks are not actually put at risk.should all entities in the internet community be held to the samestandard of care with respect to computer network security? legal liability4060 f.2d 737 (2d cir. 1932).critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks53often depends on which actors are best positioned to prevent the harmfulactivities (in this case, computer attacks). the committee has found ituseful to examine the potential duty owed by a few key players: internetservice providers, vendors, universities and colleges, and individual users(see box 3.3).box 3.3assigning liability to key playersinternet service providersdistributed denialofservice (ddos) attacks1 can be inbound to or outboundfrom the ispõs2 network. inbound ddos attacks are launched from outside theisp and either pass through or terminate on the ispõs customers. outboundattacks are launched from computers connected to the ispõs network. an isp canconnect several thousands of highbandwidth, alwayson computers to the internet. these computers as a group are prime targets for hackers, who can use themas zombies to launch an attack through the ispõs network to other targets on theinternet. when such an attack is launched, who is liable for damages?isps are in a unique position to prevent or contain the harm caused throughddos attacks in that they can cut off certain computer network attacks whenthese attacks enter the ispõs network. the highcapacity communications linksand the powerful routers (switches) used by isps within their networks are muchbetter positioned to deal with large volumes of ddos packets than are the linksand routers used by many end customers. this is particularly true if some changesare made to both the technical protocols used to move packets through the internetand the routers (switches) that sort and route those packets. while isps coulddetect and cut off attacks, they have little incentive to do so today. implementingbetter network security measures would cost the isps more money and could slowoverall network performance, resulting in customer dissatisfaction. to efficientlyand effectively identify packets as belonging to a ddos, some changes (e.g.,implementation of mechanisms that make it possible to reliably identify the originof a packet and the route it has taken) might be required that reduce the anonymityenjoyed by internet users today. in addition, some attacks are difficult to detect,analyze, and respond to, thus requiring advanced network management systems.the isps are largely unregulated,3 and there are no formal standards imposedupon them by regulatory bodies for such things as the security, trustworthiness, orreliability of the services they provide.4 ispsõ policies on incident response vary atthe discretion of each isp and its own best estimates of what may be required of itin a competitive marketplace, by its target customers, in the future.given that isps know (or should know) about the risk and have the capabilityto mitigate ddos attacks, some experts believe that isps should face significantliability if their systems are insecure. however, some service providers argue thatthey should receive immunity for hostile traffic flowing through their networks.5continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54critical information infrastructure protection and the lawvendors6should vendors (hardware and software) be liable for developing productswith extensive security flaws? do companies that knowingly use defective productsincur liability if their systems are used to launch a downstream attack? for example, hackers know that one particular hardware vendor ships routers in an insecurestate. because of this insecurity, companies know that they need to boot up therouter and configure it before it is attached to the internet. however, in one case,a summer intern did not know about the policy and attached the defaultconfiguredrouter to the internet before reconfiguring the router. within 30 seconds, a hackerbroke into the companyõs network. who should be held accountableñthe vendorwho knowingly shipped an insecure product or the company whose employee didnot follow the companyõs established procedure? certain vendors recognize thatthis is an instance of marketplace failureñthat is, the marketplace does not rewardthose who invest resources in building more secure products. customers wantmore features delivered more quickly. if there was a market demand for moresecure products, vendors argue that they would change their approach.7some experts have called for vendors to be held liable for releasing productswith security holes. applying a strict liability standard for the computer securitycontext seems unfair because software development is never a perfect processand most it environments are too complex and diverse to ensure that a givenproduct will perform exactly the same in every case. however, the cstb reportcomputers at risk notes that one way to reduce the frequency and severity oferrors is through the use of tools and testing methods prior to the release of asoftware product. if the use of such tools and testing methods were part ofindustryaccepted best practices, vendors could be held liable for negligence ifsuch tests are not performed. accordingly, allowing vendors to be held liable fornegligence would change the costbenefit calculation to encourage the development and delivery of more secure computer products. because such liability raisescosts, vendors have lobbied against it (and for such measures as ucita, whichcontains liability). however, there is some case law that supports the concept ofvendor liability in connection with consumer products (shaw v. toshiba).universities and collegesmany universities have rather open, largescale, highcapacity networks thatcan serve as a base from which hackers can launch attacks. although somelarger, wellfunded universities and colleges have the resources and technicalknowledge to implement appropriate security measures, not all do. in addition,providing an open environment that encourages information sharing and intellectualexploration is highly valued as an important role of u.s. educational institutions,and some security strategies would inhibit networkbased interactions. hence, it isnot clear whether universities and colleges should face liability for failure to securetheir computer networks. one approach is for the large research universities to setan example and play a lead role in designing and implementing secure computernetwork environments for all universities and colleges.box 3.3 continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks55individual usersin the new age of broadband computing, home users represent a majorsource of potential security hazards. should home users be liable if they do nottake certain steps (e.g., apply software patches, install a firewall, or use antivirussoftware) to secure their computers? most users simply buy a preinstalled pc orinstall their computer with default settings chosen by the software vendor. typically,these defaultconfigured installations do not provide any level of computer security.therefore, it can be easy for a hacker to break into a home userõs computer anduse it as a zombie computer in a distributed denialofservice attack. the averageuser does not necessarily have the knowledge to secure his or her home computerand may not even be aware of the risks.8 furthermore, even if the vast majority ofend users were to proactively learn about and implement effective computer andnetwork security measures, hackers would still be able to launch attacks with theremaining unprotected zombies.òthe average user is essentially clueless about how to prevent his computerfrom being taken over, so assigning liability to him would be pointless,ó argues halvarian.9 while currently available òpersonal firewallsó (software on the userõshome computer that is supposed to protect it from network attacks) are consideredhighly ineffective by the majority of the network security community, very effectivestandalone firewalls for small (e.g., home or smalloffice/homeoffice) networksneed not be expensive or complex and can be configured to be very protective bydefault. the marginal cost of manufacturing a cable or dsl modem with one ofthese firewall devices integrated with it (i.e., sharing a chassis, power supply, ornetwork interface) would presumably be very low. an effective firewall, conservatively configured, could largely prevent home computers from being attacked overthe internet no matter how securitypoor the default software configuration of thosecomputers. yet, no supplier of broadband internet services to the home is providing such integrated boxes to its users. most experts agree that liability should beassigned to those entities that are best positioned to control the risks. however, itis not clear that home users yet have the initiative, education, or resources tomaintain an adequately secured network. in the home user context, the serviceproviders may be the leastcost avoider.1the intent of a distributed denial of service attack is to reduce the availability of a computer network or resource below the level needed to support critical processing or communication. an attacker exploits security vulnerabilities to compromise one or more systems (oftencalled òzombiesó), which are then used to launch an attack against the target.2this discussion focuses on isps with retail customers. isps whose business focuses onbackbone connectivity and transport may not have directly connected end users, and they mayface a different kind of legal context.3the north american network operators group is an educational forum that promotes theexchange of technical information and coordination among network operators in the unitedstates. for more information, see <http://www.nanog.org>.4the decision by many enterprises to implement multihoming arrangements (connectingthe enterprise network to more than one isp and routing traffic based on realtime availabilitycontinuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56critical information infrastructure protection and the lawand performance of connections) highlights the perception that isps do not deliver adequate and reliable service. see, for example, <http://www.routescience.com> or <http://www.sockeye.com>.5representative bob goodlatte introduced the online criminal liability standardization actof 2002. according to the congressional research service summary, this act proposes toamend òthe federal criminal code to provide that no interactive computer service provider shallbe liable for an offense against the united states arising from transmitting, storing, distributing,or otherwise making available material provided by another person. waives such liability limitation where the defendant intended that the service be used in the commission of the offense.states that a provider does not have such intent unless: (1) an employee or agent has suchintent; and (2) the conduct constituting the offense was authorized, requested, commanded,performed, or tolerated by one or more members of the board of directors or by a high managerial agent acting for the benefit of the provider within the scope of his or her office or employment.ó see <http://thomas.loc.gov/cgibin/bdquery/z?d107:hr03716:@@@d&summ2=m&>for more information.6the committee is not addressing the provision in the usa patriot act that confersnarrow immunity on vendors. it is a clarification of the cfaa, explaining that cfaa is aimedat hackers as perpetrators, not at vendors who may have noted the vulnerabilities.7in response to calls for more secure software products, microsoft launched the trustworthy computing initiative in january 2002, which is purported to ensure the security andreliability of its software. the sustainable computing consortium is a collaborative effortformed in may 2002 by industry and academia to drive improvements in software quality andsecurity. see <http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/exec/craig/0501trustworthywp.asp> and<http://www.sustainablecomputing.org/> for more information.8however, the ftc and other consumeroriented agencies have launched a significanteducation campaign starring dewie the turtle, designed to increase the security awareness ofthe average home user. see <http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/edcams/infosecurity/index.html>.the national strategy to secure cyberspace also focuses on increasing the information security awareness of home users.9hal r. varian. òmanaging online security risks.ó new york times, june 1, 2000.regulationoften, congress passes broad legislation that calls for implementingregulations to be promulgated by administrative agencies with oversightauthority over certain regulated industries.41 direct regulation typicallyinvolves prescriptions and proscriptions (e.g., x is allowed but y is not).an entity that fails to conform to the prescribed or proscribed conductcould face criminal liability. broadly speaking, regulation that may relateto ciip could come from any combination of four imperatives: efficienteconomic conduct, national security, public health and safety, andconsumer protection. the purpose of economic regulation is to control41the administrative procedures act defines the processes for rulemaking followed byvarious agencies.box 3.3 continuedcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks5742the telecommunications sector was regulated by the communications act of 1934 asamended by the telecommunications act of 1996. pl 104104, february 8, 1996.43the defense production act of 1950 is an example of a regulation imposed on theprivate sector to ensure availability of industrial resources for national security purposes.for more information, see congressional research service, òdefense production act: purpose and scope,ó june 22, 2001. lee zeichner argues that the dpa could be extended tocritical infrastructure protection (lee m. zeichner. òuse of the defense production act of1950 for critical infrastructure protection,ó 2001).4415 usc, subchapter i, sec. 68016809. pl 106102.45pl 104191.behavior (e.g., supracompetitive pricing) associated with market poweror monopoly. regulation associated with national security and with public health and safety recognizes the obligations of providers of productsand services to stakeholders beyond their direct customers. consumerprotection regulation places the regulator in the role of a surrogate forefficiently protecting direct consumersõ interests (acting on behalf of thosedirect customers).telecommunications,42 electric power, and other critical infrastructureshave historically been regulated as utilities.43 the regulatory status ofthese industries reflects perceived public interest, and it provides a basisfor other governmentindustry interactions. an example relevant to ciipis the rise of national security/emergency preparedness activities in telecommunications and the establishment of the network reliability andinteroperability council, composed of industry representatives andstaffed by the federal communications commission. as those developments illustrate, regulation can be associated with certain kinds of reporting and the establishment of and conformance to certain performancestandards, both of which have been sought for ciip.an entirely different category of regulationñconsumer protectionregulationñalso contributes to ciip, albeit indirectly, because such regulations target major users or suppliers of the critical information infrastructure. for example, the grammleachbliley (glb) act,44 which gaverise to regulations implemented by several government agencies (including the banking agencies, the securities and exchange commission (sec),and the federal trade commission (ftc)), and the health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996 (hipaa),45 which gave rise to regulations under the jurisdiction of the department of health and humanservices, outline the responsibilities of financial institutions and healthcare providers and insurers, respectively, with regard to protecting consumer privacy. these acts and their implementing regulations speak tosecurity measures that the institutions should implement to protect consumer information stored in their computer databases. on may 17, 2002,the ftc issued the safeguards rule, which implements the safeguardcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58critical information infrastructure protection and the lawprovisions required by the grammleachbliley act. the safeguards rulerequires covered entities to implement a comprehensive information security program by may 23, 2003, to ensure the security, confidentiality,and integrity of nonpublic customer information against both internaland external threats. institutions that fail to comply could face potentialftc enforcement actions and potential liability under state consumer protection laws or common law claims (such as negligence).46 recent ftcsettlements47 have established òreasonable securityó as a written, comprehensive information security program that (1) designates appropriatepersonnel accountable for information security, (2) assesses security risks,taking into account, among other things, employee training, (3) implements reasonable security safeguards to control risks, and (4) adjusts theinformation security program in response to regular testing and monitoring. the glb implementing regulations and recent ftc actions go a longway to setting the stage for best practices and may give rise to a de factoindustry standard for negligence liability.48 however, a number of questions remain about the ftcõs de facto security standard. it is not clearwhether iso 17799 meets these requirements. nor is it known what typesof documentation, training, and supervision are necessary to meet thestandard. the microsoft settlement appears to indicate that damage isnot necessary to trigger an ftc inquiry and the imposition of its securitystandard. clearly, though, the recent ftc actions, combined with theglb and hipaa regulations, confirm that companies can no longer continue to address security issues informally.4946glb and hipaa regulations have caused a seismic shift in the financial and health careindustries (similar to the effect of y2k on the computer industry) as institutions scramble tocomply with the detailed requirements. if similar legislation could be passed in the ciiparena, it might have equally extraordinary results. however, one major difference betweenciip and these other regulations is that ciip does not have an immediately apparent benefit.in the case of y2k, entire networks would purportedly have crashed if fixes were not put inplace. in the case of hipaa, medicare payments will be withheld and other penalties maybe imposed if hipaa is not heeded. in the case of ciip, we are largely dealing with whatif scenarios.47microsoft corporation, file no. 012 3240, august 8, 2002, and eli lilly, file no. 0123214, january 18, 2002. see the ftc web site for more information: <http://www.ftc.gov>.48although not a precedent, the case of ziff davis media inc. shows how states (like theftc) can use promises in privacy policies as a lever to enforce good security practices. theremedy includes a specific set of security provisions. for more information see <http://www.oag.state.ny.us/press/2002/aug/aug28a02.html>.49one potential consequence of the recent ftc actions might be efforts by a company toexplicitly disclaim the suitability of its software for use in certain industries or applications,such as health care. although the software may not differ substantially from what wouldnormally be used, the disclaimer could be a shield to protect the company from threats orapplication of regulations or liability. it is not clear that such concerns are applicable in theciip arena, given that the information infrastructure is holistic and larger than one singleindustry.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.liability for unsecured systems and networks59the sec, with a mission to protect investors and the securities markets,50 oversees activities relating to traded securities. its interests inavoiding fraudña major consumer protection interest generallyñhaveled to regulations requiring companies to disclose certain kinds of information about what they do and their circumstances, some of which relateto measures affecting the security and stability of a companyõs informationinfrastructure.51 disclosure is a common vehicle for consumer protection;it helps consumers protect themselves.52one way to encourage companies to protect the critical infrastructures that they own and operate is to adopt disclosure agreements similarto those used during y2k. in 1997, proposed legislation was introducedin congress to require publicly traded companies to disclose certain information related to y2k remediation and risk management status (via disclosure of form 10ks to the sec). the sec then published staff legalbulletin no. 5, which reminded public companies, investment advisers,and investment companies to consider their disclosure obligations relating to anticipated costs, problems, and uncertainties associated with y2k.the sec released interpretation no.337558 in 1998, which supersededthe staff legal bulletin. william j. semancik, director of the laboratory fortelecommunications sciences at the national security agency, suggeststhat if we believe it is crucial that a company be up and operating for thesake of the country, then perhaps that company should be required todisclose the steps it is taking so the public can verify that the company isfulfilling its fiduciary responsibility.consumer protection is also the umbrella under which regulation ofproduct quality falls. for ciip, issues arise for the security dimension ofthe quality of computing and communications hardware and software.in the 1990s, both case law and efforts to revise the uniform commercialcode to address software more effectively progressed, but the eventualproposals for the uniform computer information transactions act(ucita), which would alter state law on contracts, were so controversialñin part because of allegations that they tipped the balance of powertoo far toward vendorsñthat they bogged down its passage in all thestates but maryland and virginia.53 the effort itself, though, illustrates50the secõs jurisdiction arises from the securities act of 1933 and the securities exchange act of 1934. other laws also shape the secõs mission, notably including the publicutility holding company act of 1935, which provides reporting requirements for electricpower and natural gas utilities.51the secõs reporting requirements for y2k are an illustration.52sometimes a consumerõs options may be limited, but disclosure may illuminate problems that will motivate parties to come up with alternatives.53on august 2, 2002, a group of legal experts proposed several amendments to ucita toaddress concerns about consumer rights. it is not clear whether the amendments willcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60critical information infrastructure protection and the lawthe potential for lawmaking to influence vendor responsibilities underthe law and to reframe liability.as this brief overview illustrates, regulations relevant to ciip are apatchwork. that situation will complicate any efforts to develop a regulatory framework (rationale, legal basis, agency oversight) for criticalinfrastructure protection. hank perritt, cstb member and dean and professor of law at illinois institute of technology, chicagokent college oflaw, suggests that regulation is really about a fundamental choice:whether the need for a robust, reliable, critical information infrastructureis better met by a highly centralized approachñthe model for which isat&t as it existed in 1965ñor whether it is better served by a highlydecentralized and very marketoriented and loosely regulated approach(such as is exemplified by the internet).54 given how the economy andthe information infrastructure have evolved, we have a decentralized system today. any changes would have many ramifications. many (including the current administration and the internet community, which is oftendescribed as cyberlibertarian) view regulation by the government as interference in the market economy. on september 11, the internet was veryresilient (due in large part to a fair amount of redundancy),55 which showsthat a decentralized model does not necessarily produce a less robustinfrastructure. a decentralized scenario does not foreclose the possibilityof the law having more bite but, rather, offers a choice of instruments thatare not necessarily regulatory. for example, mr. perritt suggests thatcontract and tort law could ratchet up the cost of having an insecurenetwork, and this disincentive could be further strengthened throughregulation, without eliminating competition or decentralization.regulatory compliance and the desire to avoid new regulations serveboth to require and to motivate all parties to pay more serious attention tosecuring the nationõs critical infrastructure against cybercrime and attack.the mere threat of such regulation could motivate vendors and corporations to selfregulate, providing their own standards and audit policies.the heightened interest in isacs in 2002 is an indicator that the privatesector is moving toward selfregulation. the government could periodically review such selfregulation efforts and provide reports showingdeficiencies that would need to be corrected by a given deadline if regulation is to be avoided.appease the many critics of the bill, including the consumers union and the electronicfreedom foundation. see <http://zdnet.com.com/21001104948194.html>.54this is not to suggest that centralization implies regulated and that decentralizationimplies loosely regulated.55computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2003.internet under crisis conditions: learning from september 11. national academies press,washington, d.c.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.614moving forwardthe law, which is mainly a tool for implementing policy, does notexist in a vacuum. the legal framework for critical information infrastructure protection must be considered in the larger context of the business, social, and technical environment. phil reitinger, former deputychief of the computer crime and intellectual property section of the u.s.department of justice, argues that critical information infrastructure requires a multidisciplinary response. first, he suggests, we need technicalsolutions. vendors have to produce more secure products, and systemsand customers have to demand and implement better security. second,we need management solutions. companies must adopt and share bestpractices. the third approach recommended by mr. reitinger is to develop public education1 efforts to help all users better understand computer ethics (just as throwing a stone through a neighborõs window iswrong, so is breaking into someone elseõs computer system). reducingnuisance attacks will allow government to focus resources on the greaterthreat. finally, he proposes that we need knowledge solutions. theprivate sector and law enforcement must gather and share informationabout threats, vulnerabilities, and remedies. he argues, ò[w]e have got tofigure out how we can spread the information and better secure systemswhile protecting privacy and not increasing the threat.ó1education efforts most likely would need to be international in scope, given that a largenumber of computerrelated problems originate overseas; recent incidents have come fromcountries such as russia, the philippines, and romania.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62critical information infrastructure protection and the lawmotivating the private sectorthe u.s. government has historically relied on appeals to patriotismor threats of impending cyberattacks to encourage private sector entitiesto increase security initiatives. however, successful corporations focuson activities that contribute to increased profits, increased opportunitiesfor profit, reduced constraints, and/or reduced risk. as eric benhamouobserved, there is a tendency to òhave a positive outlook on how technology will be created . . . and the concern about threats is very, verysecondary, certainly no more than afterthoughts.ó that situation is compounded, suggests milo medin (formerly the chief technology officer forexcite@home), by rapid internet growth and competition, which haveresulted in an environment where reducing expenses trumps infrastructure protection initiatives. this section looks briefly at the incentiveproblem that complicates policy making for critical information infrastructure protection.market failure?eric benhamou argues that there are several factors that complicateefforts to improve security. first, he points to an imbalance between thelow cost of the tools to perpetrate an attack and the high cost of thedefense mechanisms needed to protect against these attacks. second, henotes that there are indeed wellknown technical vulnerabilities insidemany infrastructures, but enough hasnõt been done to fix them becausedoing so is very hard. third, implementation of a strong security policyconflicts with efforts to promote open communication environments.mr.benhamou observed that another complicating factor is an it culturethat favors speed and performance over lengthy security procedures andpractices.2 finally, most of the technical vulnerabilities can only be overcome through collective, concerted actionñsomething that has provenhard in numerous contexts, such as contending with graymarket resellers.2studies such as trust in cyberspace conclude that many vulnerabilities in large, networked information systems are not attributed to poor computer security per se, but toinadequate software engineering methodology and practices and insufficient considerationof robustness in system architectures. companies often fail to follow standard securitypractices, such as implementing and enforcing access controls, implementing patches on atimely basis, and implementing normal preventative and diagnostic technologies such asfirewalls and intrusion detection systems (computer science and telecommunicationsboard. 1999. trust in cyberspace. national academy press, washington, d.c.). for adiscussion of the specific actions that can improve computer security, see computer scienceand telecommunications board. 2002. cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or paylater. national academy press, washington, d.c.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moving forward63externalities are common in computer network security and, as withpollution, they yield societal problems without motivating sufficient private action. there are a number of reasonsñnot mutually exclusiveñwhy infrastructure owners may choose not to invest more heavily in security measures. in the absence of good data, itself a problem, one canspeculate, and each of the potential reasons illuminates a different aspectof the situation. first, security measures may not be very effectiveñoreffective enough to warrant the investment. government investments inresearch and development of computer security measures may be a partial answer to this problem, and legislative and administrative activitythrough 2002 point to increasing support for such r&d.3 second, lossesfrom security breaches may not be very large, or they may be covered byinsurance (see next section) or selfinsurance.4 third, losses from securitybreaches may be large but can be dealt with only if large numbers ofparties coordinate to make the needed investments. kunreuther and heal5argue that computer network security is an example of interdependentsecurity; the incentive that one conscientious network owner has to investin security measures is reduced if the owner believes that other connectednetworks are insecure, which would undermine the impact of the conscientious ownerõs measures.6 they argue that a set of positive and negativeeconomic incentives (e.g., insurance, taxation, liability, standards, andcoordinating mechanisms) needs to be developed. fourth, losses fromsecurity breaches may be large, but each party expects others to make theneeded investments.7 when the cost of poor security is not borne by thesource, there is no incentive for the problems to be fixed. in the presentcontext, one might ask why each party apparently attempts to shift the3see, for example, the cyber security research and development act (pl 107305).4some have argued, for example, that progress may not happen without catastrophicloss.5howard kunreuther and geoffrey heal, òinterdependent security: the case of identical agents,ó at <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstractid=306405>.6a reviewer observed that a personõs incentives to invest in security is increased if othersalso invest in security (i.e., that investments in security are complements) may not always betrue. investments by one information infrastructure player may be at least a partial substitute for investments by another. for example, residential users of cable modems have beenencouraged to install firewall software to compensate for the vulnerability they incur as aresult of cableinternet system designs; a different approach by cable system operatorswould diminish the investment needed by residential users, but if more residential usersmake this investment, it lowers the incentive for the cable operator.7from this perspective, software vendors may create bugs, but their customers and distributors bear the cost of dealing with them; internet service providers sell access to theentire internet but guarantee only their part of the network; or individual users can createsecurity hazards but bear no consequences of their actions.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64critical information infrastructure protection and the lawinvestment burden to others. one possible answer is that a user cannoteasily identify the source of the underinvestment that led to the securitybreach (e.g., whether it was due to the userõs software, the isp, the backbone to which the isp is connected, or software used by others). in otherwords, the security breach may be a result of decisions made by partiesthat are outside the control of the party making the investment. finally,losses from security breaches may be large, but assigning liability8 forthem is difficult. another complicating factor is that computer networkexternalities are international in scope.dr. semancik argues that there is no economic theory that can calculate the actual benefit from the deployment of computer security technology (i.e., that a certain investment will increase security by some amount).part of the difficulty with costbenefit analysis is that the cost of securitybreaches is not widely available or knownñthis is part of the data problem noted above. companies are hesitant to disclose costs because of theeffect it might have on shareholder value and/or confidence and associated risks of litigation. a related problem is that the large numbers associated with the cost of publicized national incidents such as distributeddenialofservice attacks are considered suspect because they depend onsimple assumptions about the behavior of large numbers of parties andon a simple aggregation of resulting cost projections.9the economics of computer security is currently a hot research topic;may 2002 saw an important national workshop on this topic colocatedwith a large technical conference.10 one approach recommended bydr.semancik at the symposium is to develop economic models of computer security that would help corporations build a case for investmentsin security technology. these would vary among industries, yielding setsof investment curves for given levels of security and costs. this kind ofresearch could bring together industry and government. another optionis to use the threat of liabilityñbased on the tort law model that holdscompanies accountable to a duty of reasonable careñto create an incen8it should also be recognized that under some circumstances increasing the legal liabilityof attackers (tortbased liability of players was discussed in chapter 3), including increasing the ability to enforce such liability, might actually reduce the amount of security inwhich participants invest. if perpetrators can be more effectively caught and convicted, theneed for security may decrease. at the same time, causation may also run in the otherdirection: actions that make it easier to prevent attacks may make it more difficult to convict perpetrators.9of course, they are used by vendors and policy makers to encourage more action, becauseexhortations often sound more compelling when statistics are invoked.10workshop on economics and information security, university of california at berkeley,may 1718, 2002. information is available online at <http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/resources/affiliates/workshops/econsecurity/>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moving forward65tive to improve network security (see chapter 3). ultimately the development of a riskmanagement model for computer network security will bedriven by insurance, legal liability, and market forces.11insurance: motivator for good behaviorty r. sagalow, executive vice president and chief operating officer ofamerican international group, inc. (aig), ebusiness risk solutions,argues that the insurance industry can play a role òin motivating theprivate sector to protect our national infrastructures and to guard againstcyberattacks.ó insurance rewards good behavior by making insuranceavailable or unavailable and increasing or decreasing a companyõs premiums. insurance companies transfer the risk of a loss from the balancesheet of the company to the insurance carrier.to qualify for insurance, companies must prove they are an acceptable risk. sagalow suggests three components to managing risk: people,policies, and technology. first, he suggests that companies must havededicated technology personnel, commitment from the board, and anactive crisis management team. corporate policies should be iso 17799compliant and should include regular ongoing training of all employees(including management). sagalow noted that although no single standard (including iso 17799) has emerged, a single standard would have apositive effect. he acknowledged that it might be necessary to developindustryspecific standards rather than relying on one allencompassingstandard, such as iso 17799. finally, companies must employ appropriate security measures. examples include firewalls, antivirus software(updated daily), intrusion detection systems, monitoring/log review,scans, and regular backups. most insurance carriers require companies toundergo an independent security evaluation of their network defensesbefore granting a policy. many policies also require companies to passongoing random redteam intrusion detection tests in order to maintaincoverage. the insurance premium often depends on the security measures implemented.although policies vary, aig manages the following risks in its cyberinsurance packages: legal liability to others (arising out of a denialofservice attack; transmission of a computer virus; libel, slander, or copyright infringement caused by the content of the companyõs web page);damage, destruction, or corruption of data; loss of revenue due to a ddos11kevin j. soo hoo, òhow much is enough? a risk management approach to computersecurity,ó workshop on economics and information security, university of california atberkeley, may 2002.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66critical information infrastructure protection and the lawattack; loss of or damage to reputation; and loss of market capitalizationand resulting shareholder lawsuits.the paucity of data on cyberrelated losses makes it difficult to accurately price cyberinsurance policies. mr. sagalow noted, for example,that it was hard to quantify damage due to a ddos attack (e.g., potentiallost customers and damage to reputation). in spite of the dearth of data,the insurance information institute expects cyber insurance to be a $2.5billion market by 2005.12r&d to alter the costs of securitywm. a. wulf, president of the national academy of engineering,noted that òvery little progress has been made in computer security, andthere is no community of scholars, academic researchers doing basic longterm research in computer security.ó a contributor to this problem is thelack of a funding agency that focuses on creating a cadre of researchers incomputer security. dr. wulf argues that òwithout a long term basicresearch base, we are not going to make a lot of progress in this area.ómr. benhamou reported that pitac contemplated recommendingincreased funding in fundamental r&d in the field of computer networksecurity, specifically calling for research focusing on protecting and securing the information infrastructure and creating hackerproof networks.meanwhile, the office of science and technology policy has moved tocoordinate and plan for research relating to cip and homeland securityaid, while the major funders of computer science r&d have been exploring ways to increase their attention to these issues.13 industry and theintelligence community, suggests mr. benhamou, must engage in focusedinformation sharing to develop an understanding of the sophistication ofthe existing infrastructure, to create scenarios, and to formulate a corresponding defense. such interaction has been encouraged by richardclarke, the former cybersecurity czar. harriet pearson, chief privacy of12òinternet companies seek insurance against ôdenial of service,õó ecommerce times,july 30, 2002, at <http://www.newsfactor.com/perl/printer/18804/>.13the national strategy to secure cyberspace recommends that (1) the director of theostp coordinate the development of a federal r&d agenda; (2) dhs ensure that coordination mechanisms exist among among academic, industry, and government r&d efforts;and (3) the private sector focus nearterm r&d efforts on highly secure and trustworthyoperating systems. the national strategy is available online at <http://www.whitehouse.gov/pcipb>. the national science foundation has engaged a computer scientist to coordinate its homeland securityrelevant r&d. also, there is federal support for the new institute for information infrastructure protection, involving individuals previously associatedwith federal critical information infrastructure protection programs, which is working todevelop a national r&d agenda.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moving forward67ficer of ibm, referred to research into autonomic computing networks(also called òselfhealing networksó), in which the network detects intrusions and takes actions to shield itself. such research may lead to lowercost computer network security solutions, benefiting industry and improving the protection of critical infrastructures. but it raises challengingtechnical and legal issues in a world featuring interconnections amongnetworks administered by a growing number and variety of parties indiffering jurisdictions.awarenessmr. benhamou reported on the rise in recognition of critical infrastructure concerns in silicon valley. that region, a leader in the production and use of information infrastructure, has dealt recently with acuteenergy infrastructure problems and with a longterm rise in computercrime; it also features many companies with international operations,which raise additional concerns about vulnerabilities and their exploitation. mr. benhamou noted that many silicon valley firms have been thetarget of attacks on information infrastructure by nigerian organizedcrime groups, for example, and individual executives have been targetedby terrorist groups. these incidents make clear that the stereotypicalteenaged hacker is not the main concern. the highly publicized distributed denialofservice attacks and worm incidents of 20002001 were seenas costly to victims, whose attention to y2k had already underscoreddependence on the information infrastructure. thefts of or damage tointellectual property also have been growing for corporations.14 againstthis backdrop, the events of september 11 heightened awareness andconcern, and they spurred consideration of enhanced communication andcoordination at three levelsñwithin enterprises, within and among industries, and between industry and governmentñto respond to threats toinfrastructure. a lingering challenge is how to achieve a greater understanding of the problem and possible solutions in smaller companies,particularly those that cannot afford an information technology supportstaff. small businesses often are not aware that they need better computersecurity than what they haveñif they have any at all. frederick r. chang,president and ceo of sbc technology resources, inc., argues that theconvergence of the voice and data networks compounds the problem andsuggests possible solutions (see box 4.1). the new awareness extends toan understanding that the practices that have helped companies to thrive,14harriet pearson also commented on an increase in corporate attention to security, referring to discussions she had been having with companies in the midwest.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68critical information infrastructure protection and the lawbox 4.1network convergence and ciipthe convergence of the public switched telephone network (pstn) with newcommunications technologies has created a complex telecommunications environment. with deregulation of the telecommunications industry, there are newentrants supplying broadband connectivity to the local and longdistance markets.traditional telecommunications companies have a heritage of five nines,99.999 percent availability, which equates to five minutes of downtime per year.the expectation is that a customer will always get a dial tone when he picks up thetelephone. as a result of many factors (competition, speed to market, profitabilityand so forth), the internet, wireless networks, and the next generation network arenot being built to the same survivable standards as the pstn. on the other hand,the rise of packetswitching technologyincluding to support telephone serviceintroduces a different approach that can often provide as good or better robustness and reliability through alternatives for data paths relative to what the pstnprovides through failureresistant equipment. some of the consequences are veryimportant for crisis situations. for example, the nature of the pstn is such that, ifone can get a dial tone at all, some fairly good service quality guarantees comewith it; however poor service is better than nothing is not a choice the user has.by contrast, the packetbased bestefforts character of the internet may be able toget some signal through under very adverse conditions. whether availability of apoor signal that is still usable for some purposes should be taken into accountwhen measuring network availability is a fairly subtle question.1mr. chang suggested that more effort be made to leverage experience intelephony to enhance telecommunications robustness. for example, some of thelessons and experiences from the nstac and ncc (including structure, procedures, coordination of planning, approaches to interconnection, and so on) couldbe applied to the data network. in addition, it is important that the security androbustness lessons learned by the data network (e.g., virtual private networks,firewalls, and authentication technologies) be employed in the pstns digital initiatives such as voice over ip. these groups, along with the network reliability andinteroperability council, are already reaching out to nontelephony providers, butthere may be limits to how broad their reach can be.note: adapted from a presentation by frederick r. chang, president and ceo of sbctechnology resources, inc.1experience with cellular service availability on september 11 suggests that people mightprefer a poor voice signal to no signal. for further discussion, see computer science andtelecommunications board, national research council, 2000, the internetõs coming of age,national academy press , washington, d.c. and computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council, 2003, the internet under crisis conditions: learning fromseptember 11, national academies press, washington, d.c.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moving forward69such as support for accessing corporate information networks andresources from afar, contribute risk as well as benefit. these practicesprovide a new, and more challenging, baseline for critical infrastructureprotection than that of a few years ago.although awareness is a prerequisite to action, it does not guaranteeit. as mr. benhamou describes, many experiences show that solo actioncan be costlyñby, for example, attracting lawsuits from parties concerned about harm to their equity interestsñand collective action is hardto achieve. progress may begin within the corporation, for example byprotecting whistleblowers and by bringing in and supporting the workof professional risk managers. ms. pearson argued for thinking throughhow to simplify systems to facilitate control over information. mr.benhamou pointed to the financialreporting disclosures associated withy2k as an example of a positive incentiveña combination of disclosureand accountabilityñthat could be replicated for motivating protection ofcritical information infrastructure.15 he noted that companies may understand the risks associated with, say, problems in the domain namesystem that may interfere with their use of the internet and associated ecommerce, but that these companies are seldom called to account forhow they prepare for possible problems. of course, in some instancesbad press leads to calls for accounting for preparedness (or responses),and avoidance of bad press can itself be a motivator.security and privacy tensionshistorically, the debate about security and privacy in the united stateshas been characterized as a zerosum gameñmore security implies lessprivacy. prior to september 11, the debate had begun to shift toward arealization that the security of information systems and the protection ofpersonal data and privacy are mutually reinforcing and compatible goals.the oecdõs guidelines for security of information systems16 states:[s]ecurity of information systems may assist in the protection ofpersonal data and privacy. . . . similarly, protection of personal data and15james dempsey, deputy director of the center for democracy and technology, notedthat there are disagreements about what should be disclosed and to whom. for example,senator bennett has called for more public disclosure by companies about their informationsystem vulnerabilities while at the same time promoting less public disclosure throughsupport of a foia exemption for critical infrastructure information. dempsey called formore debate to set the rules.16organization for economic cooperation and development, 1992. guidelines for securityof information systems. available at <http://www.oecd.org/en/document/0,,endocument43nodirectorateno241024913,00.html>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70critical information infrastructure protection and the lawprivacy . . . may serve to enhance the security of information systems.the use of information systems to collect, store and crossreference personal data has increased the need to protect such systems from unauthorized access and use. . . . it is possible that certain measures adopted forthe security of information systems might be misused so as to violate theprivacy of individuals. for example, an individual using the systemmight be monitored for a nonsecurityrelated purpose or informationabout the user made available through the user verification processmight permit computerised linking of the userõs financial, employment,medical and other personal data.in the wake of september 11, the increasing number of measuresaimed at protecting homeland security has fostered an increase in surveillance and intelligencegathering activities, arousing concerns among privacy advocates. the discussion at the symposium anticipated changesthat came into effect in 2002.whitfield diffie noted that anonymity is a very powerful techniquefor protecting privacy. the decentralized and stateless design of theinternet is particularly suitable for anonymous behavior. although anonymous actions can ensure privacy, they should not be used as the solemeans for ensuring privacy as they also allow for harmful activities, suchas spamming, slander, and harmful attacks without fear of reprisal. security dictates that one should be able to detect and catch individuals conducting illegal behavior, such as hacking, conspiring for terrorist acts, andconducting fraud. for example, without trustworthy source informationand/or trustworthy data regarding the route that a packet has taken fromsource to destination, it is difficult to defend against denialofserviceattacks. today, it is easy to insert a phony source address into an internetip packet and, unless the originating isp takes some action to reject packets originated by its users that donõt match the ip addresses assigned tothose users, the source ip address cannot be used to push back attacks.likewise, routers do not add any metadata to ip packets that pass throughthem to indicate the route that has been taken. legitimate needs forprivacy (such as the posting of anonymous bulletin board items) shouldbe allowed, but the ability to conduct harmful anonymous behavior withoutresponsibility and repercussionsñin the name of privacyñshould not.james dempsey observed that better system security might reducethe need for surveillance and other potential intrusions into privacy.17however, surveillance can be a valuable tool in combating terrorists andhackers. the ability to track and monitor suspected terrorists and hackersand their supporters cannot be understatedñit can lead to valuable clues17this is an argument about substitution, as discussed earlier in the chapter.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moving forward71and trails, and it can lead to the evidence needed to catch and convictguilty parties. on the other hand, it is important to ensure adequateprotections are in place so that surveillance can be conducted without lossof privacy. collected information must be secured, protected, and prevented from being used against people except for the intended purpose ofcatching and incriminating hackers and terrorists. while better systemsecurity may not reduce the need for surveillance, properly conductedsurveillance for legitimate purposes should not result in a loss of privacy.however, the crisismanagement mentality in the aftermath of september 11 once again pushed aside issues of privacy and civil liberties.although the july 2002 version of the oecd computer security guidelines mentions privacyñòefforts to enhance the security of informationsystems and networks should be consistent with the values of democraticsociety, particularly the need for an open and free flow of informationand basic concerns for personal privacyó18ñit no longer emphasizes themutual and compatible nature of privacy and security. within the unitedstates, a number of legislative and procedural initiatives, beginning withthe usa patriot act, appear to have elevated attention to security.congressional hearings, editorials, web sites, and so on have sustaineddiscussions about the support for different objectives. technical mechanisms have been proposed to aid government efforts to promote security,and the law is seen more and more as the lever for balancing interests. itis increasingly difficult to separate law (or technology or business practice) relating to ciip from that pertaining to homeland security. as aresult, given popular concern about homeland security, many expertsfear that privacy may suffer.at the symposium, speakers and participants argued that the seriousness and urgency of the problem make it even more important to considerthe value of privacy in crafting a solution. for example, harriett pearsonnoted that a researcher at the ibm privacy research institute has developed a technology called òprivacy preserving data mining,ó which allowsinformation to be mined for patterns while preserving personally identifiable information. james dempseyõs presentation (see box 4.2 for excerpts)eloquently captures the tension that continues to impinge on ciip policymaking.18oecd. 2002. guidelines for the security of information systems and networks: towards aculture of security. available at <http://www.oecd.org/pdf/m00033000/m00033182.pdf>.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72critical information infrastructure protection and the lawbox 4.2privacy and security[a]s a privacy advocate, i find i often have to overcome certain barriers tocommunication. . . . [i]n coming forward and criticizing some of the things that arebeing done, and saying that the privacy issues are not properly being taken accountof, i sometimes find myself accused of not appreciating the nature of the threat, ornot appreciating the urgency of the situation. i want to start out by putting thataside: . . . i care about the privacy issues precisely because i believe that thisthreat is so serious. . . . i think there is a fairly high likelihood that some of us in thisroom in the coming months and years will be victims of terrorist attacks, or willhave family members who are. i see this as a very long term problem and a riskand a threat. but the seriousness of the risk, the urgency of the problem, onlymakes it more important that we get the solution right. it doesnt tell us what thesolution will be. all too oftenparticularly i have seen this recently in the legislative debatethe urgency of the threat is taken as an excuse for not engaging inthe kind of dialogue and faith and examination that is necessary. i will commendthe national academies, the national academy of engineering, and the computersciences and telecommunications board for taking on this project and trying toengage in some practical, rational discourse.privacy in this debate is a value . . . that we share as part of our society, alongwith the other values that we have, including the value of security. the privacyadvocates come to this debate and help us ask the questions that we need to ask:are we doing the right things or not?now, at this point it is clear that the systems that we are dependent upon arenot secure. they are vulnerable to attack. they are possibly a point to beattacked, in combination . . . with physical attacks. obviously we are facing peoplewho are very clever, very thoughtful, very patient. we obviously need to buildgreater security into our systems. the difficult questions [are] what do we do, andsecond, how do we create the incentives to achieve the goals that we have? . . .[w]hat are the incentives?note: adapted from a presentation by james dempsey.a trust networka common theme at the symposium was the importance of trust.trust provides the foundation for approaches based on procedure or business practice, as opposed to law or technical mechanisms.¥frederick r. chang, ò[o]ne of the successes you saw in the nstacand the ncc was that the people who were responsible for essentially thecritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.moving forward73nationõs infrastructure were together. there was information sharing.they established trust.ó¥lieutenant general kelley, ò. . . trust is absolutely key to establishing this twoway dialogue.ó¥ronald l. dick, òthe government protects the nationõs most criticalinfrastructures by building and promoting a coalition of trust . . . amongstall government agencies, between the government and the private sector,amongst different interests within the private sector itself and in concertwith the greater international community. . . . infragard expands directcontact with the private sector and infrastructure owners and operators tobuild one thing: trust. . . .ó¥james dempsey, ò. . . in some of the legislation that is being proposed, the question of what should be kept secret and what should beshared and how you define this trust network is completely missing,completely left discretionary.ó¥philip r. reitinger, òi think information sharing really only workseffectively when it is voluntary. when people say, i want to share information, that means that information sharing has to be based on trust. youhave to build trust.ó¥glenn schlarman, òtrust is important and the entity providinginformation has to get something of value in return or else that will be thefirst and last time they share.ótrust is not a new concept; it has been a central component of thegovernmentõs cip efforts over the past several years. john g. grimes,chair of the industry executive subcommittee of nstac and vice president of raytheon co., argued that trust is a simple concept that is verydifficult to implement in reality. he reported that at nstacñoften citedas an example of a successful publicprivate partnership for cip information sharingñit took time and energy to break down the walls and builda trust network.so, why have past efforts failed to build trust between partners? oneargument is that the governmentõs message to the private sector hasvaried, ranging from national security to the economic delivery of vitalservices to mixed messages in between. the transition from a focus oncip to the larger concept of homeland security compounds the challengeof communicating what is wanted and why; it presents a bigger picture,which can be a good thing, but it may also make the objective so big andunfocused as to cause confusion.the second problem is that the government interface within the private sector on cip issues is quite confusing and not necessarily userfriendly. the private sector, for example, often does not know whichgovernment entity it should be dealing with on cip matters, whom itcritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74critical information infrastructure protection and the lawshould be sharing information with, or whom it can depend on within thegovernment for uptodate information. so far, one can argue that possible focal points include the department of homeland security, fbi/nipc, ciao, the new cybersecurity board, and a mix of other government agencies: the ftc, fcc, sec, doe, dod, and more. the newdepartment of homeland security is further altering the governmentlandscape.19 it may centralize some federal responsibilities for cip,although it seems clear that others will remain distributed among manyagencies. after this major organizational change is set in motion, thegovernment should clearly and consistently explain to the private sectorwhat its objectives are for cip, how it has organized itself to accomplishthose objectives, who is responsible for what (e.g., what are the information flows), what kind of information should be shared and in what form,and why all of this is important (i.e., what the threat is and how theproposed actions will address the threat). this message should clearlyand consistently articulate what protections already exist for informationsharing and what safe harbors exist (or will be established) to encourageinformation sharing in light of foia and antitrust concerns in the privatesector. a clear and consistent message from the government to the private sector will go a long way toward building the trust that is necessaryto protect the nationõs critical information infrastructures.19observers note that the recent governmentwide cybersecurity reorganization has increased confusion about where to go to report cybercrime incidents (michael fitzgerald,2003, òhomeland cybersecurity efforts doubled,ó security focus, march 11).critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixescritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.77acommittee member andstaff biographiescommittee membersstewart d. personick (nae), chair, is an expert in telecommunicationsand information networking technologies and applications. dr.personickis currently the e. warren colehower chair professor at drexel university and director of the center for telecommunications and informationnetworking. he spent the first 15 years of his career at bell laboratoriesand at trw, doing research and managing research in fiberoptics technologies and applications for telecommunications. dr.personick spent thenext 15 years of his career at bellcore (which became telcordia technologies, inc.) doing research, research management, and management of systems engineering programs directed at emerging and nextgeneration telecommunications technologies and applications. he has played an activerole over the last 10 years in the formulation of policy issues relating tothe evolution and use of information infrastructures. for 5 years, heserved as a member, and for 1 year as chair, of the federal networkingcouncil advisory committee. he served as chair of the national research council committee that produced the report commercial multimedia technologies for 21st century army battlefields. in addition, dr.personick was a member of the cstb committee that produced the reportmaking it better. he has served as a reviewer or the review referee forseveral other cstb committee reports and is a member of the board onarmy science and technology (bast).critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78appendix amichael collins, director of information technology at lockheed martin,is responsible for working strategic information technology issues thatcross the corporations diverse technical landscape. he is responsible foridentifying emerging technology and ensuring its integration into thecorporation. mr. collins has responsibility for tracking and integratinginternal research and development (ir&d) plans across all corporate lineofbusiness areas. he manages an annual $20 million corporate r&dprogram with the ge corporate research and development labs and iscaretaker of the strategic partnership between ge and lockheed martin.he is also the focal point for the corporations r&d interface with sandianational laboratories that lockheed martin is under contract to operate.in that role mr. collins manages a $3 million corporate r&d programunder the shared vision program. he serves as executive director for thecorporations focus teams in advanced software technology, informationfusion, information assurance, knowledge management system integration, and virtual environments. mr. collins also is the working interfacebetween the corporation and the presidents national security and telecommunications advisory committee (nstac).william j. cook is a partner at freeborn and peters. he is an experiencedlitigator (90 trials) with an international practice focused on technologyissues. mr. cook specializes in information security law, computer andnetwork security liability issues, intellectual property litigation, internetand web liability and commerce issues, ecommerce transactions, andcompetitive intelligence issues surrounding corporate efforts to monitortheir competitive environment and the resulting liability issues. prior tothat he spent 16 years as an aassistant u.s. attorney in chicago. from1987 to october 1991, he prosecuted computer and telecommunicationstechnology fraud and the illegal transfer of controlled technologies fromthe united states. he has lectured and written extensively on computerand telecommunications laws, vulnerabilities, and proactive countermeasures and criminal and civil liability for misappropriation of intellectual property. he teaches internet and web law as an adjunct professor atthe university of illinois law school. as a member of the illinois attorneygenerals commission on electronic commerce and crime committee,mr. cook assisted in drafting illinoiss digital signature act. mr. cookhas testified as an expert on internet law and liability before the u.s.house of representatives judiciary committee, the illinois state assembly forum, and the federal communications commission. he assistedwith the british department of trade and industrys formation of thebritish computer misuse act of 1990.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a79deborah hurley is the director of the harvard information infrastructureproject at harvard university, adjunct lecturer in public policy at the johnf. kennedy school of government, and a senior research associate in thebelfer center for science and international affairs. from 1988 through1996, ms. hurley was an official of the organization for economic cooperation and development (oecd), where she had responsibility for legal,economic, social, and technological issues related to information and communications technologies, biotechnology, environmental and energy technologies, technology policy, and other advanced technology fields. asthe administrator in the information, computer and communicationspolicy division of oecds directorate for science, technology and industry, she focused on identifying emerging issues related to protectionof personal data and privacy, security of information systems, cryptography technology and policy, and protection of intellectual property. ms.hurley, after writing the seminal report on information network securityfor the oecd member nations in 1989, was responsible for the drafting,negotiation, and adoption by oecd member countries of the 1992 oecdguidelines for security of information systems. ms.hurley also initiatedthe oecd activities on cryptography technologies and policy in the early1990s. she is a member of the advisory committee to the u.s. statedepartment on international communications and information policyand cochair of its working group on security, encryption and exportcontrols. ms. hurley is a member of the board of directors of the electronic privacy information center (epic). she has been appointed to a3year term (20002003) as a member of the advisory committee on international science of the american association for the advancement ofscience. she served as chair of the 2001 computers, freedom and privacyconference (cfp 2001). ms. hurley is the author, with viktor mayerschnberger, of globalization of communications and informationpolicy and governance in john donahue and joseph nye, jr., eds., governance in a globalizing world (brookings institution press, 2000). otherrecent publications include the first 100 feet: options for internet and broadband access, edited with james h. keller (the mit press, 1999), and security and privacy laws: the showstoppers of the global information society, in masters of the wired world (pitman publishing, 1999).daniel schutzer is vice president and director of external standards andadvanced technology with the emerging technologies group at citigroup.dr. schutzer is a member of the financial services technology consortium board and is on the advisory board of the national academy ofsciences. he was a member of the cstb committee that produced theinternetõs coming of age and has participated in other cstb activities. hecritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80appendix acurrently has responsibility for interfacing with external organizationsand standards bodies and for representing citibank. this includes coordinating technology with business goals and priorities and keeping citibankup to date with the latest technology and standards advances. dr. schutzersprojects include electronic banking and electronic commerce, bill presentment and payment, risk management, customer behavior modeling andmathematical marketing, and new product design. advanced technologies under investigation include agent technology, machine learning,multimedia, biometrics, image and voice processing, and highperformancecomputing. currently, he teaches parttime at iona college in new rochelle,new york, and at george washington university in washington, d.c.he holds a b.s.e.e. from the college of city of new york and an m.s.e.e.and ph.d from syracuse university. he has authored over 65 publications and 7 books.w. david sincoskie (nae) is vice president of the internet architectureresearch lab at telcordia technologies, inc. he has extensive experiencewith computer networking and communications technologies.dr.sincoskie helped the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa) with its longrange research strategy by participating in theinformation science and technology study group from 1994 to 1998. in thesummer of 1995, he participated in a study that led to the creation ofdarpas program in active networks. in 1996, dr. sincoskie chaired astudy on network management and survivability. in 1998, he cochaired astudy on smart objects. before telcordia, dr. sincoskie was project director for the nsfnet network access points in san francisco and chicago.he served on the internet architecture board from 1993 to 1995. in 1991,he formed and led bellcores collaborations on local asynchronous transfer mode (atm) with apple, digital, hewlettpackard, sun microsystems,and xerox palo alto research center, resulting in the first publication ofspecifications for a new generation of lans based on atm technology, in1992. he is a member of the national academy of engineering, electedfor contributions in packet switching for integrated networks, and a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers. dr. sincoskieserved on the cstb committee that produced evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure. dr. sincoskie is also an adjunct professor of computer and information science at the university of pennsylvania.richard r. verma serves as foreign policy advisor to senator harry reidof nevada. mr. verma is also an international affairs fellow with thecouncil on foreign relations. previously, he was an attorney at steptoeand johnson, llp, where his practice focused on u.s. trade sanctions,critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a81export controls, and trade policy matters. he advised numerous clients onthe legal issues surrounding critical infrastructure protection, informationsharing mechanisms, and u.s. government restrictions pertaining to theexport of dualuse goods and technologies. mr. verma led the firstofitskind global study on the import, export, and use of encryption regulationin over 92 countries and oversaw the preparation of a 42country guide ondigital signatures, online privacy, and online consumer protection. hehas represented a number of clients before the u.s. congress and severaladministrative agencies. he drafted h.r. 2404, the personal medical information protection act of 1999. mr. verma served as a law clerk to thehonorable john o. marsh, jr., the former secretary of the army, andworked as a field representative in bucharest, romania, for the nationaldemocratic institute for international affairs. he received his b.s. fromlehigh university, a j.d. from american university, and an llm in international and comparative law from georgetown university law center.marc j. zwillinger is a partner in the washington office of sonnenscheinnath & rosenthal, where he leads the firms cyberlaw and informationsecurity efforts. previously, mr. zwillinger was a partner at kirkland &ellis and was the leader of the cyberlaw and information security practice group and a member of the firms technology committee. prior tojoining kirkland & ellis, he worked in the computer crime and intellectual property section of the criminal division of the department of justice. at the department of justice, he coordinated the investigations ofseveral highprofile computer crime cases, including the 1997 penetrationof u.s. military computer systems by an israeli hacker (solar sunrise),the denialofservice attacks that hit ecommerce sites in february 2000,and the i love you virus. he also investigated and prosecuted casesinvolving violations of the economic espionage act of 1996 (eea) andwas responsible for coordinating the department of justices approval forcharges filed nationwide under the eea. he personally represented thegovernment in united states v. p.y. yang, et al., the first eea case successfully tried in the united states. in private practice, he now providesadvice and counsel on protecting the confidentiality, availability, and integrity of proprietary information and conducts internal investigationsand litigation for companies that have suffered a breach of computersecurity or loss of trade secret technology. he also helps companies toassess and limit their risk resulting from ecommercerelated activities.he has lectured to a wide variety of audiences on topics related to computer crime and economic espionage and serves as an adjunct professorof cyberlaw at the columbus school of law at the catholic university ofamerica. he received a j.d., magna cum laude, from harvard law schoolin 1994 and then clerked for judge mark l. wolf of the united statescritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82appendix adistrict court, district of massachusetts. prior to practicing law, mr.zwillinger received a bachelors degree in political science from tuftsuniversity in 1991.staffcynthia a. patterson is a study director and program officer with thecomputer science and telecommunications board of the national academies. she is currently involved in several cstb projects, including aproject that explores the intersection of geospatial information and computer science research communities and a congressionally mandated studyon internet navigation and the domain name system. ms. patterson isalso working on a joint study with the board on earth sciences andresources and the board on atmospheric sciences and climate on publicprivate partnerships in the provision of weather and climate services.prior to joining cstb, ms. patterson completed an m.sc. at the sam nunnschool of international affairs at the georgia institute of technology.her graduate work was supported by the department of defense andscience applications international corporation. in a previous life,ms.patterson was employed by ibm as an it consultant for both federalgovernment and private industry clients. her work included applicationdevelopment, database administration, network administration, andproject management. she received a b.sc. in computer science from theuniversity of missourirolla.d.c. drake joined cstb in september 1999. he is currently handling anumber of projects, including the internet after 911 and a research agendafor counterterrorism. he came to washington in january 1999 after finishing a masters degree in international politics and communications atthe university of kentucky. mr. drake earned a b.a. in internationalrelations and german from rhodes college in 1996. he has worked forthe hannsseidl foundation in munich, germany, and in washington,d.c., for the national conference of state legislatures international programs office and for the majority staff of the senate foreign relationscommittee.critical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.83b symposium agendaopening addresswm a. wulfpresident, national academy of engineeringsetting the stageeric benhamouchairman, 3com corporationòthe internet as a critical infrastructureóphilip r. reitingerdeputy chief, computer crime and intellectual property section, u.s.department of justiceòcritical infrastructure protection: the law enforcement perspectiveójohn g. grimeschair, industry executive subcommittee, national security telecommunications advisory council (nstac) and vice president,raytheon companyònstac: a proven industrygovernment partnership to protectcritical information infrastructuresócritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84appendix bcolonel timothy gibson (u.s. army)director of technology, joint task forcecomputer network operationsòvulnerabilities of military information infrastructures and the consequences: ddos case studyójames dempseydeputy director, center for democracy and technologyòprotecting information infrastructure, protecting personal information and expressionóinformation sharing: what, when, how, and with whom?lieutenant general (retired) david j. kelleyvice president of information operations, lockheed martinòovercoming reluctance: cooperation between the government andprivate sectorsówilliam e. cohenassistant general counsel for policy studies, federal trade commissionòunderstanding antitrust: a vehicle for maintaining market forcesódavid sobelgeneral counsel, electronic privacy information centeròfreedom of information act: public safety confronts public informationólegal issueshenry (hank) perritt, jr.dean and professor of law, illinois institute of technology, chicagokent college of lawòthe many legal faces of cipócraig sillimandirector of the network and facilities legal team, worldcomòthe view from an ispóelliot turriniassistant u.s. attorney, u.s. department of justiceòcriminal law and critical information infrastructure protectionócritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b85the role of privacy and civil liberties in protectingcritical infrastructuresrichard m. smithchief technology officer, privacy foundationòthe view from a privacy advocateóharriet pearsonchief privacy officer, ibmòthe view from the private sectoróorganizing for actionronald l. dickdirector, national infrastructure protection center, federal bureauof investigationòpublicprivate partnership: keys to successócaptain j. katharine burton (u.s. navy)assistant deputy manager, national communications systemòthe telecommunications infrastructure during a national emergency:lessons from september 11thójudith millerpartner, williams & connolly llpòregulating government intervention in the information ageóglenn schlarmanoffice of management and budgetòdefense of the homeland: how government agencies can worktogetherómotivating the private sectorfrederick r. changpresident and ceo, sbc technology resources, inc.òeconomic incentivesówilliam j. semancikdirector, laboratory for telecommunications sciences, nationalsecurity agencyòbuilding the case for economically sound investments in securityócritical information infrastructure protection and the law: an overview of key issuescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86appendix bty r. sagalowexecutive vice president and chief operating officer, american international group, inc., ebusiness risk solutionsòcyber insurance: improving security through risk managementómilo medinchief technology officer, excite@homeòprotection efforts meet business pressuresóherbert h. yandirector, allegheny energy supply co. llcòcomparative perspective from the energy businessócreative alternativessteven m. bellovinfellow, at&t researchwhitfield diffiedistinguished engineer, sun microsystems