detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10730cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scopingstudy  special report 27496 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309085557 | doi 10.17226/10730committee on freight transportation information systems security, nationalresearch councilcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportationresearchboardspecialreport274cybersecurityof freight information systemsa scoping studycommittee on freight transportation information systems security computer science and telecommunications boardtransportation research boardtransportation research boardwashington, d.c.2003www.trb.orgcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation research board special report 274subscriber categoriesviii freight transportation (multimodal)ix marine transportationtransportation research board publications are available by ordering individual publications directlyfrom the trb business office, through the internet at www.trb.org or nationalacademies.org/trb, or by annual subscription through organizational or individual affiliation with trb. affiliates and library subscribers are eligible for substantial discounts. for further information, contact thetransportation research board business office, 500 fifth street, nw, washington, dc 20001 (telephone 2023343213; fax 2023342519; or email trbsales@nas.edu).copyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of america.notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy ofsciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of thecommittee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competencies and with regard forappropriate balance.this report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to the proceduresapproved by a report review committee consisting of members of the national academy of sciences,the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine.the study was sponsored by the research and special programs administration of the u.s.department of transportation.library of congress cataloginginpublication datanational research council (u.s.). committee on freight transportation information systems security.cybersecurity of freight information systems : a scoping study / committee on freight transportation information systems security, transportation research board of the national academies.p.cm.—(special report)isbn 03090855511. telecommunication—safety measures. 2. freight and freightage—security measures. i. title.ii. special report (national research council (u.s.). transportation research board)tk5103.2.n39 2003388.044028558—dc222003056526cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciencesis a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. on the authority ofthe charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requiresit to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. albertsis president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineeringwas established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. thenational academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievementsof engineers. dr. william a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicinewas established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences tosecure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibilitygiven to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser tothe federal government and, on its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research,and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research councilwas organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy’s purposes offurthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance withgeneral policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy ofengineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both the academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. william a. wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the national research council.the transportation research boardis a division of the national research council, whichserves the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering. theboard’s mission is to promote innovation and progress in transportation through research. inan objective and interdisciplinary setting, the board facilitates the sharing of information ontransportation practice and policy by researchers and practitioners; stimulates research andoffers research management services that promote technical excellence; provides expert adviceon transportation policy and programs; and disseminates research results broadly and encourages their implementation. the board’s varied activities annually engage more than 4,000engineers, scientists, and other transportation researchers and practitioners from the publicand private sectors and academia, all of whom contribute their expertise in the public interest. the program is supported by state transportation departments, federal agencies includingthe component administrations of the u.s. department of transportation, and other organizations and individuals interested in the development of transportation. www.trb.orgwww.nationalacademies.orgcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportationresearchboard2003 executivecommittee*chair: genevieve giuliano,director, metrans transportation center, andprofessor, school of policy, planning, and development, university ofsouthern california, los angelesvice chair: michael s. townes,president and ceo, hampton roads transit,virginiaexecutive director: robert e. skinner, jr.,transportation research boardmichael w. behrens,executive director, texas department of transportation,austinjoseph h. boardman,commissioner, new york state department oftransportation, albanysarah c. campbell,president, transmanagement, inc., washington, d.c.e. dean carlson,president, carlson associates, topeka, kansas (past chair,2002)joanne f. casey,president and ceo, intermodal association of north america,greenbelt, marylandjames c. codell iii,secretary, kentucky transportation cabinet, frankfortjohn l. craig,director, nebraska department of roads, lincolnbernard s. groseclose, jr.,president and ceo, south carolina state portsauthority, charlestonsusan hanson,landry university professor of geography, graduate school ofgeography, clark university, worcester, massachusettslester a. hoel,l.a. lacy distinguished professor of engineering, department ofcivil engineering, university of virginia, charlottesville (past chair, 1986)henry l. hungerbeeler,director, missouri department of transportation,jefferson cityadib k. kanafani,cahill professor and chairman, department of civil andenvironmental engineering, university of california, berkeleyronald f. kirby,director of transportation planning, metropolitan washingtoncouncil of governments, washington, d.c.herbert s. levinson,principal, herbert s. levinson transportation consultant, new haven, connecticutmichael d. meyer,professor, school of civil and environmental engineering,georgia institute of technology, atlantajeff p. morales,director of transportation, california department oftransportation, sacramentokam movassaghi,secretary, louisiana department of transportation anddevelopment, baton rougecarol a. murray,commissioner, new hampshire department of transportation,concorddavid plavin,president, airports council international, washington, d.c.john rebensdorf,vice president, network and service planning, union pacificrailroad company, omaha, nebraska*membership as of august 2003.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.catherine l. ross,harry west chair of quality growth and regionaldevelopment, college of architecture, georgia institute of technology, atlantajohn m. samuels,senior vice president, operations planning and support,norfolk southern corporation, norfolk, virginia (past chair, 2001)paul p. skoutelas,ceo, port authority of allegheny county, pittsburgh,pennsylvaniamartin wachs,director, institute of transportation studies, university ofcalifornia, berkeley (past chair, 2000)michael w. wickham,chairman and ceo, roadway express, inc., akron, ohiomarion c. blakey,administrator, federal aviation administration, u.s.department of transportation (ex officio)samuel g. bonasso,acting administrator, research and special programsadministration, u.s. department of transportation (ex officio)rebecca m. brewster,president and coo, american transportation researchinstitute, smyrna, georgia (ex officio)thomas h. collins(adm., u.s. coast guard), commandant, u.s. coast guard,washington, d.c. (ex officio)jennifer l. dorn,administrator, federal transit administration, u.s.department of transportation (ex officio)robert b. flowers(lt. gen., u.s. army), chief of engineers and commander,u.s. army corps of engineers, washington, d.c. (ex officio)harold k. forsen,foreign secretary, national academy of engineering,washington, d.c. (ex officio)edward r. hamberger,president and ceo, association of american railroads,washington, d.c. (ex officio)john c. horsley,executive director, american association of state highwayand transportation officials, washington, d.c. (ex officio)michael p. jackson,deputy secretary, u.s. department of transportation (ex officio)roger l. king,chief technologist, applications division, national aeronauticsand space administration, washington, d.c. (ex officio)robert s. kirk,director, office of advanced automotive technologies, u.s.department of energy (ex officio)rick kowalewski,acting director, bureau of transportation statistics, u.s.department of transportation (ex officio)william w. millar,president, american public transportation association,washington, d.c. (ex officio) (past chair, 1992)mary e. peters,administrator, federal highway administration, u.s.department of transportation (ex officio)suzanne rudzinski,director, transportation and regional programs, u.s.environmental protection agency (ex officio)jeffrey w. runge,administrator, national highway traffic safetyadministration, u.s. department of transportation (ex officio)allan rutter,administrator, federal railroad administration, u.s. departmentof transportation (ex officio)annette m. sandberg,administrator, federal motor carrier safetyadministration, u.s. department of transportation (ex officio)william g. schubert,administrator, maritime administration, u.s. departmentof transportation (ex officio)cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.computerscienceandtelecommunicationsboarddavid d. clark,massachusetts institute of technology, chaireric benhamou,3com corporationdavid borth,motorola labsjohn m. cioffi,stanford universityelaine cohen,university of utahw. bruce croft,university of massachusetts, amherstthomas e. darcie,university of victoriajoseph farrell,university of california, berkeleyjoan feigenbaum,yale universityhector garciamolina,stanford universitywendy kellogg,ibm t.j. watson research centerbutler w. lampson,microsoft corporationdavid liddle,u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell,carnegie mellon universitydavid a. patterson,university of california, berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt,chicagokent college of lawdaniel pike,gci cable and entertainmenteric schmidt,google inc.fred b. schneider,cornell universityburton smith,cray inc.lee sproull,new york universitywilliam stead,vanderbilt universityjeannette m. wing,microsoft research; carnegie mellon university (on leave)marjory s. blumenthal,directorcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committeeonfreighttransportationinformationsystemssecurityrobert e. gallamore,chair,director, transportation center, northwesternuniversitya. ray chamberlain,vice chair,vice president, parsons brinckerhoff, inc.frank j. anstett,manager, infrastructure security, raytheon companysamuel h. banks,senior vice president, u.s. customs modernizationproject, sandler and travis trade advisory servicesrichard a. holmes, jr.,general director, security and quality assurance,union pacific railroadbarry horowitz,nae, professor, department of systems engineering,university of virginiajohn l. king,professor and dean, school of information, university ofmichiganlars kjaer,vice president, world shipping councilart kosatka,chief executive officer, transecure llcsteven j. lambright,vice president, savi technologydaniel murray,director of research, american transportation researchinstitutefrank m. pittelli,president, navius technologies, llcalan f. spear,president, mrc investigations (usa), inc.karen ryan tobia,manager, technology planning, port commercedepartment, port authority of new york and new jerseynationalresearchcouncilstaffalan t. crane,study directorsteven woo,program officercybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the merger of information system technology and transportation infrastructureis transforming the freight transportation industry in a variety of ways. thesechanges are producing new ways to organize companies’ supply chains as well asmilitary logistics. as the new freight information systems become more fullyintegrated, they are expected to have great private and public benefits.these systems, however, may be vulnerable to cyberattack. in accordancewith the national initiative to increase security of critical infrastructure, the u.s.department of transportation (dot) requested that the national researchcouncil (nrc) review trends in the use of information technology in the freighttransportation industry and assess potential vulnerabilities to a cyberattack. inresponse, nrc formed the committee on freight transportation informationsystems security, under the transportation research board (trb) and thecomputer science and telecommunications board, to conduct a scoping studyto develop an approach, study, or other process that dot could use to addressthe vulnerabilities of freight information systems.specifically, the committee was charged with recommending how to conducta study that would result in1.a baseline description of the u.s. freight transportation communication andinformation systems, including interconnectivity with international carriers, government entities (u.s. and nonu.s.), customers, and other business partners;2.a summary of ongoing and emerging efforts in such areas as electronic datainterchange, telecommunications and data transfer, trends in the use of theinternet, business practices, customs, immigration and agriculture clearanceprocesses, electronic letters of credit, integrated logistics software, positivetrain control, intelligent transportation systems, and all other informationand communicationbased processes and technology improvements that affecttransportation, shipping, and logistics;3.a review of current industry practices addressing security (with emphasis oninformation technology–related dimensions); andprefaceixcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4.an identification and summary of the potential vulnerabilities that may becreated by the interconnection/interface and possible integration of these newsystems.one of the complexities of a project such as this is that developers and operators of the relevant system will be reluctant to discuss or admit to specific security weaknesses publicly. thus the committee had to recommend a process thatwould permit the problems to be identified and addressed.the committee held its first meeting on november 25–26, 2002. the project,from committee formation to final report, took 7 months. during that time thecommittee met twice at nrc headquarters in washington, d.c. in addition, itsmembers and staff held numerous telephone conferences to discuss their findings.after the start of the study, the department of homeland security (dhs),which incorporates many of the relevant functions formerly performed by dot,was created. hence the committee directs many of its recommendations andcomments to dhs as well as to dot.acknowledgmentsthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals selected for theirdiverse technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by thenrc’s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review isto provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the studycharge. the review comments remain confidential to protect the integrity of thedeliberative process.the reviewers of this report were noel d. matchett, information security,inc.; steven b. lipner, microsoft corporation; peter martin, lakeville motorexpress; and david zanca, federal express. the committee is grateful for themany constructive comments and suggestions the reviewers provided. thereviewers were not, however, asked to endorse the findings and conclusions, nordid they see the final draft before its release. responsibility for the final contentof this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and nrc.the review of this report was overseen by lester a. hoel, university ofvirginia, charlottesville. he was appointed by nrc to ensure that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutionalprocedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. suzannecybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping studyxcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.schneider, associate executive director of trb, managed the report reviewprocess. the committee appreciates the speed and efficiency of this review.this study was managed by alan t. crane under the direction of the committee and the supervision of stephen godwin, director of trb’s studies andinformation services.the report was written by the committee members and the nrc staff. thecommittee also appreciates the vital contributions of jocelyn sands, frances e. holland, and amelia b. mathis. joedy w. cambridge and joseph a. breenprovided valuable suggestions while the committee was being formed. this reporthas been edited by norman solomon under the supervision of nancy ackerman,director of publications.robert e. gallamore, chaira. ray chamberlain, vicechaircommittee on freight transportation information systems securityprefacexicybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.abi automated broker interface.ace automated commercial environment.acs automated commercial system.aes u.s. bureau of customs and border protection’s automated exportsystem.airbill receipt for carriage of air freight.ams u.s. bureau of customs and border protection’s automated manifestsystem.ansi x12 voluntary standards, maintained by the american nationalstandards institute (ansi), defining the structure, format, and content ofbusiness transactions conducted through electronic data interchange(edi). ansi x12 is produced by the committee asc x12, supported bythe data interchange standards association, inc. (disa). apis advanced passenger information system.atis advanced traffic information system.atri american transportation research institute.ats advance targeting system.avi automatic vehicle identification.bassc business antismuggling security coalition.bill of lading a statement of the nature and value of goods being transported,especially by ship, along with the conditions applying to their transport.drawn up by the carrier, this document serves as a contract between theowner of the goods and the carrier.camir customs automated interface requirements.chcp cargo handling cooperative program.crm customer relationship management.cstb computer science and telecommunications board of the nationalacademies.csi container security initiative.cyberterrorism terrorism related to computer and information systems.dasd directaccess storage device.acronymsandglossaryxiicybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.denialofservice (dos) attack an attack on a computer network effectedby overloading the access points, so that further access is slowed or stoppedaltogether.dhs department of homeland security.dns domain name service.dot department of transportation.drayage generally, carriage of freight, often by truck. ea enterprise architecture.edi electronic data interchange.erp enterprise resource planning.escm electronic supply chain manifest.expresslink proprietary system for interconnecting the corporatelevel systems of four regional trucking companies.faa federal aviation administration.fast free and secure trade.fbi federal bureau of investigation.fhwa federal highway administration.firewalls hardware and software systems intended to isolate a local area network from access. first freight information realtime system (for port authority of newyork and new jersey).forwarder a company that ships cargo for hire.freight brokers a company that arranges or consolidates freight shipments.freight forwarder see “forwarder.”gps global positioning system.hazmat hazardous material.ibis interagency border information system.ins immigration and naturalization service.isac information sharing and analysis center.iso international standards organization.it information technology.itds international trade data system.its intelligent transportation systems.jones act the merchant marine act of 1920 and related statutes, requiringthat vessels used to transport cargo and passengers between u.s. ports beowned by u.s. citizens, built in u.s. shipyards, and manned by u.s.citizencrews. acronyms and glossaryxiiicybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.justintime (jit) a business system of supplying to each process what isneeded at the time it is needed, and in the quantity needed, to minimizeproduction lead times and reduce inventory.lia logistics integration agency.load bidding for carriers, the practice of negotiating for freight.merchant haulage transport of cargo in shipping containers arranged by theowner or possessor of the goods.mtmc military traffic management command.nhs national highway system.noa notice of arrival.nrc national research council of the national academies.nvmc national vessel movement center.nvocc non–vessel operating common carrier.osc operation safe commerce.positive train control the use of digital data communications, automaticpositioning systems, wayside interface units (to communicate with switchesand wayside detectors), onboard and control center computers, and otheradvanced display, sensor, and control technologies to manage and controlrailroad operations.red teaming acting as an adversary for the unauthorized access to a physicalor computer system to expose the system’s vulnerabilities.rfid radio frequency identification.r&d research and development.scada supervisory control and data acquisition.simtag simulator for rfid tags.sstl smart and secure trade lanes.tecs treasury enforcement communications system.thirdparty logistics provider (3pl) provider of logistics services for hire.trb transportation research board of the national academies.tsa transportation security administration.tswg trucking security and antiterrorism working group.twic transportation worker identification card.usdot u.s. department of transportation.vhf very high frequency.vpn virtual private network.waybill shipping document.wco world customs organization.xml extensible markup language.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping studyxivcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11the evolving freight industry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13how efficient transportation creates economic growth . . . . . . . . . . . . 13differences among modes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 162freight information system technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19existing it applications. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20it trends and emerging technologies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 263planning a full study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39assessing security issues. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40study plan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43appendixesainformation management systems in the international liner shipping industry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47bsecurity initiatives and programs with cybersecurity relevance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55cprotecting international trade corridors: the operation safe commerce initiative. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63du.s. bureau of customs and border protection use of information technology. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69study committee biographical information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75contentscybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executivesummarythe potential vulnerability of freight transportation information systems to terrorist attacks is a serious concern for homeland security. in this report thegroundwork is laid for a study of the cybersecurity of the information systems onwhich freight transportation depends to facilitate efﬁcient delivery of the goodsand materials that drive the economy.the development of computer security system designs and strategies for thefreight transportation industry must be accomplished within a framework thatis sensitive to the following important attributes of the industry:1.it consists of different carrier modes (i.e., truck, rail, sea, air, and pipeline). itscompanies cover a wide range of characteristics, including size, economiccondition, technical knowhow, cargo types, and geographical location. thisdiversity makes it difﬁcult to develop a uniform security design concept withmanaged implementation schedules. instead, evolutionary steps tailored tothe different parts of the industry on a casebycase basis must be developedto address identiﬁed vulnerabilities.2.the existing freight transportation information system is a confederation ofcompanytocompany information system integrations constructed to permit more efﬁcient operation. the design is not uniform, not speciﬁed, notdocumented, not evaluated, not tested, and not under conﬁguration control.these features make security design analysis and evaluation extraordinarilydifﬁcult.3.many potential cyberattacks on the freight transportation industry wouldresult in consequences to stakeholders other than the industry itself. forexample, (a) customers that depend on the freight industry for tightly managed supply delivery schedules can suffer signiﬁcantly when deliveries aredelayed; (b) safetyrelated attacks, such as an attack on a hazmat freight vehicle, would affect the general public directly; and (c) political attacks, such asthreats to import a nuclear weapon into the united states, would affect the1cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government’s policies on imports. consideration of possible measures toaddress such scenarios, and their costs, should reﬂect these facts.as a result of this situation, a focused, evolutionary process for identifyingand prioritizing security enhancements will be required. development andimplementation of such a process are likely to be slower than one might like, sothere is a need to focus efforts on the most critical areas. otherwise, unnecessary expense will be incurred, and, under some conditions, the efforts mighteven be counterproductive—every change to the system introduces the risk ofnew vulnerabilities.typesofthreatscyberattacks on transportation and logistics networks could take several different forms, with varying consequences and probabilities. reducing vulnerabilityrequires consideration of all plausible types, including those discussed here. theﬁrst one is a direct attack on the information systems, while the latter two useinformation technology (it) to enable or amplify a physical attack. it should benoted that a physical attack on the it systems coordinated with a cyberattackcould cause far more damage than either type alone. this report, however, is concerned only with cyberattacks, which would not differ much if they were accompanied by physical attacks. the full study should consider all types of threatsinvolving cyberattacks, and their consequences.denial of service:cyberattacks, whether by terrorists or hackers, might bringdown information systems with what is known as a “denialofservice” attack. forexample, the perpetrator might gain entry to a large number of unprotected computers on the internet and program them to access selected websites simultaneously. the computers controlling these websites might then crash. companies inother industries have been subjected to denialofservice attacks on their websites and servers, which were probably perpetrated by individual hackers. suchattacks are not the subject of this report, which focuses on largescale, organizedattacks intended to inﬂict maximum economic damage over a long period oftime. no massive, coordinated attacks have yet been launched on any network,but if directed at freight information systems, such attacks could disrupt freightservice, causing signiﬁcant damage to the economy.1a related concern is delibcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study21economic damage from the 12day shutdown of west coast ports in october 2002 due to labor–management issues probably exceeded $1 billion (anderson and geckil 2002). damage was limitedbecause the shutdown was widely anticipated. a cyberattack might have different consequences.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.erate disruption of a military mobilization during a national crisis. although individual freight companies may not be unusually vulnerable to such attacks, theinterconnections of the industry’s information systems and the increasing role ofthe internet suggest the potential for widespread damage. one individual systemwhose loss could result in signiﬁcant economic harm is that of the bureau ofcustoms and border protection (customs; formerly the u.s. customs service),because it is vital for the orderly ﬂow of imports and exports.2the full study suggested by this report should also consider how quickly the system could recoverfrom an attack and how well the freight system could operate in the interim. ofthe three types of attacks, denialofservice attacks probably are the easiest to perpetrate but the least damaging.hazardous material shipments:more than 800,000 hazmat shipments occurdaily in the united states. some are potential targets for terrorists trying to harmpeople or seeking materials for making weapons. terrorists could hack into andmisuse information systems to identify and track such shipments in order toattack them at highconsequence locations. under some conditions, the malefactors might actually cause an accident resulting in the release of hazardousmaterials purely through a cyberattack, for example by seizing control of railroadswitches or signals. alternatively, terrorists might commandeer the supervisorycontrol and data acquisition (scada) system of a pipeline network carryingdangerous material to maximize the damage following a physical attack.weapons of mass destruction:terrorists trying to bring a weapon of massdestruction (chemical, biological, or nuclear) into the united states could disguise it as ordinary freight. they could exploit vulnerabilities in transportationinformation systems to mask and track their shipments, thus reducing the riskof detection. this approach is likely to become more attractive to terrorists asphysical security requirements become more stringent. terrorists also might useunauthorized access to freight information systems to move weapons around inthe united states or export them to other countries. this type of attack couldhave extremely serious consequences, but it also may be the least likely, and theit role in the attack may not be central. information systems could, however,play a role in reducing physical vulnerability to such use of the freight transportation system.all major industries are vulnerable to cyber and physical attacks. thefreight transportation industry appears to offer unusual potential forbothexecutive summary32loss of the air trafﬁc control system could be even more devastating, but that is not included in thisstudy because it is not an interconnected system and does not rely on the internet. therefore, it is muchless vulnerable to terrorist cyberattacks than are freight information systems.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.economicandphysical damage from terrorist cyberattacks.3these concernsmay grow because freight transport is increasingly dependent on it. as long asthe threat of terrorism remains, cybersecurity in the freight transport sector willbe an important issue, although it is impossible to deﬁne the threat exactly orquantify it.keycharacteristicsofthefreighttransportationindustrya cyberattack could come at any time and hit any point of vulnerability in thesystem. a variety of measures to reduce vulnerability are being implemented orconsidered. the factors discussed here and in more detail in chapters 1 and 2should be taken into account when such measures are considered.industryscaleandcomplexityfreight transportation is handled by a great many individual companies operating different modes of transport (e.g., ship, truck, train, air) in a large and complex global system. the industry uses millions of trucks, rail cars, containers, andso forth and employs millions of people to move billions of tons of freight annually. some modes (e.g., air, rail, pipelines) are concentrated, with relatively fewcompanies. others (e.g., trucking, international shipping) include many companies, ranging from large and highly sophisticated organizations to “mom andpop” operations using manual or lowtechnology systems. the fragmented andchanging nature of the industry, the diversity of the modes, and the lack of overall system security coordination can lead to vulnerability. intense competitionkeeps proﬁt margins low for companies in all modes, which limits their abilityto fund new infrastructure, technology, and procedures if the return on investment is not readily apparent.public–privateinteractionsfreight operations in the united states are essentially all in the private sector,but they are intimately connected with the public sector. in addition to usinggovernmentowned facilities such as highways, ports, and airports, the freightcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study43for example, large parts of the electric network could be shut down by cyberattacks, but these probably would not cause much physical damage to system components. the system could then be restartedquickly. see making the nation safer: the role of science and technology in countering terrorism(nrc2002). it also should be noted that as systems become more automated, it may become easier for cyberattackers to cause physical damage.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation industry is affected by many aspects of government regulation—federal, state, local, and regional. government monitoring (e.g., customs clearance, truck weighing, and even ﬁrst responder monitoring of hazmat shipments)provides opportunities for unauthorized access to information systems, including the electronic cargo declarations submitted to customs, because any entrypoint provides a potential vulnerability for cyberterrorists.informationsystemscomplexityfreight information systems are a signiﬁcant factor in the steadily improving efﬁciency of the industry. these systems also help provide highly reliable delivery,which, among other beneﬁts, permits customers to operate with lower inventories, including “justintime” inbound materials strategies. the transport/logisticssystem functions globally, but it is made up of discrete and varied subsystemsamong the different modes and even among the companies within a mode.the system is not integrated; instead, the subsystems are only interconnectedat many different points and in different ways. many transport and logisticsfirms also connect with their customers and government agencies such ascustoms. each interconnection represents a point of potential vulnerabilityto attack. in addition, the everchanging mix of carriers, shippers, distributors,and freight forwarders who are or can be connected to the “system” makes itvery difficult to identify and authenticate users. the complexity and diversityof these systems are a serious challenge in the development and implementation of a comprehensive cybersecurity strategy for freight transportation information systems.overallcoordinationcoordination of efforts to reduce cybervulnerability is a major challenge. nosingle government agency, private ﬁrm, or association is in a position to consider the whole transportation/logistics continuum as a complex system. instead,many different organizations have inﬂuence over fragments of the system. theyact where they can, but that is not necessarily at the point of highest priority.vulnerabilities, security, andtechnologiesmany factors create potential vulnerabilities to cyberattacks on freight transportation information systems, including the interconnection of systems, theincreased reliance on the internet for communications, and the emergence ofexecutive summary5cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.decentralized systems. these potential vulnerabilities and associated technologies are discussed here. a fundamental issue is whether the improvement insecurity is adequate to justify the cost.interconnectionsthe interconnection of systems across large transportation sectors allows carriers,shippers, and manufacturers alike to increase the efﬁciency of their operations. asthe web of interconnected information systems grows, however, it can becomemore susceptible to denialofservice attacks, improper use, and unauthorizedaccess.large organizations in the transportation sector have interconnected theirown information systems to create systems spanning the enterprise. smallercompanies have interconnected their systems to create “federated” or “cooperative” systems that allow them to compete more effectively with larger organizations. in addition, regulatory forces (some motivated by post–september 11homeland security concerns) are driving the interconnection of commercial andgovernment systems by requiring carriers, importers, exporters, and manufacturers to submit more information electronically to the government. for example, customs’ automated manifest system represents a vital link in the ﬂow ofinformation about imported goods.documents such as bills of lading and letters of credit are essential for theshipments of goods. they are increasingly sent in electronic form, but electronicdocuments can easily be altered or counterfeited if they are not appropriatelyprotected. electronic data interchange standards exist for the transportationsector, but the sector has generally not incorporated authentication technologies into its emerging systems and standards to ensure the authenticity of thedocument author and that the document can be exchanged privately withanother party.internetcommunicationsthe internet is used increasingly as the primary communication method amongtransportation partners or transportation carriers and their customers. freighttransportation has beneﬁted from a revolution in logistics based largely onimproved communications through the internet. in supply chain managementand the optimization of logistics, the ability to transmit data across the internetreliably is critical. improvements in supply chain efﬁciency have been an important factor in economic growth, as discussed in chapter 1. the most criticalsecurity concern of the internet is that attacks can come at any time and fromcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study6cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.virtually anywhere in the world. it is inherently difﬁcult to prevent such attacksor to identify the perpetrators afterwards, as noted in chapter 2.the internet itself provides only minimal levels of access control and protection against eavesdropping. virtual private network technology incorporatesencryption and other security mechanisms to provide enhanced security forremote usertosystem and systemtosystem communications over the internet,but only for prearranged situations involving a small number of systems. in general, the lack of a widely accepted encryption infrastructure signiﬁcantly impedesimproved security.decentralizedsystemssince the introduction of webbased application techniques in the early 1990s,system architects have been shifting the design of information systems from primarily centralized systems toward decentralized systems (networks that—likethe internet—operate without central control).the most signiﬁcant challenge for the use of widescale decentralized systemsis that of developing the infrastructure needed to authenticate all of the users inthe system. in the decentralized model, no central authority can resolve suchissues, which makes security control more difﬁcult, though still possible.otherdevelopmentsmany technologies now being implemented or tested for potential use in thefreight transportation industry may have cybersecurity implications.embedded processors are, to varying degrees, being used or tested by the transportation sector, primarily for the identiﬁcation and monitoring of shipments.radio frequency identiﬁcation (rfid) tagsautomatically identify an asset or itsdeclared contents, or both. esensorsdetect and document environmental changesto a shipment along its route. esealsare the electronic version of mechanical seals;they can be placed on shipments or structures to detect an unauthorized entry ordeter intrusions because of the fear of detection. these devices are being studiedin pilot programs (see appendix b). they are intended to address aspects of physical security, not cybersecurity, but their links to transportation informationsystems suggest that they should be part of a study of it vulnerability. for example, terrorists might hack into eseals to conceal tampering with a container.several enabling technologies may become part of the transportation sector’sit infrastructure. wireless communications(i.e., rf, infrared, terrestrial, satellitebased) can transmit information with mobile units. wireless tracking systemsalready are used in the trucking industry, often for critical, highvalue shipexecutive summary7cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ments. almost all of the embedded devices that may be used in the transportation sector rely on wireless communications. cryptographyis intended to maintain the privacy and integrity of information exchanged between two entitiesover a network and contributes to the veriﬁcation of sender authenticity. smartcards(or smart tokens) and digital certiﬁcates help to authenticate users.biometric deviceshelp to authenticate human beings through a physical attributesuch as a ﬁngerprint or voice pattern.assessingpotentialpolicyoptionsgiven the damage potential from cyberattacks on freight transportation it systems, public and private options for enhancing cybersecurity should be identiﬁed and developed. the actual vulnerabilities, risks, and consequences of suchattacks have not yet been determined, analytically or otherwise, for the variousmodes. furthermore, no mechanism now exists for determining how much security is enough or which steps could be identiﬁed as having the highest priorities.additional study as suggested here is intended to lead to a strategy for these issues.a strategy to reduce vulnerability must account for the company compositionand structure in each mode and the operations the companies perform. it must bebased on an analysis of security gaps, the costs and beneﬁts of current and emerging technologies and processes that could be implemented to enhance cybersecurity, and the ability of transport companies to implement them. the analysis thatwould permit such a strategy to be developed has not yet been conducted.some security measures may improve the efﬁciency of operations and pay forthemselves as normal investments. although they may not necessarily be a company’s investment of choice, such measures would at least be of interest andshould be a special focus of the proposed study. other measures are expensive butmay be effective in reducing the likelihood or consequences of a cyberattack. insuch cases, the main beneﬁciary may be the public rather than the company thatimplements the measure. since the risk of an attack cannot be speciﬁed and factored into the costs and beneﬁts of preventing it, prioritizing potential steps toreduce vulnerability to cyberattacks is important.the purpose of this report is to determine how such a study should be structured and the issues that it should address. it does not present a plan for implementing cybersecurity measures. as far as possible within the limited scope, themeasures that might be considered and how they might apply to the freight transportation system are reviewed. several concepts for further study are then suggested in order to develop a strategy for possible steps to reduce the sector’scybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study8cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.potential vulnerability to cyberattacks in the least costly and disruptive way. moredetail can be found in chapter 3.task 1. determine the chief vulnerabilities of freight transportation information systems.the ﬁrst step is to identify and describe the main informationsystems used in the transportation sector and to understand the role they playin normal operations. these systems should then be analyzed for potentialcybervulnerabilities. much of this analysis would reﬂect it vulnerability studies in general, but the speciﬁc use of the technologies in the freight industrywould have to be reviewed in depth. detailed information might be obtainedwith a series of interviews and perhaps a survey (if consistent with currentadministration requirements). the objective would be to develop a sufﬁcientlydetailed system description in a format appropriate for security analyses.a variety of plausible attack scenarios would then be used to assess thesystems as they exist now and as they may evolve, and the consequencesshould they be attacked successfully. the purpose would be to develop a fullunderstanding of the kinds of vulnerabilities that should be accorded thehighest priority. analyses are then required of the expected costs (including interference with normal operations) in countering these speciﬁc typesof potential vulnerabilities within each modal setting. prioritization mightbe determined by combining the consequences of a successful exploitationof a vulnerability, the likelihood that such an attack could be mounted, thecosts of reducing the vulnerability, and the impact on normal operations.while this prioritization could be done subjectively, it might also be possible to develop a methodology to do so more analytically. in either case, itis important that a systemlevel perspective be used to identify, assess, andcompare the security issues at the level of components, subsystems, and theoverall system.task 2. review current industry and government practices addressing itsecurity.security practices will be difﬁcult to obtain in detail. most companies will be understandably reluctant to discuss their practices and protective hardware and software because of concerns that any revelations couldcompromise security. it may be possible, as in task 1, to obtain the information by interviews conducted under stringent assurances of nondisclosure.companies and government agencies might be presented with a menu ofsecurity options and asked what they use. the effectiveness of these options,however, often lies in the stringency with which they are implemented. thatexecutive summary9cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information will be even more difﬁcult to procure. interviewers must be wellversed in the technology and its use, and they must be prepared to probe fordetails. the main purpose of this effort is to determine how the vulnerabilities and risks identiﬁed in task 1 are being addressed.task 3. determine the potential for itrelated security enhancements in thesector.this task is, in part, a followup to task 2. current and emerging technologies and practices should be examined to determine what role, if any,they could play in addressing identiﬁed security gaps and deﬁciencies. integralto this assessment should be an understanding of the characteristics of theindustry and an analysis of how realistic and attractive these technologies andpractices would appear to decision makers. a key part of the study should beto research the costs and beneﬁts of security measures as they might be implemented in the freight transportation sector. other concepts might requiregovernment support because the beneﬁts do not outweigh the costs to thecompany. because it costs may decline over time and with increasing scaleof deployment, this task should also consider the feasibility of strategies thatmight make promising security measures more attractive.task 4. analyze policies to reduce cybervulnerability.the u.s. governmentcould play a useful role in disseminating information on new security optionsand best practices. it also might evaluate the extent to which these optionswere being implemented. this task could include the development of a set ofcybersecurity guidelines and recommendations and consideration of how topromote their use most effectively in the freight transportation industry.4partof the task might be to cooperate with companies in performing securityaudits, perhaps including “red teaming” to test security, and in other jointprivate–public initiatives. the same tests should be applied to the government’s connections to the privatesector it systems.task 5. assess the economic impact of cost increases in the freight transportation industry.some cybersecurity measures may supply economic beneﬁts as well as security, as illustrated in figure es1. for example, the use ofdigital signatures might reduce costs related to fraud detection and managecybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study104the administration released a national cybersecurity plan in february 2003 (see news.com.com/21001001984697.html).cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11(a)(b)securityeconomics     securityeconomics   figure es1relationship between security and economic beneﬁts: (a) little or no economic beneﬁt to security enhancements; (b) signiﬁcant economic beneﬁt to security enhancements.ment and increase customer conﬁdence. other measures might protectagainst lowlikelihood but very highconsequence events—for example,involving weapons of mass destruction. such measures may have a high public value without signiﬁcantly beneﬁting the company that implementsthem, which could result in economic inefﬁciency for the industry and thenational economy.this task should deal with but not be limited to the following issues:1.at what levels and distribution of costs for security does the economicimpact become a concern, both for the freight industry itself and its users?2.on the basis of existing models for relating economic inputs and outputs,what changes in economic outputs might result from varying levels ofinvestment in security?cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3.given the tight proﬁt margins associated with the freight industry, isthere a signiﬁcant possibility of economic damage to the companies thatconstitute this industry?4.for investments that may be needed for national security purposes butthat provide little or no advantage to the company implementing themeasures, what form of government participation (e.g., tax credits) wouldbe most effective?results should be quantitative and be developed for a wide set of assumptionsin order to permit consideration of a signiﬁcant range of possible outputs.referencesabbreviationnrcnational research councilanderson, p.l., and i.k. geckil. 2002. flash estimate: impact of west coast shutdown.anderson economic consulting group, lansing, mich., oct. 15.nrc. 2002. making the nation safer: the role of science and technology in counteringterrorism.national academies press, washington, d.c.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study12cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.131theevolvingfreightindustrythe nation’s freight industry moves agricultural products and raw commoditiesto factories and ﬁnished goods to domestic and international markets. a majorrole is the handling of huge volumes of imported ﬁnished goods, much of it incontainers. the industry’s weight in the modern economy is only hinted at byits size—hundreds of billions of dollars in revenues and millions of employees(bts 2002, appendix a). the various modes carried more than 15 billion tonsof merchandise, valued at more than $9.4 trillion, in 1998 (figure 11). freighttransportation has enabled the rise of new logistics and supply chain systems.the new systems have led to explosive growth of world trade in the past decade,from which all consumers have beneﬁted. cheap and responsive transportationmakes it possible to acquire parts and components from geographically diversesources, manufacture and distribute goods without the need for expensive warehouses, and give customers wider choices of products and services. overall, theseadvances have fueled economic growth.howefficienttransportationcreateseconomicgrowthcommerce is an increasingly informationintensive process. today’s leanproduction methods and modern supply chain management require companies to forecast customer demand accurately; coordinate multiple suppliers(perhaps thousands); manage distribution of products and services; track andtrace items in transit; and otherwise control the flow of materials through the organization, from raw materials to finished goods. these systems can bequite complex, and they all hinge on managing information (chopra andmeindl 2001).cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.supplychainmanagementandworldtrademanufacturers, retailers, and other users of transportation have grown accustomedto thinking of their supply chains (networks of manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors, and retailers, which turn raw materials into ﬁnished goods and servicesand deliver them to consumers) as important sources of competitive advantage.supply chains increasingly are treated as integrated entities, and closer relationships between the organizations throughout the chain can produce competitiveadvantage, reduce costs, and help attract and maintain a loyal customer base.companies manage their supply chains to achieve strategic advantage, whichoften requires detailed models of the movements of goods and the ﬂow of information between the organization and its suppliers and customers. the processof supply chain management is often called “logistics.”today’s supply chains are increasingly multinational, as companies seek theleast costly suppliers consistent with efﬁcient production. this shift has driven aremarkable rise in international trade. merchandise trade worldwide has doubledin the past decade (figure 12). the united states accounts for nearly oneﬁfthof the world market by value and a corresponding share of the demand for transportation. the federal highway administration of the u.s. department oftransportation (dot) forecasts a further doubling by 2020 (fhwa 2002). thisgrowth will offer economic opportunity but will strain the capacity of the nation’sports, other intermodal freight terminals, and highways.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study147,4288491631,08910,8582,3111,2191885402,0004,0006,0008,00010,00012,000truckrailwaterairother value (billion $)tons (millions)figure 11value and tonnage of u.s. domestic freight shipments by mode; “other” ismainly pipelines, for which value is not available (fhwa 2000).cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the growth in foreign trade is even more striking in comparison with grossdomestic product (gdp). since 1970 u.s. merchandise trade has more thandoubled as a proportion of gdp. the world as a whole has also seen healthyincreases in this measure (figure 13).growingrelianceoninformationinformation is obviously a vital contributor to supply chain management. anautomobile manufacturer, for example, must assemble all the parts and subassemblies for a run of a particular make and model. in doing so, it must coordinate the production schedules of perhaps hundreds of suppliers to ensure that thecorrect parts and subassemblies ﬂow toward the ﬁnal assembly plant as needed.with today’s lean inventories, there is little “buffer stock” to make up for a supplier’s shortfall and, often, nowhere to store buffer inventories if they existed. tomanage its inventories, the company must forecast in real time its production ofthat model and communicate with all of its suppliers and transportation providersso that they may speed up or slow down their activities. these information ﬂowsare critical to industrial operations and proﬁtability, and any threat to theirintegrity becomes a real concern.for larger companies, supply chain management is a component of enterprise resource planning models. these models may include transportation aswell as human resources, ﬁnance, and other core functions. specialized logisticsthe evolving freight industry15$0$1,000$2,000$3,000$4,000$5,000$6,000$7,00019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001yearmerchandise exports (billion us$)worldunited stateswestern europeasiaafrica/mideastfigure 12merchandise exports by region, 1991–2001. (source: world tradeorganization.)cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.management companies have proliferated in recent years to serve this need forsmall and mediumsized companies.differencesamongmodeshighwayfreightthe nation’s highway system is the giant of american transportation, carrying71 percent of the total tonnage and 80 percent of the total value of u.s. shipmentsin 1998 (fhwa 2002). more than 550,000 separate trucking establishmentscarry freight locally, nationally, and internationally, according to the 1997economic census survey of the transportation and warehousing sector. thesecompanies shared total revenue estimated at $342 billion (including local andlongdistance trucking and courier services) (bureau of the census 2001a).the companies range from tiny concerns with one or two employees to majornational networks with revenues of $2 billion to $3 billion or more (and thebiggest of all, ups, with 2001 revenues of more than $20 billion). in all, their4.7 million employees were responsible for more than 1 trillion tonmiles offreight movement. highway freight movement grew robustly in the late 1990s(bts 2002).cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study160%5%10%15%20%25%30%19601970198019902000yearpercentagefigure 13u.s. trade in goods and services (exports plus imports) as a percentage ofgdp, 1960–2000 (bureau of the census 2001b).cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.airfreightall of america’s 100 scheduled airlines carry freight to some extent. scheduledairlines’ revenues for domestic and international freight and express servicestotaled about $12 billion in 2001, and carriage of mail added another $1 billion.the airlines were responsible for nearly 22 billion revenue tonmiles in 2001.freight and express specialists were among the few airlines to report consistentproﬁts in recent years.all of these activities declined substantially between 2000 and 2001, however, reﬂecting the uncertain security environment and the worldwide economic slump. the decline followed a period of very healthy growth (more than10 percent per annum for several years).railfreightrailroad freight revenues in 2001 totaled $35 billion. the nation’s railroads wereresponsible for nearly 1.5 trillion tonmiles of freight trafﬁc. nearly half of thetonnage (46 percent) was coal, which was followed by chemicals and allied products (8.7 percent), farm products (7.9 percent), nonmetallic minerals (7.0 percent), and food and kindred products (5.6 percent), according to the associationof american railroads (2003).the railroad industry is in a longterm process of consolidation. the unitedstates has 571 railroads, but only eight are large (class i railroads that have corporate revenues exceeding $266.7 million). statistics for this group show a totalemployment of 178,000 in 1999. in that year the eight companies shared revenuesof just over $32 billion. the association of american railroads (2003) reportsthat the top two (union paciﬁc and burlington northern) accounted for morethan twothirds of that revenue in 2000 ($23 billion).waterbornefreightthe u.s. maritime shipping industry is diverse and complex. it includes a widevariety of vessel types offering many different kinds of service, calling on hundreds of ports on all of the seacoasts and the great lakes, as well as transitinginland waterways.the volume of container freight moving through the nation’s ports has doubled in the past decade and is expected to continue growing rapidly (bts 2002;the economist1997). more than 15 million containers are in use globally; theyaccount for about 90 percent of the world’s internationally traded cargo by value(the economist2002). virtually all oceangoing vessels that serve u.s. commerceare operated under foreign ﬂags.the evolving freight industry17cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.measured by value, the cargo transported by the international liner shippingindustry constitutes about twothirds of the total u.s. foreign waterborne trade.in 2002, the liner shipping industry carried roughly 6 million containers ofimported cargo to the united states and approximately 3.3 million containersof export cargo being shipped from more than 202,000 american businesses.the total is roughly $500 billion worth of goods, or more than $1.3 billion worthof goods per day through u.s. ports (world shipping council 2002). somedetails on the information technology used by the international liner shippingindustry are offered in appendix a.data from dot’s bureau of transportation statistics indicate revenues in1999 of $24.5 billion for domestic and international freight (coastal waterways,great lakes, locks and channels, and inland waterways) (bts 2002).referencesabbreviationsbtsbureau of transportation statisticsfhwafederal highway administrationassociation of american railroads. 2003. fact about railroads.policy and economicsdepartment, jan. 10.www.aar.org/pubcommon/documents/abouttheindustry/statistics.pdf.bureau of the census. 2001a. 1997 economic census: transportation and warehousing.ec97t48ssm. march. www.census.gov/prod/ec97/97t48sm.pdf.bureau of the census. 2001b. statistical abstract of the united states.washington, d.c.bts. 2002. national transportation statistics 2001.bts0206. u.s. department oftransportation, washington, d.c. www.bts.gov/publications/nts/index.html.chopra, s., and p. meindl. 2001. supply chain management: strategy planning andoperation.prentice hall, upper saddle river, n.j.the economist.1997. delivering the goods. nov. 13.www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?storyid=352733.the economist.2002. container trade: when trade and security clash.www.economist.com/displaystory.cfm?storyid=1066906.fhwa. 2002. the freight story: a national perspective on enhancing freight transportation.u.s. department of transportation, washington, d.c.world shipping council. 2002. partners in america’s trade.brochure. washington, d.c.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study18cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192freightinformationsystemtechnologiesmost freight transportation information technology (it) is the same as in otherindustries. differences arise because of the nature of the industry and the consequences of terrorist exploitation of potential vulnerabilities, as noted in theexecutive summary. the freight transportation industry uses it in several ways:•backroom management and integration.companies use a range of generalpurpose business applications to manage internal processes and to link themby sharing information internally and with suppliers and customers (see, forexample, chopra and meindl 2001; mcdougall 2003; radding 2000).•mobile communications and tracking.to keep track of the locations of trailers,trucks, rail cars, and other mobile assets and their contents, companies useeverything from bar codes to global positioning system (gps) receivers.•internet applications.the internet plays a growing role for all freight companies. electronic commerce of all kinds uses the internet because of its wideaccessibility and its ﬂexibility in allowing companies to link various kinds ofweb, clientserver, and legacy systems. these properties make it easier forcompanies to develop distributed applications that can exchange varioustypes of formatted data (kiely 1999).all of these technologies have cybersecurity implications. as companies maketheir operations more efﬁcient by integrating their systems and those of their customers and suppliers, they also raise cybersecurity concerns. the purpose of thischapter is not to deﬁne speciﬁc information technologies into or out of the waron cyberterrorism. rather, it is to provide a basic understanding of the range andcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.character of possible technology tools that might become valuable in that context. the committee believes that this will help the department of homelandsecurity (dhs) and the department of transportation (dot) in the development of their cybersecurity strategies.existingit applicationsmany kinds of it are used by the freight transportation industry. the variousmodes (air, truck, rail, pipeline, and water), to varying degrees, use specialized,sectorspeciﬁc technologies, but the ultimate goal is to get the shipment fromits origin to its destination, which may involve multiple modes. the challengeis to get the shipment to its destination on schedule, with the appropriate degreeof tracking en route; to minimize delays in transferring from mode to mode; andto do all of this at a competitive price without damage to the product shipped.for most companies, transportation is a strategic asset. large companies todayare likely to have sophisticated models of their operations, known as enterpriseresource planning (erp) systems. erp systems may include scheduling modulesfor manufacturing plants, which would allow the company to automate majorportions of the decision processes in transportation or other aspects of the valuechain for that plant. the use of such modules (in ﬁnance, logistics, manufacturing, human resources, or supplier management) helps the company improve theway it does business by increasing efﬁciency and reducing human error.freight transportation planning and operation decisions are often assisted bysoftware that is designed to help analyze and determine how, where, when, andin what quantity materials should be transported. these systems also comparedifferent carriers, modes, routes, and freight plans; include supply chain management software; and rely on sophisticated algorithms to analyze options andgenerate solutions that increase proﬁtability. these applications can respond inreal time to problems and emergencies—for example, by instantly reschedulingif a machine breaks down.for any mode, freight operations can generally be categorized into the following tasks, each of which can be assisted or improved by the use of it:•matching a load with a carrier.the cargo owner, or shipper, must identify andengage a carrier—truck, train, ship, air, or a combination of modes. freightbrokers, agents, and freight forwarders may be involved in this task. thetechnology involved can span the range from telephone and fax on the lowend to internetbased load bidding. if a multimodal shipment is involved,cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study20cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the shipper or broker (agent) will either have to arrange each leg of the tripor request a carrier to arrange the entire intermodal movement.•order acceptance.it is necessary to establish a dated record of the carrier towhich the load is assigned. this record is typically called a bill of lading (airbill or waybill). it is a statement of the nature and value of goods being transported and the conditions and terms applying to their transport. it serves asor evidences a contract of transport between the owner of the goods and thecarrier. it may be paper, or it may take various electronic forms.•routing/dispatching.choosing a course and directing the vehicle to its destination can be a matter of strictly human effort (for a simple truck trip) orit can be automated to nearly any extent desired.•pickup conﬁrmation, en route tracking, and delivery conﬁrmation.shippers andfreight companies often desire to track the progress of their shipments. a variety of processes and technologies—depending on the transportation modes—can be used for this purpose, including gps satellites, digital or analogwireless telephones, and bar code scanning. some carriers use all of thesedevices, so customers may monitor the locations of their shipments in nearreal time by using the internet.•transmitting shipping documentation.paper documents are traditional here,but many carriers use electronic communications [e.g., the internet andelectronic data interchange (edi)].•cargo manifesting.this step often uses special information software andsystems.the various transportation modes use different technologies, which reﬂecttheir recent histories. all, however, are moving toward greater computerassistedsystems and reliance on communication, frequently using edi and the internet.yet they have far to go before truly intermodal transportation communicationsare possible.highwayfreightthe trucking industry is a component in nearly every company’s supply chain.trucking companies use computing and communications technologies heavilyfreight information system technologies21cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.to improve their own efﬁciency and to meet the demands of their customers forcosteffective, efﬁcient, and easily tracked logistics. the proliferation of smalltrucking companies over the past 20 years has been built on the use of lowcostit such as mobile phones, fax machines, and the internet.trucking companies and freight brokers increasingly use the internet tomatch loads with the most appropriate carriers. both independent brokers andsome larger truck freight companies have websites on which drivers can bid forloads or use edi, which is also commonly used by railroads and waterbornefreight companies. phone and fax, of course, are still vital, especially for the tensof thousands of smaller ﬁrms (i.e., those with fewer than 10 trucks).to document the agreement to carry a shipment, many shippers use electronicmeans [such as the wellestablished edi or the emerging and more ﬂexibleextensible markup language (xml)], but smaller shippers use paper records.except for extremely timesensitive operations, such as sophisticated logisticssystems serving justintime manufacturing operations, the driver or human dispatcher is responsible for routing and dispatching the truck. the technology isavailable for automating these operations to nearly any extent desired (includingspecial software for generating maps and trip schedules).for conﬁrming the pickup, en route tracking, and delivery conﬁrmation,truckers use a variety of technologies, including gps (satellites), digital or analog wireless telephones, and bar code scanning. new electronic automatic vehicle identiﬁcation systems, much like those used in the electronic collection oftolls on highways, are used increasingly in busy ports and other intermodal transfer points. some carriers use all of these devices, so customers may monitor thelocations of their shipments in near real time by using the internet.in transmitting shipping documentation, paper documents are the norm, butsome carriers use digital communications such as edi.airfreightthe rapid growth of air freight in the past decade was made possible by advancesin communications as much as anything else. coordinating the worldwidemovement of timesensitive freight, from business documents to garments tofresh ﬂowers, is a challenging and complex task.air cargo companies gain their competitive edge from technology innovation.they pioneered the generation and use of large databases that can be queried atwill to monitor each of the millions of items that a large air freight company mayhave in transit at any moment. a vital part of the problem is to ensure that intermodal communication is efﬁcient (air transport association 2002).cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study22cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.railfreightrail freight is increasingly supported by information systems and communications technologies. typical trains a decade or so ago had a crew of four, comparedwith two today. rail companies have made growing use of onboard computers,local area networks, automated equipment identiﬁers, gps tracking, automaticreporting of work orders to headquarters, car scheduling and train order systems,and twoway wireless connections (association of american railroads 2003).signaling and monitoring systems are also more automated, taking advantageof commercial ﬁberoptic communications cable that has been laid along rightsofway. the rails themselves are used as communications channels for signal controllers and trackside signals. wayside “hotbox” detectors take infrared readingson the bearing boxes of passing rail cars and automatically report overheatedjournals over vhf voice networks. in arranging transfers to and from othermodes, railroads have long used edi.to help track shipments, nearly all locomotives and rail cars are tagged withautomatic identiﬁcation transponders, which automatically record car locations.this technique allows automatic veriﬁcation of the standing order of cars in eachtrain and faster, more accurate reporting of car locations to railroad service centers and customers.waterbornefreightwaterborne freight has many of the same information needs as other modes. thecarrier must identify cargo, make intermodal handoffs efﬁciently, and get the cargoto the agreed destination as quickly and securely as possible. the types and sizesof typical cargo (mainly containerized freight, petroleum and other ﬂuids, motorvehicles, and various bulk cargo) are somewhat different from those of othermodes, but the types of information needed are essentially the same.the focus of the remainder of this section is on the international liner shippingindustry (that is, ocean carriers that offer scheduled services on ﬁxed routes), sincethis type of shipping activity involves the greatest need to manage informationand communicate with others. further detail can be found in appendix a.business data systemsthe heart of a company’s information and communication processes is usually alegacy mainframe computer system, which is generally accessible over the internet(with various levels of access to users inside and outside the company). access issecured by passwords or a virtual private network with different levels of securityfreight information system technologies23cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.for, and access to, the centralized mainframe systems. many global carriers alsohave company intranets.central dispatch/redirectioncentral to liner shipping companies’ activities in this area is keeping track of containers and truck chassis. shippers (cargo owners) must arrange with the line forthe speciﬁc types and numbers of containers needed, the pickup date, and whichvessel is to carry the containers. to do this, the shipper either directly contactsthe line’s booking agent or enters the necessary information (including origin, destination, port of loading, commodity description, shipper’s name, and type of container) using the appropriate transaction section of the line’s website. in eithercase, the information goes into the company’s mainframe system and becomesavailable to dispatchers of containers and to vessel operators and terminal operators, who make the necessary preparations for the movement, loading, andstowage of containers on the vessel and for the availability of needed equipment.at the destination port, the terminal operations staff—also working from thecompany’s mainframe system—will access information needed for offloading thecontainers and handing them off for the next leg of the journey.information flow among collaboratorsmultiline alliances and other vesselsharing arrangements are central to linershipping. because a vessel may carry the cargo of various container lines, it is necessary to exchange signiﬁcant amounts of information among alliance members.most of this information exchange is handled via edi, which in turn requiresthat each alliance partner’s information system be programmed to accept datafrom the other partners’ systems.they also must share information with truckers and rail carriers to ensure efﬁcient intermodal transfers. the edi protocol or web tools, or both, are generally used with “house” truckers or railroads; with smaller trucking companies,the transactions are handled by fax or email.information flow to governmentsthe freight industry has innumerable electronic links, mandated or voluntary,with local, state, and federal agencies. these include manifest ﬁlings, operatingauthorities and permits (e.g., permits to carry hazardous materials), route ﬁlings,electronic funds transfers, and personnel ﬁles, to name a few. for example, oceancarriers must post information on imported cargo with the automated manifestsystem (ams) of dhs’s bureau of customs and border protection (formerlycybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study24cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.u.s. customs service). the customs databases and systems are discussed in moredetail in appendix d. customs recently promulgated the socalled 24hour rule(see box 21), which requires that advance cargo declarations be submitted24 hours before loading of u.s.bound cargoes in foreign ports. ams and thecustoms’ automated targeting system are becoming the preeminent centralized government data management system for security prescreening of importcargoes to the united states. in addition, many ocean carriers and shippers areparticipating in customs’ automated export system for electronic submission offreight information system technologies25box 21newcargosecurityregulationsfromcustomsandborderprotectionthe u.s. bureau of customs and border protection in late 2002 issued the socalled “24hour rule,” which requires ocean carriers to submit advance cargodeclarations (cf 1302) 24 hours before loading u.s.bound cargo in foreignports. under this rule, custom’s automated manifest system (ams) is becomingthe main federal data management system for security screening of waterborneimports.the carrier sends data on inbound cargo to customs via ams, and customsmakes the appropriate checks using ams and its automated targeting system,according to an established list of risk factors. customs can thereby determinewhether a container should be held pending further investigation at the foreign port and whether containers should be physically inspected. containersfor which no hold has been issued can be loaded 24 hours after submission ofthe data.section 343 of the recent trade act of 2002 (p.l. 107210) requires thatinformation on all imports and exports be submitted electronically to customs.customs will promulgate ﬁnal regulations under the act by october 1, 2003. itis expected that more foreign jurisdictions will require electronic submission ofcargo manifest information in the future.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.export cargo information; other ocean carriers provide that information today inpaper (fax) form. the advanced passenger information system, which has beenused by airlines since 1986 to report airline passengers, has now become mandatory for other modes, under the enhanced border security act of 2002. it willsoon require mandatory advance electronic crew member information from vessels. as with information technology in other applications, the use of systems anddatabases in public–private partnerships is subject to the cybersecurity implications previously mentioned in this chapter.information flow between carriers and customersestimates in the trade press suggest that about 75 percent of shippers’ transactionswith ocean carriers are handled by telephone or fax, 20 percent through individual carriers’ websites, and 5 percent via the three webbased portals (e.g., gtnexus, inttra, and cargosmart) that provide access to multiple carriers at one site.in electronic transactions between ocean carriers and their customers, user registration and assignment of passwords is a common security measure. encryption ofdata is primarily used in situations in which the parties are passing data relatedto title to goods, as, for example, with remote printing of bills of lading. somecompanies in the liner shipping industry are moving to customer relationshipmanagement software, which allows them to more ﬂexibly manage customertransactions through a simpler linking of all the company’s individual business systems. customers can obtain information on the status of particular cargo movements from the ocean carrier’s customer service department or track the cargo’sposition in a secure section of the carrier’s website using coded information fromthe bill of lading.it trendsandemergingtechnologiesa variety of approaches using new technologies may be linked to it systems inthe future. some are intended to improve cybersecurity. others would be implemented for efﬁciency reasons but may have secondary implications, positive ornegative, for it vulnerability. the topics discussed are still developmental, andthere is no assurance that they will be (a) appropriate for freight transportationsecurity or (b) available at an acceptable cost. the technologies discussed hereare intended as examples of technology that the full study should consider.determining which are likely to be widely implemented was beyond the scope ofthis study.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study26cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.electronicsupplychainmanifestdemonstrationdot, working with freight shippers, has tested a variety of ways to improve intermodal transfers of freight under the intelligent transportation systems program.for example, at o’hare international airport, the electronic supply chainmanifest system was tested in a 2year demonstration that focused on the air–truckinterface, but it is being considered for other modes as well.freightinformationrealtimesystemfortransportthe freight information realtime system for transport (first), being developed by the port authority of new york and new jersey (https://www.ﬁrstnynj.com/), is an internetbased system for trucking companies, railroads, terminaloperators, ocean carriers, brokers/freight forwarders, and others to use in speeding the ﬂow of cargo through the area (one of the busiest and most congested inthe country). it allows cargo brokers, shipping agents, freight forwarders, andsteamship companies, as well as trucking companies and railroads, to check thestatus of cargo and vessel arrivals, arrange pickups, and conﬁrm deliveries. thefirst website includes alerts of bridge and tunnel problems and trafﬁc congestion (and webcams of the busiest container terminals).first consolidates in one place on the web various existing sources ofcritical cargo transfer and carrier information (including near realtime information on truck, ship, and train arrivals), realtime video feeds to monitorcongestion at seaport entry gates and road conditions on arterial roads leadingto the port, and enhanced intermodal connectivity by improving the intransitvisibility of cargo.interconnectionsofsystemsacrosslargesectorsthe interconnection of systems across the freight transportation sector, properlyimplemented, signiﬁcantly increases the ability of participants to communicateeffectively and efﬁciently by reducing mundane tasks and increasing accuracy.various forces are currently driving the interconnection of information systemsacross the entire transportation sector. economic forces, among other considerations, are causing large organizations in the transportation sector to interconnect their own systems to create enterprisespanning systems. for example, all ofthe large overseas shippers now have interconnected systems that are used tocontrol most aspects of the shipping process within their organizations. the systems have many of the same characteristics as those developed by fedex tohandle all of its various operations, including overnight, freight, and customfreight information system technologies27cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.deliveries. furthermore, customers are being granted electronic access to thosesystems to gain “visibility” of shipments, which allows the customers to maketheir own operations more efﬁcient.as some large organizations develop interconnected systems for their ownpurposes, they also provide the resulting computerassisted services to a largernumber of smaller organizations who otherwise would not have their own systems. for example, the system used by union paciﬁc to control its networkwideoperations is also used by many shortline carriers to control local and regionaloperations. such sharing of information systems helps large and small operatorsalike to increase efﬁciency, reduce overall costs, and amortize investments in it.smaller operators also are interconnecting their existing systems to create“federated” or “cooperative” systems that allow them to compete more effectively with larger organizations. for example, four regional trucking carriershave formed the expresslink system to interconnect their own corporatelevelsystems. expresslink gives each carrier national coverage while allowing it tomaintain a relatively small infrastructure.in addition, policy and regulatory forces are driving the interconnection ofgovernmental systems and the interconnection of commercial and governmental systems. the bureau of customs and border protection has several new itsystems (described in appendix d) under development that—once they becomeoperational—could serve more government agencies than originally envisagedas a result of homeland security initiatives and requirements. in many respects,the interconnection of government systems parallels the interconnection ofcommercial systems because regulatory agencies must streamline their operationsto keep pace with increased efﬁciencies provided by commercial systems.regulatory forces are also driving the interconnection of commercial andgovernment systems by requiring more information to be submitted electronically to the government by carriers, shippers, and manufacturers. for example,effective december 2002, customs has been requiring the submission of seacargo manifests 24 hours before loading of export cargoes destined for theunited states (see box 21). customs, acting under statutory authority, is poisedto propose that all sea cargo manifests be electronically submitted for bothimport and export cargo. customs is likely to propose that similar electronic submission requirements for cargo descriptions be implemented for the other transportation modes.many of the economic, business, policy, and regulatory forces describedabove have existed for quite some time, although the pace of development inmany of these areas has quickened as a result of homeland security initiatives.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study28cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.accordingly, pilot programs have been started or are being planned in varioussectors to gain practical experience with various existing and emerging technological and procedural applications and processes before decisions are made ontheir adoption. pilot programs (see appendices b and c) such as operation safecommerce, simtag, cargo handling cooperative program, and smart andsecure trade lanes involve the testing of, and comparison between, differentmonitoring and identiﬁcation systems of shipments as well as the handling ofthose shipments through the intermodal transportation chain. each pilot program is intended to provide insights that may be relevant to determining futureeconomic, policy, and regulatory priorities and requirements.for all of the reasons stated above, the interconnection of information systemsacross large transportation sectors is likely to develop further. transport carriers,shippers, and manufacturers will likely ﬁnd economic value in increasing the efﬁciency of their operations by development and deployment of multifunctionaland multiﬁrm intelligent management systems. similarly, government systemsand the interconnection of commercial and government systems are likely to beused increasingly in satisfying complex policy and regulatory requirements.however, as the web of interconnected information systems increases to fulﬁllthese requirements, it is likely to become more susceptible to unauthorizedaccess, improper use, and denialofservice attacks.1that is, the natural solution for the current set of economic and regulatory problems could become thecause of a host of cybersecurity problems if it is not implemented properly(cstb 2002a).various architectural and technical mechanisms can be used to maintain security across interconnected systems, such as ﬁrewalls and different access controllevels. however, regardless of the speciﬁc mechanism, they all essentially rely onauthentication, the identiﬁcation of every person or computer that accesses thesystem. the stronger the mechanism of identiﬁcation, the stronger the overallsecurity of the system. for example, most standalone and interconnected systems, including pcs, departmental servers, mainframes, and enterprisespanningwebbased services, rely on a simple username and password combination toidentify each person who should be allowed to access the system. although manytechniques have been developed to “increase the security” of the simple passwordfreight information system technologies291this theme was reﬂected in “continued review of the tax systems modernization of the internalrevenue service” (cstb 1994) with the strong condemnation of the extremely weak security architecture, which had 55,000 members able to access a taxpayer’s ﬁle over unsecured circuits using only aﬁxed password.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.scheme (e.g., stamping additional numbers on the back of credit cards or requiring at least six characters in a password), most security experts agree that passwords are a weak authentication mechanism because it is relatively easy for anintruder to acquire such information. in an interconnected system, the potentialproblems caused by weak authentication mechanisms are ampliﬁed signiﬁcantlybecause of the increased number of entry points into the system. furthermore,access to one part of the system could lead to access to other parts of the system,if not to the entire system. as important as the authentication of individuals inan interconnected system is the authentication of every system that accessesanother system.the importance of credible authentication in interconnected systems hasbeen well known for more than 20 years. moreover, various competing theoriesand technologies have evolved over that time to address these concerns, primarily through the use of cryptographic techniques that rely on mathematicalapproaches to ensure that the authentication information cannot be stolen orforged (cstb 1996). credible authentication is based on a set of “digital certiﬁcates” (i.e., credentials) that have been “digitally signed” (i.e., authenticated)by a “trusted entity.”2the use of digital certiﬁcates and signatures went a long way toward solvingthe widescale software authentication problem. support for digital certiﬁcates,which were ﬁrst developed in a widespread manner in the mid1990s with thenetscape web browser, has since been added to most email software for theauthentication and encryption of email, although it is not yet widely used.digital certiﬁcates and signatures are often used in conjunction with hardwaredevices such as smart cards and smart tokens to further strengthen the authentication scheme used by a system.embeddedprocessorsandenablingtechnologieshistorically, the primary interface between the real world and the cyberworld hasbeen a human being: someone interprets realworld activities and enters data intothe computer system, or someone is provided tasking by the computer and performs a realworld chore. embedded processors transfer information directlybetween the real world and the cyberworld. they are already used in the transportation sector, primarily for the monitoring and identiﬁcation of shipments, andcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study302having a single “trusted entity” is only one approach. the study that is outlined should look at alternative approaches such as having multiple roots [e.g., sdsi/spki (simple distributed security infrastructure/simple public key infrastructure)] and other beneﬁts of digital signatures such as the protectionof certiﬁcate integrity.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.that use could grow. radio frequency identiﬁcation (rfid) tags, esensors, and eseals, together with their electronic readers at all relevant points, are examplesof embedded processors.rfid tags are used to provide an automated means of identifying an asset orits declared contents, or both. these tags can be either active or passive. activerfid uses an internal power source (e.g., battery) within the tag to continuously power the tag and its rf communication circuitry, whereas passive rfidrelies on rf energy transferred from the reader to the tag to power the tag.passive rfid operation requires strong signals from the reader, and the signalstrength returned from the tag is low because of the limited energy. as with anyrfid system, one of the vulnerabilities to cyberattack occurs at the point wherethe tag communicates with the reader. the simplicity of passive rfid tagsmakes them relatively easy to “spoof.” active rfid systems, on the other hand,can include authentication and encryption techniques similar to those of anycomputer network. some of their cybersecurity challenges are therefore similarto those of other it systems, as discussed above.esensors make use of embedded processors to detect and document environmental characteristics or changes to a shipment along its route. for example,temperature sensors can be used on refrigerated containers to detect whether theinternal temperature was maintained within proper limits over the entire route.certain types of sensors have been used for some time in various applications inthe transportation sector but are now, to some degree, being integrated withembedded processors. for example, a temperature esensor can record the actualtemperature of the shipment over the entire route, and the temperature datacan be stored in a tamperindicative manner by using a variety of hardware andsoftware techniques. esensors also can be conﬁgured to document containerintrusions.seals, whether electronic or mechanical, are placed on shipments or structures to detect an unauthorized entry (thereby alerting ofﬁcials to the need forfurther inspections) or deter intrusions because of the fear of detection. theycan be designed for different applications. for example, eseals on a containerdoor might store information about the container, the declaration of its contents, and its intended route through the system. eseals can document whenthe seal was opened. in combination with digital certiﬁcates and signatures, aneseal also could document whether the individuals sealing and unsealing thecontainer were authorized.while these technologies are intended to enable monitoring of shipments andphysical security, they all use it and are linked to it systems. thus the additionalfreight information system technologies31cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.connection points (e.g., electronic readers) may increase cybervulnerability. afull assessment of the potential cybersecurity vulnerabilities that would be created through the widespread adoption of these technologies in the freight transportation industry is needed (see task 1 in chapter 3), perhaps as part of thelarger study that is the focus of this report.in addition to the embedded devices described above, enabling technologies,including publickey cryptography, biometrics, and wireless communicationtracking, are of potential use in the transportation sector’s it infrastructure andare relevant from a cybersecurity perspective.cryptography has been used across a range of application areas for more than25 years to ensure that information is exchanged privately between two entities over a network. cryptography is the basis for most “secure” webbasedactivities and “secure” email applications, and it is supported by all major software applications. the need for strong cryptographic techniques in electroniccommerce has led to its widespread availability beyond traditional militaryapplications.biometric devices are used to authenticate human beings on the basis of oneor more physical attributes such as a retina or iris pattern, a ﬁngerprint, digitalface recognition, or voice pattern. as such, this limits access to a specific person, not just to someone who knows certain information (i.e., a password) orholds certain credentials (e.g., a digital certificate). biometric devices can beused in conjunction with a smart card (or smart token) and a digital certificate to improve authentication. [the report who goes there? authenticationtechnologies and their privacy implications(cstb 2003b) has a more indepthdiscussion of biometrics as an authentication technology, commonsense rulesfor the uses of biometrics, and potential privacy and other social implications oftheir use.]wireless communication tracking systems are used in the domestic transportation sector to monitor the location of shipments along their route. in somecases, the shipment reports its location using wireless communication to a control system, while in other cases the shipment simply records its location alongits route, and those data are gathered at a control point.it will be important to closely monitor ongoing and planned pilot programs(e.g., operation safe commerce and smart and secure trade lanes) intendedto test these technologies to determine what role, if any, they might have inenhancing supply chain security. standardization efforts of various national andinternational organizations and institutions (e.g., the autoid center at thecybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study32cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.massachusetts institute of technology and the international organization forstandardization) and the degree to which such efforts would address recognizedcybersecurity vulnerabilities of the technologies and their possible commercialdeployment are also worth monitoring.electronicdatainterchangeproper paperwork, including the bill of lading, work order, and letters of credit, isessential to the movement of shipments. the electronic exchange of documentsrequired throughout the shipping process is becoming more and more common.mature edi standards exist for the transportation sector, and operational systemsare already in use by large and small organizations within the sector.the ﬁrst electronic documents to be exchanged were those directly related tomoney, such as purchase orders, work orders, invoices, and payments. for example, 96 percent of all invoices generated by union paciﬁc are exchanged electronically. the electronic exchange of other documents in the shipping processis increasing, to the extent that no paper document is ever generated in somecases. for example, 80 percent of all fedex orders are placed electronically overthe internet, and corresponding electronic invoices and creditcard receipts aresent to the consumer.historically, the validity of a shipping document was veriﬁed by human beingsalong the route who physically examined the document itself and any attachedseal. some fraudulent or forged documents would routinely be detected, but somewould not. in general, the system was designed to limit the number of improperdocuments to an acceptable level across the entire transportation sector. thesteady move toward electronic documents, however, could signiﬁcantly alter thatdelicate balance because electronic documents are easily reproduced, altered, orforged if they are not implemented properly. more important, it is practicallyimpossible for a human being to detect such a forgery, let alone monitor therapidly increasing number of documents being exchanged.the use of a cryptographically generated signature on a sensitive documentthat is exchanged between two information systems helps ensure the authenticity of the document author and that it can be exchanged privately withanother party. as discussed above, such technology has been used extensivelyin many application areas and is widely available. an effective digital signaturewould reduce the vulnerability of a document to tampering and fraudulent use.the transportation sector in general and system developers in particular havenot to any large degree incorporated digital signatures into emerging systemsfreight information system technologies33cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.and standards. to date, forgeries in the freight transportation industry have hadfew implications beyond ﬁnance. if weapons of mass destruction were to besmuggled, however, forgery might be an integral part of the deception. the studythat is outlined here should analyze the use of digital signatures on electronicdocuments and determine whether steps could be taken to encourage morewidespread use.in many cases, the worst cybersecurity problems result from the ﬁrst wave ofproductivity enhancements gained by computerassisted systems. that is, whencomputerized systems are ﬁrst deployed to increase productivity, they naturallycause a change in the business processes and procedures followed by humanbeings to do their job. if the consequences of those humanoriented changes arenot considered by the system designers, a wrongdoer could take advantage ofthose changes and cause more difﬁcult problems than were possible before(cstb 2003a, 80–81). similarly, equipping electronic documents with digitalsignatures based on strong cryptography might create an environment in whichthe electronic documents would replace paperbased documents, thus possiblyaltering normal business processes and procedures.the productivity enhancements provided by electronic documents come at aprice. widespread use of electronic documents would require development of anelectronic infrastructure to support the authentication of individuals and organizations, document standards across a range of transportation sectors, and a setof auditing processes to ensure that the system is working properly. such infrastructure elements are being developed across a wide range of business sectors andare starting to evolve in the transportation sector. the study that is outlined hereshould consider the value of pilot programs to identify the various issues and challenges surrounding the creation of such an electronic infrastructure throughoutthe transportation sector.as in the deployment of any technology, the deployment of edi could resultin new or additional vulnerabilities and consequences. they could result fromalteration of existing business practices (e.g., the involvement of one less personin a checkandvalidation process) and the development of infrastructure elements across various business sectors (e.g., two incompatible systems are “united”by a third “mediating” system), among other causes.increasedrelianceontheinternetforcommunicationeconomic forces are pushing most systems toward internet communications asthe result of widespread, nearuniversal access. consumeroriented carriers handle a signiﬁcant portion of their business over the internet, keeping pace withcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study34cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the general push toward online commerce in all sectors. similarly, businesstobusiness carriers are also starting to use the internet for a signiﬁcant portion oftheir transactions.with the increased use of the internet has come an increased awareness of theneed for secure communications and stronger authentication techniques in mostinformation systems, especially those using the internet. hardwarebased authentication tokens, which are issued to users who need to access a system over theinternet or by use of some other remote access technology, either replace or augment a conventional password system to strengthen the remote authenticationprocess. for example, fedex uses 20,000 tokens to provide system access at various levels to remote users. virtual private network (vpn) technology has beendeveloped to provide extra levels of security for remote usertosystem and systemtosystem communication over the internet. vpn technology creates a virtualnetwork on top of the internet that allows access only to a speciﬁed set of usersand systems. the vpn technology has wellestablished hardware and softwarestandards. vpn works for prearranged situations involving a small number ofsystems.one of the challenges still facing internet developers is that of availability. asthe internet is increasingly used as the primary communication method betweentransportation systems, the ability to transmit data reliably across the internetbecomes more critical. internet availability is a doubleedged sword. on onehand, the internet is vast, with many redundant paths between all points—localand even regional breakdowns in one part of the internet are healed relativelyquickly by rerouting trafﬁc around the problem areas (cstb 2002b, 2). on theother hand, key resources on the internet depend on standard software components that are under continuous attack from a variety of sources constantly looking for ways to make them fail. for example, attacks on the domain nameservice and sendmail servers have demonstrated the susceptibility of these widespread components.as stated previously, the most difﬁcult security aspect of any large networkedsystem such as the internet is that the attacks can come from virtually anywherein a nearly anonymous manner (using current authentication methods). denialofservice attacks have been conducted for a long period of time by a wide rangeof people located around the world. more important, such attacks are inherentlydifﬁcult to prevent, and it is difﬁcult to track down the perpetrators. owners ofkey transportation systems that use the internet for communication purposesshould be aware of the risk of such attacks. protective measures are often usedas a normal part of the business process.freight information system technologies35cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.emergenceofdecentralizedsystemssince the introduction of webbased application techniques in the early 1990s,decentralized information systems have emerged as an alternative system architecture to the prevalent centralized systems. that is, instead of having a smallnumber of servers that provide services to a large number of users (the centralizedapproach), systems are now designed with a larger number of servers that communicate directly with each other to provide services (the decentralizedapproach). decentralized systems have an inherent ability to work around localand regional network outages, communicating whenever possible, but otherwisenot preventing local users from continuing to work. early applications such asnapster allowed music ﬁles to be exchanged between peer systems, while mainstream software applications such as groove allow peertopeer processing of typical business documents. the security implications of decentralized systemsinclude the lack of a centralized “authority” to authenticate that all the users andcomputers in the system are who they purport to be.referencesabbreviationcstbcomputer science and telecommunications boardair transport association. 2002. annual report.washington, d.c.association of american railroads. 2003. facts about railroads.policy and economicsdepartment, jan. 10. www.aar.org/pubcommon/documents/abouttheindustry/statistics.pdf.chopra, s., and p. meindl. 2001. supply chain management: strategy planning and operation.prentice hall, upper saddle river, n.j.cstb. 1994. continued review of the tax systems modernization of the internalrevenue service. national research council, washington, d.c.www.cstb.org/pubirscontinuedreview.html.cstb. 1996. cryptography’s role in securing the information society.national academiespress, washington, d.c.cstb. 2002a. cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later.nationalacademies press, washington, d.c.cstb. 2002b. the internet under crisis conditions: learning from september 11.nationalacademies press, washington, d.c.cstb. 2003a. information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and futurepossibilities.national academies press, washington, d.c.cstb. 2003b. who goes there? authentication technologies and their privacy implications.national academies press, washington, d.c.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study36cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kiely, d. 1999. xml: more than just a quick fix, extensible markup language is seen asa universal object model that will enhance web development and simplifyapplication integration. information week,feb. 8.mcdougall, p. 2003. nissan’s i.t. road map: integration and security top automaker’sproject list. information week,feb. 10.radding, a. 2000. a new approach to integration: ecommerce requires companies tointegrate processes at many levels with multiple partners. information week,aug. 28.freight information system technologies37cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.393planningafullstudyas discussed in previous chapters, the freight transportation industry’s information systems may be vulnerable to cyberattacks. the consequences of a cyberattack could be serious, both economically and physically. further study is neededto identify speciﬁc vulnerabilities and risks and develop possible strategies toaddress those vulnerabilities while minimizing the costs of doing so. such studiesare warranted for the following reasons:•information technology (it) is becoming increasingly central to freighttransportation.•with all it come cybersecurity issues that should be carefully considered,in particular in the post–september 11 environment.•addressing cybersecurity issues presents the same conundrum as other security issues: a tradeoff between risk reduction and the costs of implementation.•no mechanism exists for determining analytically how far to go in reducingvulnerability or which steps should have the highest priorities.•not enough is yet known about cybersecurity as related to freight it or theimpact of potential measures to enhance security.therefore, the committee concludes that a need exists for a comprehensivestudy to assess the current challenges in cybersecurity in freight transportationinformation systems and to identify possible strategies to mitigate identiﬁed vulnerabilities. such strategies must account for the company composition andstructure in each mode, the operations the companies perform, and the information systems they use. they must be based on an analysis of security gaps, thecybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advantages and disadvantages of current and emerging technology and processesthat could be implemented to enhance cybersecurity, and the ability of transport companies to implement them. the analysis that would permit such strategies to be developed has not been conducted. the committee discusses someelements of the required analysis below.assessingsecurityissuesit is generally understood that achieving cybersecurity requires a twostep riskassessment. first, an analysis must be performed to identify overall system vulnerabilities, the threats that might exploit those vulnerabilities, and the consequences if the threats were indeed carried out. figure 31illustrates theinterrelationship of these factors. second, a risk management analysis must beconducted to evaluate possible measures to enhance cybersecurity, their costs,and their benefits. as discussed in chapter 2, the nature of the coordinatedinformation system that serves the nation’s freight transportation system makesthis risk analysis extraordinarily difﬁcult compared with other computer security assessments. nonetheless, this analysis of the overall interconnected system, as well as the individual subsystems, could be an important factor inreducing vulnerability to terrorist attacks.actions to mitigate threats should depend on the speciﬁc threats consideredplausible, the natures of the systems involved, and their owners. for example, abroad denialofservice attack on the bureau of customs and border protection’sautomated manifest system could shut down this necessary interaction pointfor all international shipments into the united states (see appendix d).40cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping studyvulnerabilities threatsconsequences figure 31factors involved in cybersecurity assessments.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.without this system, international transportation activities could grind to a halt,with signiﬁcant economic consequences for u.s. manufacturers and businessesand, ultimately, the u.s. economy. the u.s. government is responsible for countering such threats. alternatively, a disabling attack on the dispatch system of alarge carrier could bring that operation to a halt (and, correspondingly, all transportation activities linked to it). when potential targets are individually ownedand operated systems, the design and implementation of the solution move tothe companies that own these systems.diversity characterizes the freight transportation sector. achieving information system security demands a certain continuity of system design, implementation, and security procedures that does not readily permit the ﬂexibility that mightbe desirable in accommodating such a diverse range of participants. as a result,careful identiﬁcation of possible measures is required.the choice of measures to counter cyberterrorism must consider economic aswell as security issues. ignoring cost could have serious economic consequences,handing terrorists one of their stated objectives. it is difﬁcult to estimate economicimpacts across a broad sector such as freight transportation. nonetheless, it mustbe recognized that this sector operates on tight proﬁt margins. implementation ofcybersecurity measures is unlikely to be optimal unless economic beneﬁts accompany the security solutions. figure 32provides a visualization of the overlapbetween measures to improve security and measures to improve economic performance; some security initiatives may improve economic performance, and othersmay not. prioritization of possible measures for a diverse consortium of participants must be sensitive to this point as a speciﬁc aspect of the risk managementanalysis. another example of the tension between the diversity of the communityand the continuity required for cybersecurity concerns evaluation of cybersecuritycapabilities. important questions must be addressed, including who would performthe monitoring role, how it would be accomplished (for example, whether penetration tests would be conducted), how frequently evaluations would occur, andhow they would be reported.in view of these points, the process of evaluating possible measures and eventually selecting some for implementation must be an integrated effort that is basedon a risk prioritization methodology and a cost–beneﬁt methodology that areshared and understood by all affected members of the freight transportation community. the prioritization methodology should account for the consequences ofpotential attacks; the availability, efﬁcacy, and cost of possible measures; theirside beneﬁts; and the distribution of costs and beneﬁts to community membersand the nation as a whole. at present, no such methodology is in use or underplanning a full study41cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.development. in addition, no single organization has a mandate to develop andmanage the use of such a methodology. this report provides a set of recommendations that, if followed, would be the start of a process for selecting, implementing, and managing measures for countering potential terrorist cyberattacks.the study suggested here is intended to provide a strategy for approachingthese issues. it might be necessary to involve several entities in the conduct ofthe study. the national academies could do some of the work, but this is not aproposal for an academies study. industry consultants might collect data. oneor more federally funded research and development centers could do the detailedanalysis. various academic research programs also could be involved.in all these tasks, it will be necessary to impose strict conditions on the information collected and on the way it is processed. not only is company conﬁdentiality a major concern, but so is the possibility that the information might42cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping studysecurityeconomics(a)securityeconomics(b)figure 32relationship between security and economic beneﬁts: (a) little or no economicbeneﬁt to security enhancements; (b) signiﬁcant economic beneﬁt to security enhancements.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.be compromised by the terrorists that the study is intended to combat. also, forall these tasks, it will be important to study not only private freight informationsystems, but also those government information systems that interface with thefreight transportation sector (e.g., the various information systems operated bycustoms and border protection).studyplantask 1. determine the chief vulnerabilities of freight transportation information systems.no complete system description exists of the use of it in thetransportation sector. the ﬁrst step of this task is to identify at least the majorcomponents that can affect cybersecurity and their interconnections. part ofthis task would be to understand the role that these it components play innormal operations so that the consequences of their loss to cyberattacks canbe understood. information on backup systems should also be sought.this information might be obtained with a survey (if consistent with current administration requirements) and then a series of interviews. a variety ofcompanies in each mode must cooperate to ensure adequate coverage andmask companyspeciﬁc data. in many cases, the information will be alreadyavailable. it will not be necessary to have great detail as to which company useswhich technology. rather, information concerning the general prevalence ofdifferent types of systems in each mode and their interconnections is desired.then the systems—and the intermodal, interconnected system—can beexamined for vulnerabilities and the potential consequences if those vulnerabilities should be exploited. much of this work would reﬂect generic itvulnerability studies, but the speciﬁc use of the technologies in the freightindustry would have to be reviewed. a variety of plausible attack scenarioswould then be tested on the different modes to assess the systems as they existnow and as they are evolving in order to understand the likelihood of success and the extent of the consequences. the purpose would be to developa preliminary list of the vulnerabilities that should be considered in the tasksbelow. as shown in figure 31, priority should be a function of the plausibility of the type of threat that could exploit the vulnerability, the ease ofexploiting the vulnerability, and the consequences. of particular interestwould be the ease of shutting down large parts of the system and the possibility of malicious use of the system.this task might identify or develop a methodology to determine theprioritization analytically on the basis of these factors. the great diversityof transportation modes and company characteristics suggests that a largeplanning a full study43cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.number of cases must be considered and that potential remedial measurescould differ widely. however prioritization is determined, it will be importantto maintain a systemlevel perspective to identify, assess, and compare thesecurity issues at the level of components, subsystems, and the overall system.task 2. review current industry and government practices addressing itsecurity.security practices will be difﬁcult to obtain in detail. most companies will be understandably reluctant to discuss their practices and protectivehardware and software because of concern that any revelations could compromise security. it may be possible, as in task 1, to obtain this informationby interviews conducted under stringent departmental assurances of nondisclosure. as in task 1, an exhaustive list of which companies use which measures is not necessary, just a general sense of the level of security in each mode.representative companies and government agencies might be presentedwith a menu of security options and asked what they use. this informationcould then be compiled without identifying the source.one concern, however, is that the effectiveness of these options oftenlies in the stringency with which they are implemented. for example, if anemployee forgets his smart token but can log on anyway through a back door,security will be compromised to some degree. that information will be evenmore difﬁcult to procure and may even be unknown to most company ofﬁcials. interviewers must be well versed in the technology and its use and prepared to probe for details. another possibility might be for the governmentto fund a series of pilot studies of various technologies and processes to seehow well they work in speciﬁc contexts.task 3. determine the potential for itrelated security enhancements in thesector.this task is, in part, a followup to tasks 1 and 2 and could lead toa prioritization of possible measures to reduce vulnerability. the purposewould not be to identify which measures speciﬁc companies should take, butto provide a general sense of the important identiﬁed cybervulnerabilitiesthat could be addressed and the approximate costs of doing so.possible measures to address the vulnerabilities identiﬁed in tasks 1 and2 should be identiﬁed for each mode and for the overall freight transportationsystem, because of its pervasive intermodal nature, as well as for technologiesand processes as they are now and as they may evolve. analyses should bemade of the expected costs (including potential interference with normaloperations) in countering these vulnerabilities.44cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping studycybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.then an additional factor can be added to the prioritization of task 1:the costs of reducing vulnerability. this reﬁnement may change the list of priorities. for example, a vulnerability that might result in only a moderateconsequence incident could rise on the list if the cost of remedying it weresmall and could actually involve signiﬁcant improvements in operational efﬁciency. alternatively, a vulnerability subject to a highconsequence attackthat can only be addressed with very expensive ﬁxes might drop in priority.in connection with this task, emerging technologies and practices shouldbe examined to determine what role, if any, they could play in addressingidentiﬁed cybersecurity gaps and deﬁciencies. integral to such an assessmentshould be both an analysis of various modes of the industry and an analysis ofthe overall, intermodal freight transportation system, along with an assessment of how realistic and attractive these technologies and practices wouldappear to decision makers—that is, their economic and operational incentives and disincentives. companies must believe that the beneﬁts of theirinvestments are commensurate with the costs. if a measure improves bothsecurity and efﬁciency at a reasonable cost, it may be implemented as a matter of course (although these measures must compete for a place above thecutoff point on the list of potential investments that all companies consider).other concepts might require government support because the beneﬁts to thecompany are insufﬁcient. in addition, it may decline in cost with increasingscale of deployment. this pattern may or may not apply to cybersecuritytechnology. therefore, this task should examine potential cost changes andthe possibility that targeted deployment strategies might make prioritizedcybersecurity measures more attractive. what might now be impracticalcould become costeffective within a few years.in addition, there should be study of “upstream” scientiﬁc and technological developments that may result in new opportunities for it applicationin the future.task 4. analyze policies to reduce cybervulnerability.the u.s. governmentcould play a useful role in disseminating information on new securityoptions and best practices. for example, the pilot studies listed in appendixb may identify promising measures to enhance cybersecurity, but unlessthey are recognized by companies that can use them, they will not be implemented. the study could identify likely means, such as an annual symposium to discuss innovations or a series of training sessions.the study also might identify followup studies to determine the extent towhich these options were being implemented. for example, it might suggestplanning a full study45cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.government–industry cooperation in performing cybersecurity validations,perhaps including “red teaming” to test security. it should apply the same teststo government’s connections to the privatesector it systems.finally, this task might develop a set of cybersecurity guidelines and recommendations, or at least suggest a methodology to determine how muchsecurity is enough. it could analyze how to promote the use of such guidelines most effectively.task 5. assess the economic impacts of cost increases in the freight transportation industry.some cybersecurity measures may bring with them corresponding economic beneﬁts. for example, the use of digital signatures mightreduce costs related to errors and fraud detection and management. the resulting improved service could also increase customer conﬁdence. however, certain measures might protect against lowlikelihood but very highconsequenceevents, such as those that may help enable the transport of weapons of massdestruction. such measures are less likely to have ancillary beneﬁts but couldresult in signiﬁcant additional costs. the public might beneﬁt from a reduction in the risk of a catastrophe, but the companies making the investmentmay not. even costeffective measures may be problematical for companiesthat are making no proﬁt. the costs of increased cybersecurity could ultimately affect all companies that rely on the transport industry. this taskshould deal with the following issues:1.at what levels and distribution of costs for security does the economicimpact become a concern, for the freight industry itself, its users, and theu.s. economy?2.on the basis of existing models for relating economic inputs and outputs,what changes in economic outputs might result from varying levels ofinvestment in security?3.given the tight margins associated with the freight industry, is there asigniﬁcant possibility of economic damage to the companies that constitute this industry?4.for investments that may be needed for national security purposes butthat provide little or no advantage to the company implementing themeasures, what form of government participation (e.g., tax credits) wouldbe most effective?results should be quantitative and be developed for a wide set of assumptionsin order to permit consideration of a signiﬁcant range of possible outputs.46cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping studycybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.47appendixainformationmanagementsystemsintheinternationallinershippingindustrya detailed description of information systems in one sector of the freight transportation industry is provided in this appendix. it is included for illustrative purposes only and is not intended to suggest that the information systems of theliner shipping industry are particularly vulnerable to cyberattacks or are morelacking in protection against such attacks than the information systems in othertransportation sectors.in general, liner shipping companies manage their information and businessprocesses with an array of technologies, including mainframe computer systems,electronic data interchange (edi), web tools connected to mainframe systems,customer relationship management software, fax, and email. individual lines’information management or communication systems vary. they include mainframe computer systems that allow worldwide access to a common central database and information management processes, as well as regional databases.international liner shipping is not a concentrated industry. for example, themarket share for the major linesserving the u.s. trade (imports and exports combined) for the ﬁrst 8 months of 2002 is shown in table a1.each liner shipping company owns and operates its own information systems,which are in different locations. this reduces the potential for cyberterrorists totarget all liner shipping companies’ information systems at the same time in onecoordinated attack. furthermore, because shipping is a global business, a company’s computer systems generally have backup and redundant capacity andoperational centers in order to facilitate 24 ×7 business operations.these features of the industry suggest that a cyberattack directed against anindividual liner company’s information systems is unlikely to disrupt the oceantransportation system as such.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.on the other hand, a more signiﬁcant disruption and greater economic damage to the u.s. freight transportation system could result if a centralized government information management system used by all u.s.bound carriers, importers,brokers, and so forth were to be targeted [e.g., the bureau of customs and borderprotection’s (customs’) automated manifest system (ams)].1another example of a centralized government information management systemis the coast guard’s national vessel movement center, which receives notices ofarrival (noas) from all vessels originating from outside the united states 96 hoursprior to arrival at the ﬁrst u.s. port of call. the information in the noas isused for u.s. government agencies’ monitoring of vessel movements. similarly,customs’ advanced passenger information system (apis) receives and screensinformation on persons coming to the united states, and effective later this yearit will receive electronic crew manifests from vessels 96 hours prior to arrival in au.s. port. both customs and the immigration and naturalization service use thecybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study48linemarket share (%)maersksealand13.1evergreen7.1apl6.7hanjin6.0cosco5.1p&o nedlloyd4.4oocl4.1hyundai4.0kline3.8nyk line3.7msc3.7yang ming3.7hapag lloyd3.5mol2.5table a1market share of major lines serving u.s. trade (january–august 2002)source: journal of commerce,dec. 9–15, 2002, pp. 28–34(from the top 50 lines serving the u.s. trade).1see “information flow between carriers and governments” on page 51.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information in apis to screen visitors to the united states; it is expected thateventually the coast guard will also use apis for its prescreening purposes.businessdatasystemsthe heart of a liner company’s information and communication processes is usually a legacy mainframe computer system that provides the critical “behind thescenes” processing and storage of data for various aspects of the business. by linking webbased technologies to its mainframe computer, an ocean carrier cancreate a near realtime informationsharing system that is accessible by all itsgeographically diverse ofﬁces. thus, for example, information could be inputusing a web tool, put into a large relational database, and fed into the companymainframe—giving the various specialty business functions in ofﬁces across theglobe (sales, customer service, operations, etc.) access to common data sets,standard report formats, and activity records.the databases thus made available typically would include ﬁnancial databases,such as those for invoicing, billing, and trade lane pricing; terminal operationsdatabases,which are key to vessel management; container yard inventories;andcustomer support dataused in taking bookings, creating bills of lading, tracingcargo, changing “trip plans” (from, say, rail to truck), and distributing, diverting, or consolidating cargo.there are, of course, different levels of security for, and access to, such centralized mainframe systems. that is also the case with liner companies’ publicwebsites, which typically combine (a) a “general site” that can be accessed byanyone using the internet and (b) a “business transaction site” that requireswouldbe users (mainly customers) to provide identiﬁcation and be cleared forspeciﬁc levels of access. a general site might include general background information about the line, company news, descriptions of available services, a company history, hiring information, contact information for ofﬁces worldwide, andlinks to other sites. the business transaction site requires customer registrationand would provide speciﬁc access for activities such as making bookings, submitting bills of lading, tracking shipments, creating customer reports, and viewing accounts. the business transaction feature will typically involve “specialprivileges” (customized access) depending on the nature of the customer’s business and available carrier services.in addition to public internet sites, many global carriers have company intranetsystems for internal communications. however, because liner companies oftenhave overseas ofﬁces in countries with communications infrastructure of variableinformation management systems in the international liner shipping industry49cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.quality, internet connections may be less than reliable at some locations. in thosecases, intracompany communications may depend more on email. in general,however, webbased systems are preferred.centraldispatch/redirectionin liner shipping, vessels operate on ﬁxed schedules in speciﬁc trade lanes—and,except in the case of serious unforeseen circumstances, those schedules are revisedas part of a broader company planning process. so the most common dispatching/redirection activities in the industry are those for containers and chassis.when a container or group of containers is booked with a carrier, arrangementsare made as to the size and type of containers needed, the container pickup date(from the company’s container yard), and which vessel is scheduled to carry thecontainers. this can be done by the shipper either by (a) directly contacting theline’s booking agent or (b) inputting the required information (origin, destination,port of loading, commodity description, shipper’s name, type of container, etc.)using the appropriate business transaction section of the line’s website.under either approach, that information goes into the company’s mainframesystem and becomes available to, for example, the equipment dispatcher, whomust determine whether the container yard has the necessary inventory and makearrangements to have the containers available for use; and the marine terminaland vessel operators, who ensure that appropriate preparations are made and thatneeded equipment (e.g., reefer plugs for refrigerated containers) is available.the ocean carrier takes control of the cargo either (a) at the terminal gate,in cases where the shipper handles the drayage of the container (known as “merchant haulage”) from its facility to the port of loading; or (b) at the customer’spremises, called a “store door” move, when the ocean carrier provides for thetrucking service (known as “carrier haulage”) using a “house” trucking ﬁrm thatoperates under an agreement with the ocean carrier. carrier haulage is commonin the united states and europe but limited in asia and latin america, wheremerchant haulage is more common.in the port of departure, the terminal operator will typically have access, viathe line’s mainframe system, to reports on arriving containers and the bookinginformation needed to arrange loading by stevedores and plan the arrangement(“stowage”) of containers in the vessel. that information would include, in addition to the identity of the vessel against which the cargo was booked (and therefore the sailing date), details about the type of cargo, special storage requirements,and destination port.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study50cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.once the vessel has completed its voyage and arrived at the destination port,the terminal operations staff at that port typically will be working from anotherreport containing the relevant information for offloading the containers andhanding them off for the next leg of their journey. if the next leg is by truck, themove could again be merchant haulage or carrier haulage. if a rail move isinvolved (say for cargo arriving at the port of new york and new jersey andscheduled for a rail move to chicago), the terminal operator will contact therail partner by edi with details about which containers need to be moved andwhen. for example, if 10 boxes need to be moved by rail to chicago, the terminal operator will know that its rail partner has ﬁve trains running to chicago inthe next 3 days and will inform the rail planning staff which of the 10 boxeshave the highest priority (i.e., need to go on the earliest of the trains), or whichmay require special handling (e.g., hazmat cargo).informationflowamongcollaboratorsbecause multiline alliances and other vesselsharing arrangements are such acentral part of liner shipping today, a given vessel operating in the u.s. trademay be carrying the cargo of different container lines. consequently, a signiﬁcant amount of information must be exchanged among alliance members. mostof this information exchange is handled via edi, which in turn requires thateach alliance partner’s information system be programmed to accept data fromthe other alliance partners’ systems.carriers’ dealings with house truckers are generally handled via edi or webtools, if available (and bigger lines generally require such capabilities from theirhouse truckers). otherwise, trucking arrangements are handled by fax or email.arrangements for freight movement by rail are also generally made via edi.informationflowbetweencarriersandgovernmentscustoms’ ams represents a vital link in the ﬂow of information about importedgoods. with customs’ recent promulgation of the socalled “24hour rule,” whichrequires that advance cargo (cf 1302) declarations be submitted 24 hours beforeloading of u.s.destined cargoes in foreign ports, ams—in combination withcustoms’ automated targeting system (ats)—is becoming the preeminentcentralized government data management system for security prescreening ofimport cargoes to the united states.information management systems in the international liner shipping industry51cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.many shipping lines provide cargo manifest information electronically viaams.2in addition, a number of ocean carriers and most shippers are participating in customs’ automated export system for the electronic submission ofexport cargo information; other ocean carriers provide that information todayin paper (fax) form.3inbound cargo manifest data are sent to customs’ ams through one of twodata formats: (a) ansi x12 or (b) camir (customs automated interfacerequirements). each ocean carrier is limited to using only one of those two systems, with ansi x12 being predominant. each ocean carrier is also limited toa single source with an electronic interface with ams. so, for example, abcline’s rotterdam ofﬁce ﬁrst will provide cargo manifest information for containers scheduled to be loaded in rotterdam for a voyage to the united statesinternally to the abc line’s designated single point of contact with ams (perhaps an ofﬁce in new jersey) to be forwarded to ams. thus, all cargo manifestinformation for cargo to be loaded at any port in asia, latin america, europe,onto a vessel bound for, or calling at, a u.s. port must ﬁrst go to each shippingline’s single ams contact entity.when the line’s central source for inbound manifest information contactsams, a return receipt is automatically generated conﬁrming the number of billsof lading that were received and accepted and the number of bills of lading thatwere received and rejected because of incomplete data. the lines then knowthat further information is required on the rejected bills of lading.security prescreening checks are done by using ams and ats. an assessmentof risk factors results in point scores that allow customs to determine whether acontainer should be subject to a socalled security “hold” pending further investigation at the foreign port and whether the container should be physicallyinspected. containers for which no hold messages have been communicated bycustoms can be loaded, but not until 24 hours after submission of the advancecargo manifest information.ocean carriers also produce inbound cargo manifests to foreign governments.however, such manifests are usually paper reports, not electronic ﬁlings. someforeign jurisdictions also request ﬁling of export cargo manifests.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study522the 24hour rule does not formally require that the cf 1302 cargo declarations be submitted electronically via ams, but electronic submission is strongly encouraged.3it should be noted that section 343 of the recently enacted trade act of 2002 (p.l. 107210) requires,for all modes,that “not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this act, the secretary [of thetreasury] shall promulgate regulations providing for the transmission to the customs service, through anelectronic data interchange system,of information pertaining to cargo destined for importationinto the unitedstates or exportationfrom the united states, prior to such importation or exportation” (emphasis added).cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.it is expected that more foreign jurisdictions will require electronic submission of cargo manifest information in the future. there are already indicationsthat governments that have signed container security initiative agreementswith customs for prescreening of containerized shipments bound for the unitedstates may be in the process of implementing electronic (export) cargo manifestrequirements. also, the world customs organization is developing an international customs data model that assumes the electronic submission of data elements to—and exchange of data elements between—exporting and importingcustoms administrations.informationflowbetweencarriersandcustomersestimates in the trade press suggest that about 75 percent of shipper transactionswith ocean carriers are handled by telephone or fax, 20 percent through individual carriers’ websites, and 5 percent via the three webbased portals (gt nexus,inttra, and cargosmart) that provide access to multiple carriers at one site. theportal systems are designed to allow customers (usually larger shippers) easy accessto multiple carriers when they make rate requests or book cargo.in business transactions between ocean carriers and their customers, user registration and assignment of passwords is a common security measure, but actualencryption of data tends to be limited to situations in which the parties are passing data related to title to goods, as, for example, with remote printing of billsof lading.carriers communicate with customers, whether cargo owners, consolidators,or logistics management companies, in a similar fashion. as mentioned in anearlier section (“central dispatch/redirection”), ocean carriers typically have“business transaction” functions as part of their public websites. when customers use the business transaction portion of a carrier’s site, the informationinput into the system typically goes through an edi transformation and is forwarded to the (global or regional) mainframe system.some companies in the liner shipping industry are moving to customer relationship management (crm) software, which allows them to more ﬂexibly manage customer transactions through a simpler interlinking of all the company’sindividual business systems. for example, crm software can, by allowing all theseparate systems to “talk to each other,” permit a line’s sales representatives, customer service representatives, and various operational staff to access a given customer’s complete transactions history and account information. when a salesinformation management systems in the international liner shipping industry53cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.representative signs a service contract, for example, the detailed information(e.g., the number of containers to be moved in each trade lane) would go into thecrm system in a way that facilitates the creation of sales management reports;allows customer service representatives access to the sales representative’s detailednotes on the contract discussions; and indicates to system users factors such as therelevant vessel booking, loading date, and when the trucker is to be contacted.crm also facilitates contract management activities and simpliﬁes contract compliance reviews.when customers want to check on the status of particular cargo movements,they can contact the line’s customer service department or use the line’s website.on the website, in a secure section, the customer can track the cargo’s positionby using coded information from the relevant bill of lading.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study54cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.55appendixbsecurityinitiativesandprogramswithcybersecurityrelevancethe following programs and initiatives are connected with improving freightsecurity and use or affect a range of technologies, systems, and technologyprotocols.note: customs =bureau of customs and border protection (formerly u.s.customs service); dhs =u.s. department of homeland security; dot =u.s.department of transportation; faa =federal aviation administration; fhwa=federal highway administration; gis =geographic information system; nhs=national highway system; tsa =transportation security administration;wmd =weapons of mass destruction.project:electronic supply chain manifest (escm)operational testdescription:intermodal research project that uses biometricﬁngerprint readers, smart cards, and encryptedinternet transactions to enhance the security andefﬁciency of freight supply chain activities. theproject, which initially focused on air cargo transactions, is being incorporated into other freightmodal testsstakeholders:trucking, manufacturing, air cargo industries,dot, tsa/dhstechnology implications:full integration of personnel, cargo, and trackingdata using a range of cuttingedge technologysystemscybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project:transportation worker identiﬁcation carddescription:proposed government initiative to develop andtest a technologybased secure identiﬁcation system for transportation workersstakeholders:tsa/dhstechnology implications:may use two or more biometrics on a smartcardplatformproject:surface transportation information sharing andanalysis center (rail/waterways stisac)commercial vehicle operations isacdescription:public–private system for sharing/transferringsecuritysensitive information between safety andsecurity agencies and modal interestsstakeholders:railroads, trucking companies, domestic waterway carriers, u.s. intelligence agencies, publicsafety agencies, law enforcement agenciestechnology implications:multijurisdictional datatransfer systems. dataformatting and encryption issuesproject:tsa airport biometric research solicitationdescription:tsa and faa are developing and releasing asolicitation to develop and install aviation personnel identiﬁcation systems throughout theunited states (20+airports). the focus is onaccess and perimeter control using existing andemerging technologiesstakeholders:aviation personnel (possibly including air cargopersonnel), tsa/faa, law enforcement agenciestechnology implications:largescale systems integration using personneldata and government information. biometric dataand readers integrated with personnel management applicationscybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study56cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project:cargo handling cooperative programdescription:public–private consortium to pursue industrydriven enhancements to cargo handling thatsupport a sustainable and seamless transportation systemstakeholders:ocean carriers, railroads, port authorities, terminal operators/stevedores, trucking companies,government organizationstechnology implications:currently performing assessments of electronicseal technologies in support of the operation safecommerce initiativeproject:freight performance measures (satellitebasedvehicle tracking)description:research project that uses satellite tracking systems to develop realtime freight performancemeasures for the nhs (e.g., travel speeds, travel times)stakeholders:fhwa, state departments of transportation, metropolitan planning agencies, nhs userstechnology implications:new applications for vehicle tracking and analysisproject:american transportation research institutedata privacy study (data sharing protocolsand strategies)description:atri will begin a study to analyze data privacyissues, datasharing opportunities, and tools forprotecting datastakeholders:dot, freight industries/business communities,department of justicetechnology implications:the study will likely identify industry data thatexist in electronic form and offer data protectionstrategiessecurity initiatives and programs with cybersecurity relevance57cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.project:port security grants programdescription:congressionally mandated and funded port security program that provides funding for proposalsthat test technologies and programs for improvingport security. the program is focused on thelargest u.s. ocean ports and strategic portsstakeholders:ocean carriers, trucking companies, port authorities, railroads, shippers, customs, dot, tsatechnology implications:enhanced security infrastructures. major systemsintegration between port systems, carrier systems,and public agencies. likely to use new and emerging technologies and integration software applications. may require the development andcollection of new data setsproject:trucking industry antiterrorism operations centerdescription:the expanded highway watch program hasfour elements: (a) a nationwide antiterrorismtraining program to maintain a 3 million–personcadre as “america’s trucking army”; (b) a callcenter to take, route, and record security andsafety reports from the industry; (c) an operationscenter to perform analysis, planning, and communications functions for the industry on acomprehensive, integrated platform; and (d) an information sharing and analysis center to serve as the intelligence bridgebetween industry and government. scope isdirectly linked to the level of federal financialsupport for this effortstakeholders:the program is open to the entire trucking industry and is coordinated by the trucking securityand antiterrorism working group, which consists of 19 national trade and professionalorganizationscybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study58cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology implications:the call center will utilize a nationalcapabilitycontractor to conduct this activity. theoperations center will use a technology platformto integrate industry data, gis simulation, andopen source dataproject:national hazmat tracking and security testdescription:dotsponsored research program to install andtest a suite of existing and emerging technologiesthat may improve the security and efﬁciency ofhazmat shipments in the united statesstakeholders:hazmat carriers, dot safety and highway agencies, law enforcement, safety regulatory agenciestechnology implications:uses existing and emerging wireless technologiesincluding satellite tracking and communications,new biometric authentication systems, and electronic cargo data systemsproject:operation safe commercedescription:coordinated research and testing of supply chainsecurity systems using existing and emerging technologies, systems, and processes through the portsof seattle/tacoma, los angeles/long beach, andnew york/new jerseystakeholders:coordinated by customs, dot, and tsa; allresearch and testing via partnerships among theports and the supply chains that use those pointsof entrytechnology implications:existing and new technologies and systems intracking, management, information interchange,physical security, and risk assessmentproject:washington eseal programdescription:track commercial inbound containers to determine whether container integrity has been compromised and facilitate borderclearance activitiessecurity initiatives and programs with cybersecurity relevance59cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.stakeholders:customs, washington state department oftransportation, washington state truckingassociation, ports of seattle and tacomatechnology implications:test technology to enhance security whileimproving efﬁciency of inspection and clearancesproject:safe and secure trade lanesdescription:industryfunded initiative to demonstrate anddeploy automated tracking and security technology for containers entering u.s. portsstakeholders:hutchison whampoa, ltd., psa corporation,p&o ports, port of seattle, port of tacoma,port of los angeles/long beach, qualcomm,savi technology, saic, pb ports & marine,many otherstechnology implications:testing technology and concepts developed forthe u.s. department of defense in monitoringand tracking containersproject:west coast tracking initiativedescription:industryfunded expansion of the escm projectthat will install and test biometric smart cards forcontainer access and tracking purposes. willlikely tie into port of los angeles/long beach forexpanded functionalitystakeholders:trucking industry, shippers/manufacturers, portauthorities, container stakeholderstechnology implications:driver authentication through biometrics; facilityaccess control and event notiﬁcation via smartcard (and prox card) systemsproject:customs trade partnership against terrorism(ctpat)description:customs initiative to certify companies whoagree to conduct a comprehensive selfassessmentcybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study60cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.of supply chain security on the basis of guidelinesdeveloped by customs and the trade communitystakeholders:shippers, port authorities, importers/exporterstechnology implications:will vary depending on speciﬁc ctpat agreementproject:container security initiativedescription:customs initiative to prescreen cargo at designated foreign “megaports” before export to theunited statesstakeholders:foreign ports, shippers, importers, and ocean carrierstechnology implications:use of the information provided on theautomated manifest system to target “highrisk” shipments for further screening via xray, gamma ray, wmd detection technologiesproject:chicago intermodal data transfer initiativedescription:fhwasponsored research to identify datasharing opportunities among maritime shipping,rail, and trucking—with an emphasis on container movements to and from ports. the studywill propose a technology system for expeditingthe ﬂow of data between the modesstakeholders:freight industries, shippers/manufacturers, dotproject:port authority of new york and new jersey’sfirst systemdescription:internetbased port community system that consolidates cargo data and integrates vessel,highway, and rail datastakeholders:port community participants (terminals, truckers,freight forwarders, brokers, ocean carriers, etc.)security initiatives and programs with cybersecurity relevance61cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technology implications:potential use as a nationwide platform for consolidated cargo dataproject:cargo*mate projectdescription:multitechnology, multiphased system for trackingcontainer chassis across the united states.recently expanded to connect system totractor/container trackingstakeholders:par logistics management systems, maritimeshipping industry, trucking industry, customs,dottechnology implications:realtime satellite/cellular tracking of chassis toprovide endtoend cargo visibilityproject:free and secure trade (fast) initiativedescription:a joint program between the united states andcanada, the fast initiative is now operationalat detroit, michigan/windsor, ontario; porthuron, michigan/sarnia, ontario; and buffalo,new york/fort erie, ontario. in early 2003, thefast lane program will be extended farther westalong the border to blaine, washington/douglas,british columbia, and to the east, at champlain,new york/lacolle, quebecstakeholders:customs, trucking companies, dottechnology implications:electronic data sharing/transfer between publicand privatesector entities using several technologiescybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study62cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.63appendixcprotectinginternationaltradecorridors: theoperationsafecommerceinitiative1operation safe commerce (osc) is an innovative public–private partnershipdedicated to enhancing security throughout international and domestic supplychains while facilitating the efﬁcient crossborder movement of legitimate commerce. the object is to prevent terrorists or their weapons from gaining access tothe united states to cause catastrophic harm, while sustaining the viability ofthe global transportation lifelines that support international commerce. the wayto accomplish this is to move away from primary reliance on a system of controlat the borders that lie within u.s. jurisdiction and toward pointoforigin controls. pointoforigin controls are to be supported by controls developed withininternational supply chains and accompanied by a concentric series of checksbuilt into the system at points of transshipment and at points of arrival. in return,the nation’s world trade partners rightfully expect reciprocity and controls onu.s. exports to aid the security of their imports.effective international trade corridor security must rest on a foundation ofcredible risk management—that is, a regime that can reliably identify the people, goods, and conveyances that are legitimate, so their movements can be facilitated. this would allow shippers, importers, regulators, and inspectors to focuson the smaller number of entities about which they know little or have speciﬁcconcerns. achieving this goal requires a layered public–private approach.osc will validate security at the point of origin and will demonstrate what isneeded to ensure that parties associated with commercial shipping exert reasonable care and due diligence in packing, securing, and manifesting the contents of1the material in this appendix is based on governmentsupplied information not independently veriﬁedby the committee.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.a shipment of goods in a container. in addition, osc will demonstrate variousmethods to ensure that the information and documentation associated with theseshipments are complete, accurate, and secure from unauthorized access. the project will ultimately gauge the security of the supply chain with these new procedures in order to determine their viability.osc will provide validated recommendations and workable solutions to legislators, regulatory agencies, the international maritime organization, and theworld customs organization on how best to address the critical issue of cargosecurity.the following are some of the major objectives of osc:•ensure the integrity of the supply chain by encompassing the entire transaction between an importer and a supplier. this includes validating securityat the point of origin, ensuring the contents of containers, and tracking thecontainer in transit with the intent of identifying methods and evidence ofpossible tampering.•pilot the use of offtheshelf technologies and conduct proofofconceptprojects to demonstrate other technologies to monitor the movement oflegitimate cargo in transit before it reaches the u.s. border and all the wayto its ﬁnal destination.•provide a tangible prototype that can inform post–september 11 efforts—byfederal and international authorities—that aim to enhance the security associated with all types of cargo, conveyances, and people moving across bordersand within international trade corridors, by proving the feasibility of variousindustry and government proposals for layered cargo security strategies.to achieve these objectives, osc proposes the following:1.apply a common set of standard security practices to govern the loadingand movement of cargo throughout the supply chain. the goal is to ensurethat an authorized packer of a container knows what is in that containerand can report those contents accurately.2.ensure that the container’s electronic documentation is complete, accurate,and secure against computer hackers and is provided to law enforcementagencies in a timely manner.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study64cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3.reduce the risk of a container being intercepted and compromised intransit.osc will work initially with three major ports: seattle/tacoma, new york/new jersey, and los angeles/long beach. seventy percent of the containermovement in the united states originates or terminates with these entities. toachieve these objectives, the three load centers will use several methods thatmay include all or some of the following:•validating and assessing the entire delivery system through examination ofthe discrete stages of the product ﬂow (supply chain):1.product origination (the factory and subcontract manufacturing),2.product shipping to export facility (transportation company),3.export stage repackaging and shipping (export broker),4.international transport (freight company),5.export arrival and storage (transportation company, warehouses, customs facilities, port, ocean carrier),6.vessel voyage (ocean carrier),7.import arrival and storage (port, transportation company, warehouses,customs facilities),8.cargo conveyance (rail, truck),9.cargo breakup into multiproduct facilities (drop centers, distributionwarehouses), and10.product arrival and storage at the buyer’s facility.•complying with business antismuggling security coalition or similarprocedures and standards.•requiring secure packing procedures for loading intermodal containersalong the lines of iso9000 quality assurance rules.•maintaining secure loading docks at manufacturing plants or at shippingfacilities that restrict access to authorized individuals and that use camerasto monitor the loading process. loading docks would be subject to periodic,random, independent inspections to ensure compliance.•using thirdparty veriﬁers to augment the capability of government enforcement authorities to audit, certify, and validate shipments and supply chainservice providers.protecting international trade corridors: the operation safe commerce initiative65cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.•providing and checking proper import vouchers before loading cargo onvessels.•using technology to secure and monitor containers and their movementthrough the intermodal supply chain.•outﬁtting containers with theftresistant mechanical and electronic seals.•installing light, temperature, or other sensors in the interior of the container, which would be programmed to set off an alarm if the container isopened illegally at some point of transit.•conducting background checks of truck drivers who deliver goods to theport and outﬁtting them with biometrically based identity cards.•attaching an electronic transponder (such as those used for the “ezpass” tollpayment system in the northeastern united states) and global positioningsystem devices to the truck cab and chassis or rail car carrying containers andusing intelligent transportation system technologies to monitor intransitmovements to and within the port terminal.•maintaining the means to communicate with operators from their pickupto their offload destinations.•providing tracking information to the appropriate regulatory or enforcement authorities within the jurisdictions through which the cargo will betransported.•leveraging the port of new york and new jersey’s freight informationrealtime system for transport vessel and cargo information system, orother similar information portals, by requiring all participants in the supplychain cycle to provide advance notice of the details about their shipments,operators, and conveyances in accordance with agreedupon protocols. thisearly notice would give government inspectors the time to assess the validity of the data and check the data against any watch lists they may be maintaining, and would provide timely support to a ﬁeld inspector deciding whatshould be targeted for examination.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study66cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the following may be among the major project tasks:1.forming regional task forces that will include the law enforcement community and other regulatory authorities, as well as appropriate academicand technical experts.2.enlisting private businesssector partners involved with all stages of product ﬂow in the construction of a process ﬂow map for the physical movement of each container/supply chain that has been identiﬁed. the chain ofcustody as well as the information ﬂow will also be mapped out to identifysecurity gaps and how they can be redressed.3.tasking the regional task force members to examine the following for security gaps: (a) the entire designtodelivery product ﬂow; (b) the means ofconveyance—maritime, rail, truck, and air; and (c) the “who and how” connected with the operators who move the products.4.conducting ﬁeld visits to witness the actual supply chain process.5.having the regional task force prepare recommendations they believemight redress the gaps they identify. a recommendation should fall underone of three groupings: (a) offtheshelf technologies for securing and tracking shipments, (b) improvements to existing data collection and sharingarrangements, and (c) process changes that would close opportunities forcompromise at the point of origin or in transit.6.enlisting a support group made up of academic and privatesector partners todevelop technological applications for testing as the regional task force identiﬁes gaps. an outreach effort will be made to other governmentsponsoredr&d programs that are ﬁeldtesting tracking and sensor technologies thatsupport a demonstration of how secure intransit visibility and accountability can be achieved.7.conducting trials of new technologies, data arrangements, or processchanges using volunteer manufacturers, importers, surface shippers, freightforwarders, maritime shipping lines, and terminal operators.8.testing the integrity of systems with “redteam” exercises.protecting international trade corridors: the operation safe commerce initiative67cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9.preparing reports to capture and quickly relate lessons learned from the security gap analyses and the testing and reﬁnement of technological applications.the reports will aim to provide guidance for a layered, multitiered approachfor replication and standardization of policy approaches to securing tradecorridors. the audience includes legislators and policy makers involved inthe u.s.–canada “smart border” agreement and participants in counterterrorism initiatives under consideration by the international maritimeorganization, the world customs organization, the international standardsorganization, and other relevant multilateral and international bodies.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study68cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.69appendixdu.s. bureauofcustomsandborderprotectionuseofinformationtechnology1the u.s. bureau of customs and border protection (customs) has developed anextensive array of information systems that support the collection, processing,and analysis of data on goods, people, and conveyances entering and exiting theunited states. these systems were developed over the past three decades withthe involvement of many government agencies and the international businessand transportation communities. the following statistics are intended to providea brief picture of the magnitude of two of these systems:•the automated commercial system (acs) currently processes more than99 percent of the $1.8 trillion in imports and exports in all modes of transportation.•the acs database has 4 terabytes of electronic storage and 6.2 billionrecords accessed 578 million times daily.•the treasury enforcement communications system (tecs) currentlyprocesses more than 475 million travelers entering the united states by air,land, and sea.•the tecs database has 3 terabytes of dasd and a database of 5.3 billionrecords accessed 766 million times daily.1the material in this appendix is based on governmentsupplied information not independently veriﬁedby the committee.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.•acs and tecs support or have interfaces with more than 100 u.s. government agencies and foreign countries, nearly all international transportation carriers, and thousands of international businesses and serviceproviders.in august 2001, customs embarked on a modernization program, a 15yearinitiative to modernize and integrate its information technology infrastructureto support the government’s oversight of import and export trade compliance,border enforcement, and international passenger processing. modernizationwill enable customs and all participating government agencies to collect, analyze, collaborate on, and disseminate the right international trade and travelerinformation to internal and outside users in advance or in real time—to theright people, at the right time, and in the right place. furthermore, the program will enable borderrelated government agencies and the internationaltrade and travel private sector to transform the way they do business by implementing new processes that support future trade growth and changing businessrequirements.baselinedescriptionofexistingsystemstoday, customs has information systems in place at the 300 u.s. ports of entryto process all inbound and outbound cargo and passengers. although these systems are antiquated, they still provide the platform for air and sea carriers totransmit cargo and passenger manifests in advance of arrival and enable importersto ﬁle their entries electronically. customs interfaces with virtually every entityin the international supply chain process—importers, exporters, carriers, and amultitude of intermediaries and service providers.currently, customs uses multiple systems that process international tradeand travel and support a multitude of agencies and commercial businesses. thefollowing are examples:•acs tracks and monitors all imports of goods entering the united states.•the automated broker interface is the central government system for theﬁling of commercial declarations on imported cargo.•the automated manifest system is a multimodular international cargoinventory control and release notiﬁcation system for sea, air, and rail carriers.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study70cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.•the automated export system is the central point through which exportshipment data required by multiple agencies is ﬁled electronically for allmethods of transportation.•the advance targeting system assembles and screens commercial, transportation, and passenger data to identify highrisk imported cargo and arriving international passengers.•tecs is a megadatabase of law enforcement information shared by thefederal bureau of investigation, the immigration and naturalization service,and customs. it is used to screen all persons entering the united states.•the interagency border information system meets the datasharing, analytical, and processing needs of a multiagency (state, treasury, justice,agriculture) border effort for international passengers and conveyances.•the advance passenger information system receives and analyzes biographical data on international air passengers before their arrival in the unitedstates. it covers about 85 percent of the 67 million passengers arriving.the communications backbone is the treasury communications system widearea network (frame relay) with multiple levels of protection and multipleremote access methods and controls.currentandplanneddevelopmentsthe customs modernization program will integrate all customs informationsystems that encompass imports and exports, conveyance and shipment tracking, passenger enforcement, investigative and intelligence support, humanresources, and ﬁnancial management.the ﬁrst components currently under development are the automatedcommercial environment (ace) and the international trade data system(itds) programs, which focus on cargo import and export operations. ace anditds form a coordinated system that provides a “single window” allowing theinternational business community to interact with customs and all governmentagencies on import/export requirements.ace will lay the technology foundation for all modernization programs anddeliver enhanced “cradletograve” support of the cargo control and enforceu.s. bureau of customs and border protection use of information technology71cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ment process. all related functions in ﬁeld operations and enforcement will besupported from a single common user interface, a single window for ofﬁcers toperform their work. ace will process both imports and exports and will belinked seamlessly to enforcement, revenue management, and mission supportsystems to enable integrated ﬁeld operations and nationwide collaborative teaming among ofﬁcers. delivery of ace functions will begin in the ﬁeld in january2004 and will continue in phases extending through april 2006.the following are the major business functions of ace that directly link tothe freight transportation sector:•portal—a universal, secure internet “window” for all authorized system users(customs, other government agencies, and the international transportationcommunity) to transmit, analyze, and collaborate on supply chain data.projected for spring 2003.•account management—provides a single comprehensive, nationwide accountbased picture of all reported activity and relationships for an importer, anexporter, an international carrier, or a logistics/service provider. projectedbeginning spring 2003 through 2005.•erelease—provides for advance receipt of transportation data via transponders/electronic seal transmissions resulting in inspection or release information at the earliest point in the supply chain. projected for trucktransportation in 2004 and all other modes beginning in 2005.•multimodal manifest—provides for advance transportation data at the earliest point in the supply chain. projected for truck transportation in 2004 andall other modes beginning in 2005; will track cargo across modes in 2007.•cargo and conveyance tracking—provides for tracking shipments (including inbond) and conveyances, and provides release or status of shipmentsubject to government agency control.itds supports 101 agencies with information and actual operational interaction on shipments, crew, and conveyances crossing the border.as stated by the itds multiagency board of directors:itds is a federal government information technology (it) initiative to implement a secure, integrated, governmentwide system for the electronic collection,cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study72cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.clientweb &interface tier data tiereai tierapplicationtiersecurity/systems managementexternalsystemexternalsystembrowserbrowsereailayermodernlegacy/pervasivecomputing pervasivecomputingenterpriseportalservletxmlxmlhtmlhtmllegacymodernapplicationbusinesslogicadaptersintegrationlogicfirewall, intrusion detection, virusfirewall, intrusion detectionrdbmslegacydbmsexternal systeminterfacefigure d1ace architecture: conceptual view.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study74use and dissemination of international trade and transportation data ... theitds board of directors has oversight responsibility and serves as a forum forharmonization of requirements and dispute resolution among federal agencies.the board insures that itds goals and functionality are integrated with theneeds of the public, the participating agencies and customs modernization plans.customsinformationtechnologysystemssecuritycustoms’ new enterprise architecture (ea) for ace and the modernization isestablished to support all ﬁeld activities and align information technology withthe strategic objectives of customs and all agencies. the ea provides for a multilayer security management system. the information customs has made public isrepresented in figure d1.potentialvulnerabilitiesthe customs modernization and ace programs will be state of the art but aresubject to cyberattacks, as are all information systems. the reality of connectivity with the international trade and transportation community and the electronic exchange of massive amounts of data and database queries add to thepotential vulnerability.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.75studycommitteebiographicalinformationrobert e. gallamore,chair,is director of the transportation center andprofessor of managerial economics and decision sciences in the kellogg schoolof management at northwestern university, evanston, illinois. before joiningnorthwestern university, he was assistant vice president, communicationstechnologies, and general manager of the north american joint positive traincontrol program at the transportation technology center, inc., while on executive loan from the union paciﬁc railroad. before this assignment, he wasgeneral director, strategic analysis, for the union paciﬁc railroad in omahaand an executive with up corporation in new york city. dr. gallamore has alsoserved as deputy federal railroad administrator, associate administrator forplanning with the urban mass transportation administration, and system plancoordinator with the united states railway association. he received an a.b.from wesleyan university and an m.a. in public administration and a ph.d. inpolitical economy and government from harvard university.a. ray chamberlain,vice chair,is vice president of parsons brinckerhoff. hehas previously held positions as vice president, freight policy, and actingmanaging director of the american trucking associations foundation; chiefexecutive ofﬁcer of the colorado department of transportation; and presidentof colorado state university. he has served as president of the americanassociation of state highway and transportation ofﬁcials (aashto), as chair,trb executive committee, and as chairman, board of directors, nationalassociation of state university and land grant colleges. dr. chamberlainreceived a b.s. in engineering from michigan state university, an m.s. inengineering from washington state university, and a ph.d. in engineering fromcolorado state university.frank j. anstettis manager, infrastructure security, at raytheon company.mr. anstett’s experience includes management of diverse functional groups,cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.including u.s. department of transportation security and infrastructureteams; information technology (it) evaluation and implementation; performance of risk assessments; and the development of international organizationfor standardization–compliant procedures. as engineering and installationmanager, he was the primary interface between raytheon and the federalaviation administration (faa) in support of the transportation securityadministration’s installation of explosive detection equipment. he led a diverseteam in the evaluation and improvement of raytheon/faa managementinformation systems (mis). he then led a team in testing and implementingthe new mis tools, including the development of new functional policies andprocedures. mr. anstett has successfully managed numerous faa infrastructure upgrade projects across the united states. they include vulnerability andrisk assessment requirements so that improvements do not interfere with thesafety or effectiveness of faa’s air trafﬁc control system.samuel h. banksis senior vice president of the u.s. customs modernizationproject and resident at sandler and travis trade advisory services, specialists ininternational trade. his experience in customs and international trade includesmore than 28 years at the u.s. customs service. mr. banks began his career atcustoms as a uniformed inspector in san francisco and rose to become the highestranking career ofﬁcial in the agency, deputy commissioner, for 4 years. healso served as the acting commissioner of customs for 1 year. throughout histenure with u.s. customs, mr. banks worked on a number of major initiatives,including the customs modernization act, the landmark legislation that signiﬁcantly altered the rules governing the entry of imported merchandise into theunited states. he represented the united states at international forums and negotiated numerous international agreements, including signiﬁcant portions of thenorth american free trade agreement. mr. banks received many awards duringhis career at the customs service, including the distinguished governmentexecutive award—the highest award given to career public servants—granted tohim by president bush and the excellence in government award from the jointindustry group. in the private sector, mr. banks worked as a consultant for various international trade businesses including the air transport association, unitedparcel service, and lockheed martin. most recently, mr. banks served as a corporate ofﬁcer for an international trade information technology ﬁrm.richard a. holmes, jr.,is the general director of security and qualityassurance for union paciﬁc railroad and is responsible for information security,cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study76cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.disaster recovery, change management, development methodologies, and quality assurance functions at the company. he has been involved in informationassurance activities for more than 16 years at union paciﬁc. currently he is aboard member of the partnership for critical infrastructure security. he is pastpresident of the nebraska chapter of infragard. most recently he led theinformation sharing and analysis working group of the association of americanrailroads and participated in the development of the rail industry’s risk analysisand security management plan. mr. holmes teaches information assurancecourses for the institute of internal auditors and is a senior technical associatefor the nebraska university consortium on information assurance. beforetransferring to the information technologies department, he performed ﬁnancial, operational, and information systems audits of union paciﬁc corporation’srailroad, trucking, oil and gas, mining, hazardous waste, and logistics companies.he earned an mba from creighton university and a bachelor’s degree in management information systems from iowa state university.barry horowitz(nae) is professor of systems engineering at the university ofvirginia. formerly he was chairman and founder of concept five technologies,an ebusiness solutions provider specializing in applying enterprise applicationintegration and security technologies to b2b systems. he served as president andceo of the mitre corporation and president and ceo of mitretek systems.he received the highest civilian award of the u.s. air force for his contributionsto the gulf war related to locating, tracking, and destroying scud missiles.dr. horowitz is a member of the national academy of engineering. he holds absee from city college of new york and an msee and ph.d. in electrical engineering from new york university.john l. kingis professor and dean of the school of information at theuniversity of michigan. his research is in the development of largescale information systems in complex organizational and institutional problem domains,including logistics. he is a member of the advisory committee of the nationalscience foundation’s directorate for computer and information science andengineering and the board of directors of the computing research association.he previously served in faculty and administrative roles in the university ofcalifornia at irvine and as marvin bower fellow at the harvard business school.from 1993 to 1998 he was editorinchief of the informs journal informationsystems research.he has been coeditor or editorial board member of many otherjournals, including information infrastructure and policy, acm computing surveys,study committee biographical information77cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the journal of organizational computing and electronic commerce,and the journalof the association for information systems.he holds m.s. and ph.d. degrees inadministration from the university of california at irvine.lars kjaeris vice president of the world shipping council. he has been working closely with industry leaders and government agencies to enhance the security of containerized cargo at all points of the intermodal supply chain. hisprevious position was washington representative for the council of europeanand japanese shipowners associations from 1999 to 2000. before that, mr. kjaerwas counselor at the royal danish embassy in washington, d.c., from 1993 to1998. during that tenure he was also chairman of the cotton club of foreigntransportation counselors in washington. at the royal danish embassy, mr. kjaer was responsible for transportation matters, in particular shipping policy, and for bilateral and regional trade issues, including the gats (services)negotiations in the world trade organization. he joined the danish ministryof foreign affairs in 1983. while with the foreign service of denmark, his positions included principal head of section in the middle east political departmentand chair of various working groups of the european union’s foreign policycooperation. his foreign postings included a 4year term as first secretary at thedanish delegation to the north atlantic treaty organization in brussels.art kosatkais ceo of transecure llc, an aviation consulting ﬁrm formed afterhis retirement as a senior civil aviation security specialist with faa and theairport security policy and planning division of the transportation securityadministration. mr. kosatka was responsible for writing the security regulationsunder which airports operate and for the deﬁnitive manual of policy interpretations used nationwide by federal security directors at all commercial airports. hecame to faa from a career in airport consulting in which he managed varioussecurity projects at 32 airports, including 13 of the transportation securityadministration’s 22 highrisk category x airports. he has been director of publicsafety and security for the airports council international, representing theindustry’s security concerns nationwide, and he has served on both u.s. senateand house of representatives staffs handling transportation issues. he was threeterm chairman of the airport consultant council’s security committee and isan instrument and multienginerated pilot.stephen j. lambrightis vice president of marketing, savi technology. he workswith customers, global partners, and government agencies to identify and deﬁnecybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study78cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.solutions for global supply chain security and asset management. with a focus onimproving, hardening, and expanding the global supply chain it infrastructure,mr. lambright has more than 12 years of international experience in enterpriseit solution design, development, and deployment. mr. lambright is a member ofthe technology board of the autoid center at the massachusetts institute oftechnology, council for logistics management, and the society of logisticsengineers. he is also currently acting as executive director of the strategiccouncil on security technology. mr. lambright holds a bachelor of science fromnorthwestern university and a master’s in business administration from theuniversity of california at berkeley.daniel murrayis director of research for the american transportation researchinstitute (atri; formerly the ata foundation). atri, the autonomousresearch arm of the american trucking associations (ata), conducts comprehensive research on a variety of issues to improve trucking and transportationsafety, security, and productivity. his areas of expertise are in intelligent transportation systems (its) applications and freight mobility and transportation planning, and his current research focuses on the development of national its systemsto enhance freight efﬁciency and security. mr. murray has managed several largescale research projects including the o’hare airport air cargo security accesssystem project, the multimodal electronic supply chain manifest ﬁeld test, astudy to develop realtime freight performance measures, and the tacoma–chicago intermodal data transfer study. he is current or former board memberof the minnesota guidestar its board, the midwest transportation alliance, andthe minneapolis–st. paul metropolitan planning organization. he received hism.s. from northwestern university.frank pittelliis cofounder and president of navius technologies, llc. he hasmore than 20 years of experience spanning the breadth of the computer industry, including research, system design and development, academic and professional teaching, highlevel analysis, consulting, and product development. inthe area of computer security, dr. pittelli has participated in a number ofadvanced computer security studies, including the national research council’scommittee on computer system security and the committee for review of thenational cryptographic policy. dr. pittelli’s practical experience includes thedesign and analysis of secure systems. he was the principal author of the concept of operations for the key escrow system for the clipper chip, and he developed a complete curriculum of courses for a major secure product vendor. hestudy committee biographical information79cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study  special report 274copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.has conducted a number of enterprisewide security audits for clients that combined the analysis of system functionality and security in a relatively shortperiod of time. dr. pittelli has been instrumental in the development of threesuccessful entrepreneurial companies. he received his b.s. degree, summa cumlaude, in computer science from rensselaer polytechnic institute in 1981 andhis m.a. and ph.d. degrees in computer science from princeton university in1984 and 1986, respectively.alan f. spearis president of mrc investigations (usa), inc. the companyspecializes in cargo crime investigation and prevention, counterhijacking andpiracy, tracing stolen marine assets, vessel tracking, and asset tracing. before thisappointment he was director, loss control, operation intercept, and assistantvice president, claims, xl specialty insurance company (intercargo). he hascontributed to the development of standards on cargo security and is an authorof articles published on the subject. mr. spear received a bachelor’s degree fromknox college and a master’s degree in community mental health from northernillinois university.karen ryan tobiahas held administrative and managerial positions with theport authority of new york and new jersey in departments as diverse ascomptrollers, ofﬁce of the executive director, economic development, worldtrade and economic development, regional development, and port commerce.in her current position as manager, technology planning, in the strategicanalysis and industry relations division of the port commerce department,she is responsible for the research, development, and implementation of newmaritime and portrelated technologies at port authority marine facilitieswithin the port of new york and new jersey. this includes the research of itstechnologies as they relate to the movement of intermodal freight and commercial vehicle operations, testing and implementation of new securityrelatedtechnologies, and testing and implementation of portrelated information anddata management systems. she also acts as the project manager for the portauthority’s freight information realtime system for transport, or first,which features an interactive website for ocean container tracking and portinformation. she is vice chair of the cargo handling cooperative programand cochair of the intermodal program track of the i95 corridor coalition. ms. tobia received a bachelor of science degree in management and communications from adelphi university.cybersecurity of freight information systems: a scoping study80