detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10795innovation in information technology84 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309089807 | doi 10.17226/10795computer science and telecommunications board; division on engineering andphysical sciences; national research councilinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.in informationtechnologycomputer science and telecommunications boarddivision on engineering and physical sciencesthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.eduinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the projects that are the basis of this synthesis report were approved bythe governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawnfrom the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy ofengineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committees responsible for the final reports of these projects and of the board that produced thissynthesis were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the core sponsors of the computerscience and telecommunications board (cstb), which include the air force office of scientific research, cisco systems, defense advanced research projectsagency, department of energy, intel corporation, microsoft research, nationalaeronautics and space administration, national institute of standards and technology, national library of medicine, national science foundation, and office ofnaval research. sponsors enable but do not influence cstbõs work. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication arethose of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizationsor agencies that provide support for cstb.international standard book number 0309089808 (book)international standard book number 0309526221 (pdf)copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifthstreet, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055, (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 in the washington metropolitan area; internet: http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americainnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages educationand research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a.wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr.harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both thenational academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineeringcommunities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and theinstitute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair andvice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orginnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcomputer science and telecommunications boarddavid d. clark, massachusetts institute of technology, chaireric benhamou, 3com corporationdavid borth, motorola labsjames chiddix,** aol time warnerjohn m. cioffi, stanford universityelaine cohen, university of utahw. bruce croft, university of massachusetts at amherstthomas e. darcie, university of victoriajoseph farrell, university of california at berkeleyjoan feigenbaum, yale universityhector garciamolina, stanford universitysusan l. graham,* university of california at berkeleyjudith hempel,* university of california at san franciscojeffrey m. jaffe,** bell laboratories, lucent technologiesanna karlin,** university of washingtonwendy kellogg, ibm thomas j. watson research centerbutler w. lampson, microsoft corporationedward d. lazowska,** university of washingtondavid liddle, u.s. venture partnerstom m. mitchell, carnegie mellon universitydonald norman,** nielsen norman groupdavid a. patterson, university of california at berkeleyhenry (hank) perritt, chicagokent college of lawdaniel pike, gci cable and entertainmenteric schmidt, google inc.fred schneider, cornell universityburton smith, cray inc.terry smith,** university of california at santa barbaralee sproull, new york universitywilliam stead, vanderbilt universityjeannette m. wing, carnegie mellon universitymarjory s. blumenthal, directorkristen batch, research associatejennifer bishop, senior project assistantjanet briscoe, administrative officerdavid drake, senior project assistant**term ended june 30, 2001.**term ended june 30, 2002.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vjon eisenberg, senior program officerrenee hawkins, financial associatephil hilliard, research associatemargaret marsh huynh, senior project assistantalan s. inouye, senior program officerherbert s. lin, senior scientistlynette i. millett, program officerdavid padgham, research associatecynthia a. patterson, program officerjanice sabuda, senior project assistantbrandye williams, staff assistantsteven woo, dissemination officernote: for more information on cstb, see its web site at <http://www.cstb.org>, write tocstb, national research council, 500 fifth street, n.w., washington, dc 20001, call at(202) 3342605, or email the cstb at cstb@nas.edu.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethe health of the computer science field and related disciplines hasbeen an enduring concern of the national research councilõs computerscience and telecommunications board (cstb). from its first reports inthe late 1980s, cstb has examined the nature, conduct, scope, and directions of the research that drives innovation in information technology.ironically, the success of the industries that produce information technology (it) has caused confusion about the roles of government andacademia in it research. and it does not help that research in computerscienceñespecially research relating to softwareñis hard for many peopleoutside the field to understand. this synthesis report draws on severalcstb reports, published over the course of the past decade, to explain thewhat and why of it research. it was developed by members of the board,drawing on cstbõs body of work and on insights and experience fromtheir own careers.this synthesis is kept brief in order to highlight key points. it ispaired with a set of excerpts from previous reports, chosen either for theirexplanation of relevant history or for their compelling development ofcore arguments and principles.david d. clark, chaircomputer science andtelecommunications boardinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs report reviewcommittee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candidand critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness tothe study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remainconfidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wishto thank the following individuals for their review of this report:frederick p. brooks, jr., university of north carolina at chapel hill,linda cohen, university of california at irvine,samuel h. fuller, analog devices inc.,juris hartmanis, cornell university,timothy lenoir, stanford university,david g. messerschmitt, university of california at berkeley,ivan e. sutherland, sun microsystems laboratories, andjoseph f. traub, columbia university.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the reportbefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by johninnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xacknowledgment of reviewershopcroft, cornell university. appointed by the national research council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered.responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with theauthoring board and the institution.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xicontentssummary and recommendations11innovation in information technology5universities, industry, and government: a complexpartnership yielding innovation and leadership, 5the essential role of the federal government, 9the distinctive character of federally supported research, 15university research and industrial r&d, 20hallmarks of federally sponsored it research, 22looking forward, 262excerpts from earlier cstb reports30making it better: expanding information technologyresearch to meet societyõs needs (2000), 31the many faces of information technology research, 31implications for the research enterprise, 33funding a revolution: government support for computingresearch (1999), 37lessons from history, 37sources of u.s. success, 44research and technological innovation, 46the benefits of public support of research, 47maintaining university research capabilities, 48innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontentscreating human resources, 49the organization of federal support: a historical review, 5019451960: era of government computers, 51the governmentõs early role, 52establishment of organizations, 53observations, 5719601970: supporting continuing revolution, 58maturing of a commercial industry, 58the changing federal role, 6019701990: retrenching and international competition, 67accomplishing federal missions, 67evolving the high performance computing and communicationsinitiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure(1995), 68continued federal investment is necessary to sustainour lead, 68what is cstb?71innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1summary and recommendationsprogress in information technology (it) has been remarkable, but thebest truly is yet to come: the power of it as a human enabler is just beginning to be realized. whether the nation builds on this momentum orplateaus prematurely depends on todayõs decisions about fundamentalresearch in computer science (cs) and the related fields behind it.the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) hasoften been asked to examine how innovation occurs in it, what the mostpromising research directions are, and what impacts such innovationmight have on society. consistent themes emerge from cstb studies,notwithstanding changes in information technology itself, in the itproducing sector, and in the u.s. university system, a key player in it research.in this synthesis report, based largely on the eight cstb reports enumerated below, cstb highlights these themes and updates some of thedata that support them. much of the material is drawn from (1) the 1999cstb report funding a revolution: government support for computing research,1 written by both professional historians and computer scientists toensure its objectivity, and (2) making it better: expanding information tech1computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1999.funding a revolution: government support for computing research. national academy press,washington, d.c.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2innovation in information technologynology research to meet societyõs needs,2 the 2000 cstb report that focuseson longterm goals for maintaining the vitality of it research. many ofthe themes achieved prominence in (3) the 1995 cstb report evolving thehigh performance computing and communications initiative to support thenationõs information infrastructure,3 known informally as the brookssutherland report. other reports contributing to this synthesis include(4)computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering (1992),4 (5) building a workforce for the information economy (2001),5(6) academic careers in experimental computer science and engineering(1994),6 (7) embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systemsof embedded computers (2001),7 and (8) more than screen deep: towardeverycitizen interfaces to the nationõs information infrastructure (1997).8 inthe text that follows, these reports are cited by number as listed, for easyreference, in box 1.here are the most important themes from cstbõs studies of innovation in it:¥the results of researchamericaõs international leadership in itñleadership that is vitalto the nationñsprings from a deep tradition of research (1,3,4).the unanticipated results of research are often as important asthe anticipated resultsñfor example, electronic mail and instant messaging were byproducts of research in the 1960s that was aimed at making it2computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2000.making it better: expanding information technology research to meet societyõs needs. nationalacademy press, washington, d.c.3computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1995.evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.4computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1992.computing the future: a broader agenda for computer science and engineering. national academy press, washington, d.c.5computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2001.building a workforce for the information economy. national academy press, washington,d.c.6computer science and telecommunications board., national research council. 1994.academic careers in experimental computer science and engineering. national academy press,washington, d.c.7computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2001.embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networked systems of embedded computers. national academy press, washington, d.c.8computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1997.more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary and recommendations3box 1reference numbers for key cstb titles cited in this reportreferencetitlenumber(1)funding a revolution: government support for computingresearch (1999)(2)making it better: expanding information technology research tomeet societyõs needs (2000)(3)evolving the high performance computing and communicationsinitiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure (1995)(4)computing the future: a broader agenda for computer scienceand engineering (1992)(5)building a workforce for the information economy (2001)(6)academic careers in experimental computer science andengineering (1994)(7)embedded, everywhere: a research agenda for networkedsystems of embedded computers (2001)(8)more than screen deep: toward everycitizen interfaces to thenationõs information infrastructure (1997)note: complete citations for these reports appear in footnotes 1 through 8 in this òsummaryand recommendationsó section.possible to share expensive computing resources among multiple simultaneous interactive users (1,3).the interaction of research ideas multiplies their impactñforexample, concurrent research programs targeted at integrated circuitdesign, computer graphics, networking, and workstationbased computing strongly reinforced and amplified one another (14).¥research as a partnershipthe success of the it research enterprise reflects a complex partnership among government, industry, and universities (18).the federal government has had and will continue to have anessential role in sponsoring fundamental research in itñlargely universitybasedñbecause it does what industry does not and cannot do (18).industrial and governmental investments in research reflect differentinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4innovation in information technologymotivations, resulting in differences in style, focus, and time horizon(13,7,8).companies have little incentive to invest significantly in activities whose benefits will spread quickly to their rivals (1,3,7). fundamental research often falls into this category. by contrast, the vast majority ofcorporate research and development (r&d) addresses product andprocess development (1,2,4).government funding for research has leveraged the effectivedecision making of visionary program managers and program officedirectors from the research community, empowering them to take risks indesigning programs and selecting grantees (1,3). government sponsorship of research especially in universities also helps to develop the ittalent used by industry, universities, and other parts of the economy (15).¥the economic payoff of researchpast returns on federal investments in it research have beenextraordinary for both u.s. society and the u.s. economy (1,3). the transformative effects of it grow as innovations build on one another and asuser knowhow compounds. priming that pump for tomorrow is todayõschallenge.when companies create products using the ideas and workforcethat result from federally sponsored research, they repay the nation injobs, tax revenues, productivity increases, and world leadership (1,3,5).the themes highlighted above underlie two recurring and overarchingrecommendations evident in the eight cstb reports cited:recommendation 1the federal government should continue toboost funding levels for fundamental information technology research,commensurate with the growing scope of research challenges (24,68). itshould ensure that the major funding agencies, especially the nationalscience foundation and the defense advanced research projects agency,have strong and sustained programs for computing and communicationsresearch that are broad in scope and independent of any special initiativesthat might divert resources from broadly based basic research (2,3).recommendation 2the government should continue to maintainthe special qualities of federal it research support, ensuring that it complements industrial research and development in emphasis, duration, andscale (14,6).this report addresses the ways that past successes can guide federalfunding policy to sustain the it revolution and its contributions to otherfields.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51innovation in information technologyuniversities, industry, and government: a complexpartnership yielding innovation and leadershipfigure 1 illustrates some of the many cases in which fundamentalresearch in it, conducted in industry and universities, led 10 to 15 yearslater to the introduction of entirely new product categories that becamebilliondollar industries. it also illustrates the complex interplay betweenindustry, universities, and government. the flow of ideas and peopleñthe interaction between university research, industry research, and product developmentñis amply evident.figure 1 updates figure 4.1 from the 2002 cstb report informationtechnology research, innovation, and egovernment.1 the originally published figure2produced an extraordinary response: it was used in presentations to congress and to administration decision makers, and it was1computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2002.information technology research, innovation, and egovernment. national academy press,washington, d.c.2known informally as the òtiretracks chartó because of its appearance, the figure wasfirst published in evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative tosupport the nationõs information infrastructure (3; p. 2).innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6innovation in information technologylansrings, hubnetethernet, datakit, autonetlans, switched ethernetgraphical user interfaces workstationsgraphicssketchpad, utahgm/ibm, xerox, microsofte&s, sgi, ati, adobelisp machine, stanfordxerox altoxerox star, apollo, sunengelbart / rochesteralto, smalltalkstar, mac, microsofttimesharingctss, multics / bsdunixsds 940, 360/67, vmsinternetarpanet, aloha, internetpupdecnet, tcp/iprisc processorsberkeley, stanfordibm 801sun, sgi, ibm, hpvlsi designberkeley, caltech, mosismany1965197019751980198519901995200519651970197519801985199019952005client/server computingberkeley, cmu, cernparc, dec, ibmnovell, emc, sun, oracleentertainmentspacewar (mit), trek (rochester)atari, nintendo, sgi, pixarthe topics are ordered roughly by increasing date of $1 b industry.universityindustry r&dproducts$1 b marketto world wide webfigure 1 examples of governmentsponsored it research and development inthe creation of commercial products and industries. federally sponsored researchlies at the heart of many of todayõs multibilliondollar information technologyindustriesñindustries that are transforming our lives and driving our economy.ideas and people flow in complex patterns. the interaction of research ideasinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology7raid /disk serversrelational databasesberkeley, wisconsinibmoracle, ibm, sybaseberkeleystriping/datamesh, petalmany19651970197519801985199019952005world wide webalta vistanetscape, yahoo, google19651970197519801985199019952005speech recognitioncmu, sri, mitbell, ibm, dragondragon, ibmbroadband l in last milebellcore (telcordia)amati, alcatel, broadcomstanford, uclaportable communicationlinkabit, hughesqualcommberkeley, purdue (cdma)parallel databasestokyo, wisconsin, uclaibm, iclicl, teradata, tandemparallel computingilliac 4, cmu, caltech, hpcibm, intelcm5, teradata, cray t3ddata miningwisconsin, stanfordibm, arboriri, arbor, platocern, illinois (mosaic)the topics are ordered roughly by increasing date of $1 b industry.universityindustry r&dproducts$1 b marketfrom internetmultiplies their effect. the result is that the united states is the world leader inthis critical arena. although the figure reflects input from many individuals atmultiple points in time, ensuring readability required making judgments aboutthe examples to present, which should be seen as illustrative rather than exhaustive. source: 2002 update by the computer science and telecommunicationsboard of a figure (figure es.1) originally published in computer science andtelecommunications board, national research council, 1995, evolving the highperformance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure, national academy press, washington, d.c.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8innovation in information technologydiscussed broadly in the research community. although it commercialsuccess leads some policy makers to assume that industry is selfsufficient, the tiretracks chart underscores how much industry builds on governmentfunded university research, sometimes through long incubationperiods (1,3).figure 1 also illustratesñalthough sketchilyñthe interdependenciesof research advances in various subfields. there is a complex researchecology at work, in which concurrent advances in multiple subfieldsñinparticular within computer science but extending into other fields, too,from electrical engineering to psychologyñare mutually reinforcing: theystimulate and enable one another.3one of the most important messages of figure 1 is the long, unpredictable incubation periodñrequiring steady work and fundingñbetween initial exploration and commercial deployment (1,3). starting aproject that requires considerable time often seems risky, but the payofffrom successes justifies backing researchers who have vision. it is oftennot clear which aspect of an earlystage research project will be the mostimportant; fundamental research produces a range of ideas, and laterdevelopers select from among them as needs emerge. sometimes theutility of ideas is evident well after they have been generated. for example, some early work in artificial intelligence has achieved unanticipated applicability in computer games, some of which are now beinginvestigated for decision support and other professional uses as well asrecreation.it is important to remember that realworld requirements can changequickly. although the end of the cold war was interpreted by some aslessening the need for research,4 september 11, 2001, underscored research needs in several areas: system security and robustness, automaticnatural language translation, data integration, image processing, andbiosensors, among othersñareas in which technical problems are difficult to begin with, and may become harder when technology must bedesigned to both meet homeland security needs and protect civil liber3the idea that research in it not only builds in part on research in physics, mathematics,electrical engineering, psychology, and other fields but also strongly influences them isconsistent with what donald stokes has characterized in his fourpart taxonomy asòpasteurõs quadrantó research: use or applicationinspired basic research that pursuesfundamental understanding (such as louis pasteurõs research on the biological bases offermentation and disease). see the discussion on pp. 2629 in the 2000 cstb report makingit better (2), and see donald e. stokes, 1997, pasteurõs quadrant: basic science and technological innovation, brookings institution press, washington, d.c.4linda r. cohen and roger g. noll. 1994. òprivatizing public research,ó scientificamerican 271(3): 7277.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology9ties.5 without fundamental research, the cupboard is bare when there isa sudden need for ideas to reduce to practice.the essential role of the federal governmentfederally sponsored research played a critical role in creating theenabling technologies for each of the billiondollar market segments illustrated in figure 1ñand for many others as well. the government rolecoevolved with it industries: its organization and emphases changed tofocus on capabilities not ready for commercialization and on new needsthat emerged as commercial capabilities grew, both moving targets (1).as this coevolution shows, successful technology development relies onflexibility in the conduct of research and in the structure of industry.most often, this federal investment took the form of grants or contracts awarded to university researchers by the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) and/or the national science foundation (nsf)ñalthough a shifting mix of other funding agencies has beeninvolved, reflecting changes in the missions of these agencies and theirneeds for it (1,3). for example, the department of energy (doe), thenational aeronautics and space administration (nasa), and the military services have supported highperformance computing, networking,humancomputer interaction, and other kinds of research.6why has federal support been so effective in stimulating innovationin computing? as discussed below, many factors have been important.1.federally funded programs have supported longterm research into fundamental aspects of computing, whose widespread practical benefits typicallytake years to realize (1).òlongtermó research refers to a long time horizon for the researcheffort and for its impact to be realized. examples of innovations thatrequired longterm research include speech recognition, packet radio,computer graphics, and internetworking. in every case illustrated in figure 1, the time from first concept to successful market is measured in5see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2003.information technology for counterterrorism: immediate actions and future possibilities. national academies press, washington, d.c.6in addition to research funding, complementary activities have been undertaken byother agencies, such as the national institute of standards and technology, which oftenbrings together people from universities and industry on issues relating to standards setting and measurement.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10innovation in information technologydecades (see box 2)ña contrast to the more incremental innovations thatare publicized as evidence of the rapid pace of it innovation. work on speech recognition, for example, which began in earnest inthe early 1970s, took until 1997 to generate a successful product for enabling personal computers to recognize continuous speech (8). work onpacket radio also dates from the 1970s, and its realization in commercialad hoc mobile networking also began in the late 1990s.7 fundamentalalgorithms for shading threedimensional graphics images, which weredeveloped with federal funding in the 1960s, saw limited use on highperformance machines until they entered consumer products in the 1990s;today these algorithms are used in a range of products in the health care,entertainment, and defense industries. the research programs behindthese innovations not only were longterm but also were broad enough toaccommodate within a single program the development of those unanticipated results that have in many cases provided the most significantoutcomes of a project.the benefits of a long time horizon, combined with program breadth,extend to todayõs challenges. this point was emphasized in cstbõs 1997report on usability, more than screen deep (8), which explained (at p. 192):federal initiatives that emphasize longterm goals beyond the horizonof most commercial efforts and that may thus entail added risk have thepotential to move the whole information technology enterprise into newmodes of thinking and to stimulate discovery of new technologies forthe coming century.because of unanticipated results and synergies, the exact course offundamental research cannot be planned in advance, and its progresscannot be measured precisely in the short term. even projects that appearto have failed or whose results do not seem to have immediate utilityoften make significant contributions to later technology development orachieve other objectives not originally envisioned. a striking example isthe field of number theory (1): for hundreds of years a branch of puremathematics without applications, it is now the basis for the publickeycryptography that underlies the security of electronic commerce.7similarly, commercial developments in broadband cellular radio (which has becomeessentially wireless internet access in thirdgeneration wireless) are built in part on manydecades of federally supported research into code division multiple access technology,signal processing for antenna arrays, errorcorrection coding, and so on.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology11box 2the role of federal support for fundamental research in itcstbõs 1995 report evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure (3) examinedthe payoff from several decades of federal investment in it research. among theconclusions of that report are these:¥research has kept paying off over a long period.¥the payoff from research takes time. as figure [1] shows, at least 10 years,more often 15, elapse between initial research on a major new idea and commercial success. this is still true in spite of todayõs shorter product cycles.¥unexpected results are often the most important. electronic mail and theòwindowsó interface are only two examples. . . .¥research stimulates communication and interaction. ideas flow back andforth between research programs and development efforts and between academiaand industry [and between research programs with different foci that are proceeding concurrently].¥research trains people, who start companies or form a pool of trained personnel that existing companies can draw on to enter new markets quickly.¥doing research involves taking risks.  not all public research programs havesucceeded or led to clear outcomes even after many years. but the record ofaccomplishments suggests that government investment in computing and communications research has been highly productive.11computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 1995.evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c., pp. 34.2.the interplay of governmentfunded and industry research has been animportant factor in it commercialization (18).the examples in figure 1 show the interplay between governmentfunded research and industry research and development. in some cases,such as reducedinstructionset computing (risc) processors, the initialideas came from industry, but the research that was essential to advancing these ideas came from government funding to universities. risc wasconceived at ibm, but it was not commercialized until darpa fundedadditional research at the university of california at berkeley and atstanford university as part of its very large scale integrated circuit(vlsi) program of the late 1970s and early 1980s (1,3). the vlsi programalso supported university research that gave rise to such companies assynopsys, cadence, and mentor, which have acquired dozens of smallerinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12innovation in information technologycompanies that started as spinoffs of darpafunded8 university research; such research has also pushed the proverbial envelope in algorithms and user interfaces. the more than $3 billion electronic designautomation industry is an essential enabler to other parts of it.similarly, ibm pioneered the concept of relational databases (its system r project) but did not commercialize the technology. nsfsponsoredresearch at the university of california at berkeley brought this technology to the point at which it was commercialized by several startup companies and then by more established database companies (including ibm)(1,3). in other cases, such as timesharing, the initial ideas came from theuniversity community, and subsequent industry research, while significant for a time, was not sustained. in none of the examples in figure 1 didindustry alone provide the necessary research.3.there is a complex interleaving of fundamental research and focused development (13).in the case of integrated circuit (vlsi) design tools, research innovation led to products and then to major industrial markets. a stillunfolding example is the theoretical research that yielded the algorithms behindthe webcontent management technology underlying akamai. in thecase of relational databases, the introduction of products stimulated newfundamental research questions, leading to a new generation of productswith capabilities vastly greater than those of their predecessors. thepurpose of publicly funded research is to advance knowledge and tosolve hard problems. the exploitation of that knowledge and those solutions in products is fundamentally important, but the form it takes isoften unpredictable, as is the impact on future research (see box 3).4.federal support for research has tended to complement, rather than preempt, industry investments in research.the it sector invests an enormous amount each year in r&d. it iscritical to understand, however, that the vast majority of corporate r&dhas always been focused on product and process development (2). this iswhat shareholders (or other investors) demand. it is harder for corporations to justify funding longterm, fundamental research. economists8in some cases, the semiconductor research corporation provided the funding. foradditional information, see the web site <http://www.src.org/member/about/history.asp>. accessed june 2, 2003.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology13box 3the technological underpinnings of electronic commerceelectronic commerce is becoming pervasive. it is changing many aspects ofour lives, from the way we shop to the way we obtain government services.the organizations and individuals that exploit electronic commerce employcommercial tools from companies such as microsoft and oracle. they may notthink of themselves as the beneficiaries of federal investments in universitybasedit researchñbut they are. nearly every key technological component underlyingelectronic commerce has been shaped by this investment. for example:¥the internetñdefense advanced research projects agency (darpa) investments in the 1960s and 1970s were followed by national science foundation(nsf) investments in the 1980s and early 1990s, with research (supported bymultiple agencies) continuing to this day (1).¥web browsersñmosaic, the first browser with a graphical user interface,was invented at the nsfsupported national center for supercomputer applications at the university of illinois (1).¥publickey cryptography for secure credit card transactionsñnsf sponsored universitybased research in the 1970s that supported this innovation (1).¥backend database and transaction processing systemsñnsf and darpasupported key research on relational databases and transaction processing systems at the university of california at berkeley, university of wisconsin, and elsewhere, beginning in the early 1980s and continuing to this day (1).¥search enginesñsearch engines grew out of federally supported universityresearch programs, such as the ranking algorithm work at stanford university thatcontributed to google; the webcrawler and metacrawler grew out of work at theuniversity of washington.but the development is not complete: a range of technical challenges still exist,along with challenges for improving the fit between the technologies and the behavior and needs of the people who use them (2,8).sources: pieces of this history are recounted in the previously cited cstb reports (18)and in cstbõs series of reports on the internet: toward a national research network (1988),realizing the information future: the internet and beyond (1990), the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000 (1996), the internetõs coming of age (2001), andbroadband: bringing home the bits (2002), all published by the national academy press,washington, d.c.have articulated the concept of òappropriabilityó to express the extent towhich the results of an investment can be captured by the investor, asopposed to being available to all players in the market. the results oflongterm, fundamental research are hard to appropriate for several reasons: they tend to be published openly and thus to become generallyknown; they tend to have broad value; the most important may be unpreinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14innovation in information technologydictable in advance; and they become known well ahead of the moment ofrealization as a product, so that many parties have the opportunity toincorporate the results into their thinking. in contrast, incremental research and product development can be performed in a way that is moreappropriable: it can be done under wraps, and it can be moved into themarketplace more quickly and predictably.although individual industrial players may find it hard to justifyresearch that is weakly appropriable, it is the proper role of the federalgovernment to support this sort of endeavor (1,3). when companies create successful new products using the ideas and workforce that resultfrom federally sponsored research, they repay the nation handsomely injobs, tax revenues, productivity increases, and world leadership (1,3).longterm research often has great benefits for the it sector as a whole,although no particular company can be sure of reaping most of thesebenefits.appropriability helps to explain why the companies that have tendedto provide the greatest support for fundamental research are large companies that enjoy dominant positions in their market (1). at&t and ibm,for example, have historically made significant investments in fundamental research. anything that advances it as a whole benefits the dominantplayersñthey may be capable of reaping a significant proportion of thereturns on their research investments. as it industries became morecompetitive, however, even these firms began to link their research moreclosely with corporate objectives and product development activities.9one of them (at&t) has radically cut back its research effort. this processbegan with a government proceeding that resulted in the splitting up offunctions formerly aggregated under òma belló and continued with thegrowth and contraction of a set of industry research and developmentendeavors (at&t research, lucent technologies, agere systems, andbellcore [now telcordia]) where once there was the monolithic belllaboratories.10several of the companies that have recently emerged as dominant intheir sectors, such as intel and microsoft, have increased their support forfundamental research. however, many other successful companies withlarge market shares (e.g., cisco, dell, oracle) have chosen not to invest infundamental research to any significant extent. and even at microsoft,just as at at&t and ibm before it, the investment in fundamental research9elizabeth corcoran, 1994, òthe changing role of u.s. corporate research labs,ó researchtechnology management 37(4):1420; peter coy, 1993, òr&d scoreboard: in the labs,the fight to spend less, get more,ó business week, june 28, pp. 102124.10cstb launched a study of the future of telecommunications r&d in 2003.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology15represents a relatively small proportion of overall corporate r&d. in2002, microsoft invested roughly $5 billion in r&d, but the companyõsfundamental research arm is small enough to suggest that 95 percent ofmicrosoftõs r&d investment is productrelated.startups represent the other end of the spectrum. a hallmark of u.s.entrepreneurship, startups and startup financing promote flexibility inindustry structure and industry management. they have facilitated thedevelopment of highrisk products as well as an iconoclastic, risktakingattitude among more traditional companies and managers in the it business. but they do not engage in research (2). thus, the wave of internetrelated and other it startups of the 1990s is notable for two reasons: first,these startups attracted some researchers away from universities andresearch, and second, notwithstanding the popular labeling of those startups as òhightech,ó they applied the fruits of past research rather thangenerating more. startups illustrate the critical role of government funding in building the foundations for innovative commercial investments.the distinctive character offederally supported researchthe most important characteristic of successful government researchactivities is their breadth of scopeñboth in their long time dimension andin their focus on activities that are potentially difficult to appropriateprivately in their entirety. two specific topic areas that illustrate theseprinciples are largescale it systems and social applications of it. growing capabilities and broadening use of it in the 1990s motivated cstbrecommendations for greatly increased federal support in these two categories (2) (see boxes 4 and 5).prospects for progress in social applicationsñhowever difficultñareone reason for confidence that it will improve as a human enabler. thebeginnings evident in all of these areas are but crude indicators of whatresearch may make possible.an example of particular currency is that of cybersecurity. stimulated by the events of september 11, cstb issued the report cybersecuritytoday and tomorrow: pay now or pay later, in early 2002. the report summarized the findings of seven cstb reports issued over the precedingdecade that had cybersecurity as a principal theme. cybersecurity todayand tomorrow concludes with the following paragraph:research and development on information systems security should beconstrued broadly to include r&d on defensive technology (includingboth underlying technologies and architectural issues), organizationaland sociological dimensions of such security, forensic and recovery tools,and best policies and practices. given the failure of the market to adinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16innovation in information technologybox 4defining largescale systems and social applicationsof information technologylargescale systems are it systems that contain many (thousands, millions,billions, or trillions or more) interacting hardware and software components. theytend to be heterogeneousñin that they are composed of many different types ofcomponentsñand highly complex because the interactions among the components are numerous, varied, and complicated. they also tend to span multipleorganizations (or elements of organizations) and have changing configurations.over time, the largest it systems have become ever larger and more complex,and at any given point in time, systems of a certain scale and complexity are notfeasible or economical to design with existing methodologies.social applications of it serve groups of people in shared activities. the moststraightforward of these applications improve the effectiveness of geographicallydispersed groups of people who are collaborating on some task in a shared context. more sophisticated applications may support the operations of a business orthe functioning of an entire economy; systems for ecommerce are an example.characteristic of social applications of it is the embedding of it into a large organizational or social system to form a òsociotechnicaló system in which people andtechnology interact to achieve a common purposeñeven if that purpose is notobviously social, such as efficient operation of a manufacturing line (which is aconjunction of technological automation and human workers) or rapid and decisivebattlefield management (which is a conjunction of commandandcontrol technology and the judgment and expertise of commanders). social applications of itñespecially those supporting organizational and societal missionsñtend to be largescale and complex, mixing technical and nontechnical design and operationalelements and involving oftendifficult social and policy issues such as those related to privacy and access.source: reprinted from computer science and telecommunications board, nationalresearch council. 2000. making it better: expanding information technology research tomeet societyõs needs. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 3.dress security challenges adequately, government support for such research is especially important.11cstbõs 2001 study on networked systems of embedded computers(7) sounds a similar theme (at p. 9):[t]he committee (composed of people from both academia and industry) believes that while some of the questions raised in this report may11computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2002.cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later. national academy press, washington, d.c., pp. 1415.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology17box 5research on the social applications ofinformation technologyresearch on the social applications of information technology (it) combineswork in technical disciplines, such as computing and communications, with research in the social sciences to understand how people, organizations, and itsystems can be combined to most effectively perform a set of tasks. such research can address a range of issues related to it systems, as demonstrated bythe examples below . . . :¥novel activities and shifts in organizational, economic, and social structuresñwhat will people do (at work, in school, at play, in government, and so on)when computers can see and hear better than people can? how will activities andorganizations change when robotic technology is widespread and cheap? how willindividual and organizational activities change when surveillance via it becomeseffectively universal? new technologies will affect all kinds of people in many ways,and they hold particular promise for those with special situations or capabilities,because they will give them broader access to social and economic activities.¥electronic communitiesñhow can it systems be best designed to facilitatethe communication and coordination of groups of people working toward a common goal? progress requires an understanding of the sociology and dynamics ofgroups of users, as well as of the tasks they wish to perform. psychologists andsociologists could offer insight for the conceptualization and refinement of thesesocial applications, and technologists could mold their technological aspects.¥electronic commerceñhow can buyers and sellers be best brought together to conduct business transactions on the internet? what kinds of security technologies will provide adequate assurances of the identities of both parties andprotect the confidentiality of their transactions without imposing unnecessary burdens on either? how will electronic commerce affect the competitive advantage offirms, their business strategies, and the structure of industries (e.g., their horizontal and vertical linkages)? such work requires the insight of economists, organizational theorists, business strategists, and psychologists who understand consumerbehavior, as well as of technologists.¥critical infrastructuresñhow can it be better embedded into the nationõstransportation, energy, financial, telecommunications, and other infrastructures tomake them more efficient and effective without making them less reliable or moreprone to human error? for example, how can an air traffic control system be designed to provide controllers with sufficient information to make critical decisionswithout overwhelming them with data? such work requires the insight of cognitivepsychologists and experts in air traffic control, as well as of technologists.¥complexityñhow can the benefits of it be brought to the citizenry withoutthe exploding complexity characteristic of professional uses of it? although networks, computers, and software can be assembled and configured by professionals to support the missioncritical computing needs of large organizations, the techniques that make this possible are inadequate for information appliances designedfor the home, car, or individual. research is needed to simplify and automatecontinuesinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18innovation in information technologybe answered without a concerted, publicly funded research agenda, leaving this work solely to the private sector raises a number of troublingpossibilities. of great concern is that individual commercial incentiveswill fail to bring about work on problems that have a larger scope andthat are subject to externalities: interoperability, safety, upgradability,and so on. moreover, a lack of government funding will slow down thesharing of the research, since the commercial concerns doing the research tend to keep the research private to retain their competitive advantage. the creation of an open research community within whichresults and progress are shared is vital to making significant progress inthis arena.another example of the distinctive role that federal funding can playin computing research comes from two recent cstb studies of the internet.the 2001 report the internetõs coming of age examined the role of thegovernment in funding research that leads to open standards, exemplified by the work that defined the internet. one of the internetõs hallmarkshas been its openness. proprietary research can enhance a particularproduct, but research leading to open standards can create a new marketplace for products. each company that is an internet òplayeró will betempted to diverge from the common standard if it looks possible tocapture a large portion of itñwe have seen this during the past decade inprotocols for transport, electronic mail, instant messaging, and many otherareas (see box 6). however, a common, open standard maximizes overallsocial welfare as a result of the network externalities obtained from thelarger market. when effective open standards are made available, theycan be attractive in the marketplace and may win out over proprietaryones. the report notes:the governmentõs role in supporting open standards for the internet hasnot been, and should not be, to directly set or influence standards. rather, its role should be to provide funding for the networking researchcommunity, which has led to both innovative networking ideas as wellsystem configuration, change, and repair. such research will require insight fromtechnologists, cognitive psychologists, and those skilled in user interface design.source: reprinted from computer science and telecommunications board, nationalresearch council. 2000. making it better: expanding information technology research tomeet societyõs needs. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 7.box 5continuedinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology19as specific technologies that can be translated into new open standards.12a 2002 report, broadband: bringing home the bits, outlines an evenbroader role for federally funded research to enable openness ininfrastructural systems:support research and development on access technologies, especiallytargeting the needs of nonincumbent players and other areas that arenot targets of stable, private sector funding. . . . [one target area is]technologies that foster the accommodation of multiple competitive service providers over facilities. such open accessready systems might notbe a natural research and development target of large incumbent providers but will be the preferred form for a variety of public sector orpublicprivate deployments.13broadband: bringing home the bits notes that federally funded researchcan complement the more proprietaryoriented industry approaches toinnovation, whether in communications architecture or content. it alsobox 6the origins of electronic mail and instant messagingthe invention of timesharing systems in the 1960s not only contributed important technical developments in hardware, software, and system security but alsoprovided the environment that led to the development of the most useful and widespread of popular applications, namely, email and instant messaging (1).timesharing allowed concurrent multiple users to share the power of a computer, which provided a fresh way for colleagues to interact. by 1970, programmersin federally funded research laboratories had developed both asynchronous electronic mail and facilities for realtime interaction between users, in research operating systems such as tenex, multics, and caltss.these modalitiesñnow widely known as email and instant messagingñproved so powerful that they have spread far and wide with the availability of lowcost personal computers, public networking, and clientserver computing. thesepopular and visible tools, as well as all of the other forms of collaborative computing, have truly transformed our work and our lives. they owe their origins to thefunding of it research by the defense advanced research projects agency andthe national science foundation (1,3).12computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2001.the internetõs coming of age. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 18.13computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2002.broadband: bringing home the bits. national academy press, washington, d.c., p. 40.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20innovation in information technologycalls for the support of research on economic, social, and regulatory factors relating to broadband technologiesñnontechnical factors that interact with the design and deployment of broadband.university research and industrial r&dmuch of the governmentfunded research in it has been carried outat universities.14 federal support has constituted roughly 70 percent oftotal university research funding in computer science and electrical engineering since 1976 (2). among the many benefits of federally fundeduniversity research, the generation of new knowledge is only one (seebox7).strong research institutions are recognized as being among the mostcritical success factors in hightech economic development (5). in computing, electronics, telecommunications, and biotechnology, evidence ofthe correlation aboundsñin boston (harvard university and the massachusetts institute of technology); research triangle park (duke university, the university of north carolina, and north carolina state university); new jersey (princeton university, rutgers university, and newyork citybased columbia university); austin (the university of texas);southern california (the university of california at san diego, the university of california at los angeles, the california institute of technology, and the university of southern california); northern california (theuniversity of california at berkeley, the university of california at sanfrancisco, and stanford university); and seattle (the university of washington). in addition to creating ideas and companies, universities often import forefront technologies to their regions (e.g., the nationwide expansion of arpanet in the 1970s and of nsfnet in the 1980s, and the continuation of those efforts through the private internet2 activities in the1990s and early 2000s). universities also serve as powerful magnets forcompanies seeking to relocate. these contributions are not reflected infigure 1.figure 1 also does not capture the most important product of universities: people. the american research university is unique in the degreeto which it integrates research with educationñboth undergraduate andgraduate education. not only do graduating students serve to staff industry (5,6), but they also are by far the most effective vehicle for technol14the concentration of research in universities is particularly true for computer scienceresearch; industry played an important role in telecommunications research before thebreakup of at&t and the original bell labs.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology21box 7the diverse benefits of university researchuniversities have a number of important characteristics that contribute to theirsuccess as engines of innovation. among them are the following:¥universities can focus on longterm research. focusing on longterm research is the special role of universitiesñone that it companies cannot be expected to fill to any significant extent (13). americaõs it companies are extraordinarilyadept at improving current products, but the track record is at best mixed on theinvention and adoption of òdisruptive technologies,ó and corporate research in ithas been becoming more applied (2).¥universities provide a neutral ground for collaboration. universities encourage movement and collaboration among faculty through leave and sabbatical policies that allow professors to visit industry, government, and other university departments or laboratories. these uniquely valuable components of the r&dstructure in the united states are not generally present in industry. universitiesalso provide sites at which researchers from competing companies can come together to explore technical issues. at the same time that industry people sharetheir wisdom and experience with university researchers, they have the opportunity to learn from one another (2,6).¥universities integrate research and education. universities provide a forumfor educating the skilled it workers of the future (5). the presence of researchactivities in an educational setting creates very powerful synergy (2,4). it is arapidly changing field. many of the specific facts and techniques that a studentlearns become obsolete early in his or her career. the educational foundation forcontinuous learningñòkeeping up with the fieldóñis a crucial component of it education (5). students, even beginning undergraduates, get that education not onlyin the classroom, but also by serving as apprentices on leadingedge researchprojects, where knowledge is being discovered, not read from a book. often, newideas are a byproduct of what goes on in the classroom: in an attempt to explainthe solutions to emerging problems, teachers often deepen their own understanding, while discovering interesting research questions whose answers are as yetunknown. additionally, students are the most powerful vehicle for technologytransfer, not only from university to industry but also between university laboratories and departments, through the hiring of postdoctoral researchers and assistantprofessors (5).¥universities are inherently multidisciplinary. university researchers are wellsituated to draw on experts from a variety of other fields (2). there are oftencultural barriers to crossdisciplinary collaboration, but physical proximity and collegial values go a long way in enabling collaboration. the multidisciplinary natureof universities is of historic and growing importance to computer science, whichinterfaces with so many other fields.¥universities are òopen.ó this characteristic of universities, which is trueboth literally and figuratively, can pay enormous unanticipated dividends. chanceinteractions in an open environment can change the world; for example, whenmicrosoft founders paul allen and bill gates were students at seattleõs lakesideschool in the early 1970s, they were exposed to computing and computer scienceat the university of washington and a university spinoff company, computer center corporation.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22innovation in information technologyogy transfer (see box 7). federal support for university research drivesthis process (16). in top university computer science programs, over halfof all graduate students receive financial support from the federal government, mostly in the form of research assistantships. in addition, mostof the funding for research equipmentñthat is, research infrastructureñcomes from federal agencies. industry also contributes significantly toequipment but is usually attracted by existing research excellence andcollaborations. thus, by placing infrastructure in universities, the federalgovernment directly and indirectly makes possible handson learning experiences for countless young engineers and scientists, as well as enablinguniversity researchers to continue their work (16).hallmarks of federally sponsored it researchas discussed below, the hallmarks of federally sponsored it researchinclude scale, diversity, vision, and flexibility.1. federal programs have been effective in supporting the construction oflargescale systems and testbeds that have motivated research and demonstratedthe feasibility of new technological approaches (13).some research challenges are too large and require too much researchinfrastructure to be carried out by small, local research groups (6). in itresearch, as in other areas of scientific investigation, federal programshave played an important role in stimulating and supporting largescaleefforts. darpaõs decision to construct a packetswitched network (calledthe arpanet) to link computers at its many contractor sites prompteddiverse, highimpact research on networking protocols, the design ofpacket switches and routers, software structures for managing large networks (such as the domain name system), and applications (such asremote login, file transfer, and ultimately the web). moreover, by constructing a successful system, darpa demonstrated the value of largescale packetswitched networks, motivating subsequent deployment ofother networksñsuch as the nsfõs nsfnet, which ultimately served asthe foundation of the internetñand also a series of highspeed networking testbeds (1,3).much of the success of major systembuilding efforts derives fromtheir ability to bring together large groups of researchers from universities and industry that develop a common vocabulary, share ideas, andcreate a critical mass of people who subsequently extend the technology(2,6).innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology232. computing research has benefited from diverse modes of research sponsored by different federal agencies (13).funding for research in computing has been provided by variousfederal agenciesñmost notably darpa and nsf, but also including otherparts of the department of defense (dod) besides darpa, and otherfederal agencies such as nasa, doe, and the national institutes of health(nih; in particular through the national library of medicine). complementary investments have supported technology transfer to industry (e.g.,activities of the national institute of standards and technology, or nist).funding agencies have continually evolved in order to match their structures better to the needs of the research and policymaking communities(1). (see box 8.)in supporting research, these agencies pursue different objectives andemploy different mechanisms. in contrast to nsf, for exampleñwhichhas a mandate to support a very broad research agendañòmission agenciesó tend to focus on topics that appear to have the greatest relevance totheir specific missions. additionally, the early darpa programs choseto concentrate large research awards in socalled centers of excellence(many of which over time have matured into some of the nationõs leadinguniversity computer science programs), while nsf and the office of naval research have supported individual researchers at a more diverse setof institutions (1). nsf has been active in supporting educational andresearch needs more broadly, awarding graduate student fellowships andproviding funding for research equipment and infrastructure.cstb has recognized the effective leadership of nsf and darpa,calling on them to step up to larger roles (2; p. 11):the programs run by [nsf and darpa] should complement oneanother and should together [do the following]:¥support both theoretical and experimental work;¥offer awards in a variety of sizes (small, medium, and large) tosupport individual investigators, small teams of researchers, and largercollaborations;¥investigate a range of approaches to largescale systems problems,such as improved software design methodologies, system architecture,reusable code, and biological and economic models . . . ;¥attempt to address the full scope of largescale systems issues,including scalability, heterogeneity, trustworthiness, flexibility, and predictability; and¥give academic researchers some form of access to largescale systems for studying and demonstrating new approaches.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24innovation in information technologybox 8federal agency evolutionin response to proposals by vannevar bush and others for an organization tofund basic research, especially in universities, the u.s. congress established thenational science foundation (nsf) in 1950 (1). a few years earlier, the u.s. navyhad founded the office of naval research to draw on science and engineeringresources in the universities.in the early 1950s, during an intense phase of the cold war, the military services became the preeminent funders of computing and communications research.the soviet unionõs launching of sputnik in 1957 raised fears in congress and thecountry that the soviets had forged ahead of the united states in advanced technology. in response, the u.s. department of defense, pressured by the eisenhower administration, established the advanced research projects agency(arpa, now darpa) to fund technological projects with military implications. in1962 darpa created the information processing techniques office (ipto),whose initial research agenda gave priority to further development of computersfor commandandcontrol systems.with the passage of time, new organizations have emerged, and old ones haveoften been reformed or reinvented to respond to new national imperatives andcounter bureaucratic trends (2). darpaõs ipto has transformed itself severaltimes to bring greater coherence to its research efforts and to respond to technological developments and changes in perceived national needs for it.in 1967 nsf established the office of computing activities, and in 1986 itformed the computer and information science and engineering directorate toadvance and coordinate support for research, education, and infrastructure in computing (1). in the 1980s nsf, which customarily has focused on fundamentalresearch in universities, also began to encourage joint universityindustry researchcenters through its engineering research centers program (these centers focuson research and education in the context of longtimehorizon, complex engineering challenges1) and its science and technology center program (aimed at longterm research in areas that are new or that can bridge disciplines and/or institutions and sectors2).with the growth in the it sector and corresponding it development togetherwith the maturation of the field of computer science, more recent federal fundinghas been characterized by a series of multiagency, longterm, highrisk initiatives.the first was the high performance computing and communications initiative,which emerged in the late 1980s and broadened through the mid1990s (1,3). bythe late 1990s and the establishment of the multiagency information technologyfor the twentyfirst century initiative (in nsf, the information technology research initiative), social science researchñrelating it innovation to the peoplewho use itñwas an important complement to the science and technology research per se (3,8).1see <http://www.eng.nsf.gov/eec/erc.htm>. accessed june 2, 2003.2see <http://www.nsf.gov/od/oia/programs/stc/>. accessed june 2, 2003.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology25given the wide circle of agencies interested in and involved with itresearch and the even wider circle coming to depend on largescale itsystems, the nsf and darpa should attempt to involve in their research other federal agencies . . . that operate largescale it systems andwould benefit from advances in their design. such involvement couldprovide a means for researchers to gain access to operational systemsfor analytical and experimental purposes.the diversity of research funding objectives and program management styles offers many benefits (1,3). it helps ensure exploration of adiverse set of research topics and consideration of a range of applications.for example, darpa, nasa, and nih (in addition to nsf) have allsupported work in expert systems. however, because the systems havehad different applicationsñdecision aids for pilots, tools for determiningthe structure of molecules on other planets, and medical diagnosticsñeach agency has supported different groups of researchers who tried different approaches. and no oneõs judgment is infallible. if one agencydeclines to support a particular topic, researchers have other sources offunding.3. visionary program managers who were willing to take risks have been ahallmark of many of the highestimpact federal research initiatives (1,3).the program manager is responsible for initiating, funding, and overseeing research programs. the funding and management styles of program managers at darpa during the 1960s and 1970s, for example, reflected an ability to marry visions for technological progress with strongtechnical expertise and an understanding of the uncertainties of the research process (1,3). many of these program managers and programoffice directors were recruited from universities and industrial researchlaboratories for limited tours of duty and were themselves leadingresearchers. with close ties to the field, they were trusted byñandtrustedñthe research community. they tended to lay down broad guidelines for new research areas and to draw specific project proposals fromprincipal investigators. they were willing to place betsñto pursue highrisk/highgain projects.this style of funding and management allowed researchers room topursue new venues of inquiry. the funding style resulted in advances inareas as diverse as computer graphics, artificial intelligence, networking,and computer architecture. as that experience illustrates, because unanticipated outcomes of research are so valuable, federal mechanisms forfunding and managing research need to recognize the inherent uncertainties and build in enough flexibility to accommodate midcourse changes(1,3).innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26innovation in information technologylooking forwardfederal funding agencies will have to continue to adjust their strategies and tactics as national needs and imperatives change. today there isan escalation in concern about homeland security, the globalization ofindustry, a rise of commodity it products and an it mass market, thegrowing dependence of economic and social activity on networking anddistributed computing capabilities, and a variety of industry retrenchments. coevolution with industry thus means different things for federally funded computing research today than it did in the middle to latedecades of the 20th century.challenges as well as opportunities have grown: computer science isa larger field with more subdisciplines; telecommunications is increasingly intertwined with computing while evolving across multiple media;15 the interdisciplinary problems that engage computer science andtelecommunications are broaderranging; and the number of hard problemsñreflecting growth in scale, complexity, and interactions withpeopleñhas increased. evolving capabilities motivate a range of stretchgoals that can help realize the potential of information technology as ahuman enabler.16 examples include new forms of prosthetics (beginningwith systems that can hear, speak, or see as well as a person can) andbetter ways to observe or participate in activities from a distance (i.e.,telepresence).these circumstances imply that the challenge to federal research program managers has also grown. for example, while it is at the core of anumber of interdisciplinary programs (such as the multiagency digitallibraries initiative and nsfõs digital government and computing andsocial system programs), it takes more work to review proposals for interdisciplinary work and to assure its quality. it may thus be more important to engage itusing organizations in research projects, which mayinvolve more work for the researchers (2). the growth in opportunities atthe intersection of computing and biology, for example, or even computing and the artsñboth topics of cstb projects17ñsuggests new horizons15innovations are enhancing the potential of optical fiber, various forms of wireless, andeven older media, such as copper.16these and other problems were outlined by jim gray in his 1998 a.m. turing awardlecture. see jim gray. 1998. òwhatõs next? a few remaining problems in informationtechnology.ó available online at <http://research.microsoft.com/~gray/talks>. accessedjune 9, 2003.17the project on computing and the arts and design was completed in early 2003. seecomputer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2003. beyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativity. national academiespress, washington, d.c.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology27for it innovation that depend on the nurturing that is available throughuniversitybased research programs.the challenges confronting program managers underscore the needto attract talent from universities and industry to such public servicepositions. past advances fostered by federal funding leveraged theenergies and wisdom of people who went from universities and industryinto the government, for at least a limited period. it is ironic that theirsuccess has increased the incentives for researchers to stay in universitiesor to try their hand in industry instead of cultivating the field as programmanagers.government support for it research will also be shaped by categoriesof problems in which it has a special interest. the events of september 11,2001, remind us that computer and communications security, constrainedby market failure, has always depended on federal investments. but so,too, has research in humancomputer interaction, another arena in whichmarket forces have been limited (8) and where the rise of egovernmentreinforces longstanding government interest associated with its own applications.18 the postseptember 11 focus on homeland security andintelligence analysis also puts a spotlight on supercomputing architectures, numerical analysis, parallel programming languages and tools, andother areas in which it advances have flowed from scientific and engineering computing needs within the research community at largeñandin which purely commercial development was unlikely at best (1,3).the downturn in the telecommunications industry presents opportunities for the government to stimulate new directions through its supportfor research. we may see a consolidation and a loss of viable competition,or a realignment of the sector boundaries to better reflect economic realities. government funding, supporting the development of open standards, can help shape the structure of industry.19 given the òchickenandeggó tension shaping advances in infrastructure and applications,government support for exploration of new kinds of applications canhave great impact.20 the government can encourage competition by supporting the definition of critical interfaces and demonstrations of feasibil18computer science and telecommunications board, national research council. 2002.information technology research, innovation, and egovernment. national academy press,washington, d.c.19see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council,2001, the internetõs coming of age, national academy press, washington, d.c.; and computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 2002, broadband:bringing home the bits, national academy press, washington, d.c.20this was demonstrated by the evolution of the early internet and web, involving development and refinement of both the underlying infrastructure and a suite of compellinginnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28innovation in information technologyity for open standards, and it can demonstrate new architectures throughfield trials and testbeds. this role was critical in the emergence of theinternet, and the relevance and importance of this sort of leadership havenot waned.21more generally, the 20012002 downturn in the economy and the crisis in the telecommunications industry caused a reduction in investmentacross all of it. spending remained down in 2003, and internal investment has dropped accordingly. venture and equity capital has also become harder to obtain in the it industries. in times such as these, research, especially longerterm research, is an obvious target for costcutting. but if we as a nation do not continue to invest in the foundationsof innovation, we run the risk that when an improving economy justifiesan increase in investment, there may be few ideas in which to invest. forthat reason this time is especially important for governmentsponsoredresearch.todayõs research investments are essential to tomorrowõs world leadership in it. from its position of leadership todayñreinforced by anaggregation of universities, companies, government programs, and talentñthe united states is better positioned than other nations are to makethe most of nonappropriable research (and even appropriable research).properly managed, publicly funded research in it will continue to createimportant new technologies and industries, some of them unimaginedtoday. the process will continue to take 10 to 15 years from the inceptionof a new idea to the creation of a billiondollar industry. without continued federal investment in fundamental research there would still be innovation, but the quantity and range of new ideas for u.s. industry to drawfrom would be greatly diminishedñas would the flow of people eduapplications by researchers focused not only on it but also on other fields of science andengineering in which people used it. the internet probably could never have developedcommercially without this phase of governmentsupported experimentation and refinement coordinated between infrastucture and applications. for a discussion of new opportunities in the support of applications, see computer science and telecommunicationsboard, national research council, 2002, broadband: bringing home the bits, national academy press, washington, d.c.21for a discussion of the role of government in setting a vision, see computer scienceand telecommunications board, national research council, 1994, realizing the informationfuture: the internet and beyond, national academy press, washington, d.c. for a discussion of government leadership and the importance of government funding of research as apolicy tool, see computer science and telecommunications board, national research council, 1996, the unpredictable certainty: information infrastructure through 2000, national academy press, washington, d.c.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in information technology29cated at the forefront, the most important product of the nationõs researchuniversities (18).the lessons of history are clear, as many cstb studies in the pastdecade have shown, and many of those lessons are relevant to 21stcentury realities. a complex partnership among government, industry, anduniversities has made the united states the world leader in it, and information technology has become essential to our national security and economic and social wellbeing. turnofthecentury turmoil and structuralchanges in it industries have diminished their inherently limited capacity to support fundamental it research. the role of the federal government in sponsoring fundamental research in itñlargely universitybasedñhas been and will continue to be essential.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.302excerpts from earlier cstb reportsthis section contains excerpts from three cstb reports:¥making it better: expanding information technology research to meetsocietyõs needs (2000),¥funding a revolution: government support for computing research(1999), and¥evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure (1995).while this synthesis report is based on all the cstb reports listed inbox 1 in the òsummary and recommendations,ó the excerpts from thesethree reports are the most general and broad. to keep this report to areasonable length, nothing was excerpted from the other five reports.readers are encouraged to read all eight reports, which can be foundonline at <http://www.nap.edu>.for the sake of simplicity and organizational clarity, footnotes andreference citations appearing in the original texts have been omitted fromthe reprinted material that follows. a bar in the margins beside the excerpted material is used to indicate that it is extracted text. section headsshow the topics addressed.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports31making it better: expanding information technologyresearch to meet societyõs needs (2000)citation: computer science and telecommunications board (cstb),national research council. 2000. making it better: expanding informationtechnology research to meet societyõs needs. national academy press,washington, d.c.the many faces of information technology research(from pp. 2326): it research takes many forms. it consists of boththeoretical and experimental work, and it combines elements of scienceand engineering. some it research lays out principles or constraints thatapply to all computing and communications systems; examples includetheorems that show the limitations of computation (what can and cannotbe computed by a digital computer within a reasonable time) or the fundamental limits on capacities of communications channels. other researchinvestigates different classes of it systems, such as user interfaces, theweb, or electronic mail (email). still other research deals with issues ofbroad applicability driven by specific needs. for example, todayõs highlevel programming languages (such as java and c) were made possibleby research that uncovered techniques for converting the highlevel statements into machine code for execution on a computer. the design of thelanguages themselves is a research topic: how best to capture aprogrammerõs intentions in a way that can be converted to efficient machine code. efforts to solve this problem, as is often the case in it research,will require invention and design as well as the classical scientific techniques of analysis and measurement. the same is true of efforts to develop specific and practical modulation and coding algorithms that approach the fundamental limits of communication on some channels. therise of digital communication, associated with computer technology, hasled to the irreversible melding of what were once the separate fields ofcommunications and computers, with data forming an increasing share ofwhat is being transmitted over the digitally modulated fiberoptic cablesspanning the nation and the world.experimental work plays an important role in it research. one modality of research is the design experiment, in which a new technique isproposed, a provisional design is posited, and a research prototype isbuilt in order to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the design.although much of the effect of a design can be anticipated using analytictechniques, many of its subtle aspects are uncovered only when the prototype is studied. some of the most important strides in it have been madethrough such experimental research. timesharing, for example, evolvedinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32innovation in information technologyin a series of experimental systems that explored different parts of thetechnology. how are a computerõs resources to be shared among severalcustomers? how do we ensure equitable sharing of resources? how dowe insulate each userõs program from the programs of others? what resources should be shared as a convenience to the customers (e.g., computer files)? how can the system be designed so itõs easy to write computer programs that can be timeshared? what kinds of commands does auser need to learn to operate the system? although some of these tradeoffs may succumb to analysis, othersñnotably those involving the userõsevaluation and preferencesñcan be evaluated only through experiment.ideas for it research can be gleaned both from the research community itself and from applications of it systems. the web, initiated byphysicists to support collaboration among researchers, illustrates howpeople who use it can be the source of important innovations. the webwas not invented from scratch; rather, it integrated developments in information retrieval, networking, and software that had been accumulating over decades in many segments of the it research community. it alsoreflects a fundamental body of technology that is conducive to innovationand change. thus, it advanced the integration of computing, communications, and information. the web also embodies the need for additionalscience and technology to accommodate the burgeoning scale and diversity of it users and uses: it became a catalyst for the internet by enhancingthe ease of use and usefulness of the internet, it has grown and evolvedfar beyond the expectations of its inventors, and it has stimulated newlines of research aimed at improving and better using the internet innumerous arenas, from education to crisis management.progress in it can come from research in many different disciplines.for example, work on the physics of silicon can be considered it researchif it is driven by problems related to computer chips; the work of electricalengineers is considered it research if it focuses on communications orsemiconductor devices; anthropologists and other social scientists studying the uses of new technology can be doing it research if their workinforms the development and deployment of new it applications; andcomputer scientists and computer engineers address a widening range ofissues, from generating fundamental principles for the behavior of information in systems to developing new concepts for systems. thus, it research combines science and engineering, even though the popularñandeven professionalñassociation of it with systems leads many people toconcentrate on the engineering aspects. fine distinctions between the science and engineering aspects may be unproductive: computer science isspecial because of how it combines the two, and the evolution of both iskey to the wellbeing of it research.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports33implications for the research enterprise(from pp. 4243): the trends in it suggest that the nation needs toreinvent it research and develop new structures to support, conduct, andmanage it. . . .as it permeates many more realworld applications, additional constituencies need to be brought into the research process as both fundersand performers of it research. this is necessary not only to broaden thefunding base to include those who directly benefit from the fruits of theresearch, but also to obtain input and guidance. an understanding ofbusiness practices and processes is needed to support the evolution of ecommerce; insight from the social sciences is needed to build it systemsthat are truly userfriendly and that help people work better together. noone truly understands where new applications such as ecommerce, electronic publishing, or electronic collaboration are headed, but businessdevelopment and research together can promote their arrival at desirabledestinations.many challenges will require the participation and insight of the enduser and the service provider communities. they have a large stake inseeing these problems addressed, and they stand to benefit most directlyfrom the solutions. similarly, systems integrators would benefit from animproved understanding of systems and applications because they wouldbecome more competitive in the marketplace and be better able to meettheir estimates of project cost and time. unlike vendors of componenttechnologies, systems integrators and end users deal with entire information systems and therefore have unique perspectives on the problemsencountered in developing systems and the feasibility of proposed solutions. many of the enduser organizations, however, have no tradition ofconducting it researchñor technological research of any kind, in factñand they are not necessarily capable of doing so effectively; they dependon vendors for their technology. even so, their involvement in the research process is critical. vendors of equipment and software have neither the requisite experience and expertise nor the financial incentives toinvest heavily in research on the challenges facing enduser organizations, especially the challenges associated with the social applications ofit. of course, they listen to their customers as they refine their productsand strategies, but those interactions are superficial compared with thedemands of the new systems and applications. finding suitable mechanisms for the participation of end users and service providers, and engaging them productively, will be a big challenge for the future of it research.past attempts at publicprivate partnerships, as in the emerging arenaof critical infrastructure protection, show it is not so easy to get the publicinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34innovation in information technologyand private sectors to interact for the purpose of improving the researchbase and implementation of systems: the federal government has a responsibility to address the public interest in critical infrastructure,whereas the private sector owns and develops that infrastructure, andconflicting objectives and time horizons have confounded joint exploration. as a user of it, the government could play an important role.whereas historically it had limited and often separate programs to support research and acquire systems for its own use, the government is nowbecoming a consumer of it on a very large scale. just as it and the widespread access to it provided by the web have enabled businesses to reinvent themselves, it could dramatically improve operations and reducethe costs of applications in public health, air traffic control, and socialsecurity; government agencies, like privatesector organizations, are turning increasingly to commercial, offtheshelf technology.universities will play a critical role in expanding the it researchagenda. the university setting continues to be the most hospitable forhigherrisk research projects in which the outcomes are very uncertain.universities can play an important role in establishing new research programs for largescale systems and social applications, assuming that theycan overcome longstanding institutional and cultural barriers to theneeded crossdisciplinary research. preserving the university as a base forresearch and the education that goes with it would ensure a workforcecapable of designing, developing, and operating increasingly sophisticated it systems. a booming it marketplace and the lure of large salariesin industry heighten the impact of federal funding decisions on the individual decisions that shape the university environment: as the key fundersof university research, federal programs send important signals to facultyand students.the current concerns in it differ from the competitiveness concernsof the 1980s: the allpervasiveness of it in everyday life raises new questions of how to get from here to thereñhow to realize the exciting possibilities, not merely how to get there first. a vital and relevant it researchprogram is more important than ever, given the complexity of the issuesat hand and the need to provide solid underpinnings for the rapidlychanging it marketplace.(from p. 93): several underlying trends could ultimately limit thenationõs innovative capacity and hinder its ability to deploy the kinds ofit systems that could best meet personal, business, and governmentneeds. first, expenditures on research by companies that develop it goodsand services and by the federal government have not kept pace with theexpanding array of it. the disincentives to longterm, fundamental research have become more numerous, especially in the private sector,innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports35which seems more able to lure talent from universities than the other wayaround. second, and perhaps most significantly, it research investmentscontinue to be directed at improving the performance of it components,with limited attention to systems issues and applicationdriven needs.neither industry nor academia has kept pace with the problems posed bythe largescale it systems used in a range of social and business contextsñproblems that require fundamental research. . . . new mechanismsmay be needed to direct resources to these growing problem areas.(from pp. 69): neither largescale systems nor social applications ofit are adequately addressed by the it research community today. most itresearch is directed toward the components of it systems: the microprocessors, computers, and networking technologies that are assembled intolarge systems, as well as the software that enables the components towork together. this research nurtures the essence of it, and continuedwork is needed in all these areas. but component research needs to beviewed as part of a much larger portfolio, in which it is complemented byresearch aimed directly at improving largescale systems and the socialapplications of it. the last of these includes some work (such as computersupported cooperative work and humancomputer interaction) traditionally viewed as within the purview of computer science. research inall three areasñcomponents, systems, and social applicationsñwill makeit systems better able to meet societyõs needs, just as in the medical domain work is needed in biology, physiology, clinical medicine, and epidemiology to make the nationõs population healthier.research on largescale systems and the social applications of it willrequire new modes of funding and performing research that can bringtogether a broad set of it researchers, end users, system integrators, andsocial scientists to enhance the understanding of operational systems.research in these areas demands that researchers have access to operational largescale systems or to testbeds that can mimic the performanceof much larger systems. it requires additional funding to support sizableprojects that allow multiple investigators to experiment with large itsystems and develop suitable testbeds and simulations for evaluatingnew approaches and that engage an unusually diverse range of parties.research by individual investigators will not, by itself, suffice to makeprogress on these difficult problems.today, most it research fails to incorporate the diversity of perspectives needed to ensure advances on largescale systems and social applications. within industry, it is conducted largely by vendors of it components: companies like ibm, microsoft, and lucent technologies. few ofthe companies that are engaged in providing it services, in integratinglargescale systems (e.g., andersen consulting [now accenture], eds, orinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36innovation in information technologylockheed martin), or in developing enterprise software (e.g., oracle, sap,peoplesoft) have significant research programs. nor do enduser organizations (e.g., users in banking, commerce, education, health care, andmanufacturing) tend to support research on it, despite their increasingreliance on it and their stake in the way it systems are molded. likewise,there is little academic research on largescale systems or social applications. within the it sector, systems research has tended to focus on improving the performance and lowering the costs of it systems rather thanon improving their reliability, flexibility, or scalability (although systemsresearch is slated to receive more attention in new funding programs).social applications present an even greater opportunity and have thepotential to leverage research in humancomputer interaction, using it tobetter understand how it can support the work of individuals, groups,and organizations. success in this area hinges on interdisciplinaryresearch, which is already being carried out on a small scale.one reason more work has not been undertaken in these areas is lackof sufficient funding. more fundamentally, the problems evident todaydid not reach critical proportions until recently. . . . from a practicalperspective, conducting the types of research advocated here is difficult.significant cultural gaps exist between researchers in different disciplinesand between it researchers and the end users of it systems.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports37funding a revolution: government support forcomputing research (1999)citation: computer science and telecommunications board (cstb),national research council. 1999. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. national academy press, washington, d.c.(from p. 1): the computer revolution is not simply a technical change;it is a sociotechnical revolution comparable to an industrial revolution.the british industrial revolution of the late 18th century not only broughtwith it steam and factories, but also ushered in a modern era characterized by the rise of industrial cities, a politically powerful urban middleclass, and a new working class. so, too, the sociotechnical aspects of thecomputer revolution are now becoming clear. millions of workers areflocking to computingrelated industries. firms producing microprocessors and software are challenging the economic power of firms manufacturing automobiles and producing oil. detroit is no longer the symboliccenter of the u.s. industrial empire; silicon valley now conjures up visions of enormous entrepreneurial vigor. men in boardrooms and grayflannel suits are giving way to the casually dressed young founders ofstartup computer and internet companies. many of these entrepreneurshad their early handson computer experience as graduate students conducting federally funded university research.as the computer revolution continues and private companies increasingly fund innovative activities, the federal government continues to playa major role, especially by funding research. given the successful historyof federal involvement, several questions arise: are there lessons to bedrawn from past successes that can inform future policy making in thisarea? what future roles might the government play in sustaining theinformation revolution and helping to initiate other technological developments?lessons from history(from pp. 513): why has federal support been so effective in stimulating innovation in computing? although much has depended on theunique characteristics of individual research programs and their participants, several common factors have played an important part. primaryamong them is that federal support for research has tended to complement,rather than preempt, industry investments in research. effective federalresearch has concentrated on work that industry has limited incentive topursue: longterm, fundamental research; large systembuilding effortsthat require the talents of diverse communities of scientists and engiinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38innovation in information technologyneers; and work that might displace existing, entrenched technologies.furthermore, successful federal programs have tended to be organized inways that accommodate the uncertainties in scientific and technologicalresearch. support for computing research has come from a diversity offunding agencies; program managers have formulated projects broadlywhere possible, modifying them in response to preliminary results; andprojects have fostered productive collaboration between universities andindustry. the lessons below expand on these factors. the first three lessons address the complementary nature of government and industrysponsored research; the final four highlight elements of the organizational structure and management of effective federally funded researchprograms. . . .1. government supports longrange, fundamental research thatindustry cannot sustain.federally funded programs have been successful in supporting longterm research into fundamental aspects of computing, such as computergraphics and artificial intelligence, whose practical benefits often takeyears to demonstrate. work on speech recognition, for example, whichwas begun in the early 1970s (some started even earlier), took until 1997to generate a successful product for enabling personal computers to recognize continuous speech. similarly, fundamental algorithms for shadingthreedimensional graphics images, which were developed with defensefunding in the 1960s, entered consumer products only in the 1990s, thoughthey were available in higherperformance machines much earlier. thesealgorithms are now used in a range of products in the health care, entertainment, and defense industries.industry does fund some longrange work, but the benefits of fundamental research are generally too distant and too uncertain to receivesignificant industry support. moreover, the results of such work are generally so broad that it is difficult for any one firm to capture them for itsown benefit and also prevent competitors from doing so. . . . not surprisingly, companies that have tended to support the most fundamental research have been those, like at&t corporation and ibm corporation,that are large and have enjoyed a dominant position in their respectivemarkets. as the computing industry has become more competitive, eventhese firms have begun to link their research more closely with corporateobjectives and product development activities. companies that have become more dominant, such as microsoft corporation and intel corporation, have increased their support for fundamental research.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports392. government supports large systembuilding efforts that haveadvanced technology and created large communities of researchers.in addition to funding longterm fundamental research, federal programs have been effective in supporting the construction of large systemsthat have both motivated research and demonstrated the feasibility ofnew technological approaches. the defense advanced research projectsagencyõs (darpaõs) decision to construct a packetswitched network(called the arpanet) to link computers at its many contractor sitesprompted considerable research on networking protocols and the designof packet switches and routers. it also led to the development of structures for managing large networks, such as the domain name system, anddevelopment of useful applications, such as email. moreover, by constructing a successful system, darpa demonstrated the value of largescale packetswitched networks, motivating subsequent deployment ofother networks, like the national science foundationõs nsfnet, whichformed the basis of the internet.efforts to build large systems demonstrate that, especially in computing, innovation does not flow simply and directly from research, throughdevelopment, to deployment. development often precedes research, andresearch rationalizes, or explains, technology developed earlier throughexperimentation. hence attempts to build large systems can identify newproblems that need to be solved. electronic telecommunications systemswere in use long before claude shannon developed modern communications theory in the late 1940s, and the engineers who developed the firstpacket switches for routing messages through the arpanet advancedempirically beyond theory. building large systems generated questionsfor research, and the answers, in turn, facilitated more development.much of the success of major systembuilding efforts derives fromtheir ability to bring together large groups of researchers from academiaand industry who develop a common vocabulary, share ideas, and createa critical mass of people who subsequently extend the technology. examples include the arpanet and the development of the air forceõssemiautomatic ground environment (sage) project in the 1950s. involving researchers from mit, ibm, and other research laboratories, thesage project sparked innovations ranging from realtime computing tocore memories that found widespread acceptance throughout the computer industry. many of the pioneers in computing learned throughhandson experimentation with sage in the 1950s and early 1960s. theysubsequently staffed the companies and laboratories of the nascent computing and communications revolution. the impact of sage was feltover the course of several decades.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40innovation in information technology3. federal research funding has expanded on earlier industrial research.in several cases, federal research funding has been important in advancing a technology to the point of commercialization after it was firstexplored in an industrial research laboratory. for example, ibm pioneeredthe concept of relational databases but did not commercialize the technology because of its perceived potential to compete with moreestablishedibm products. national science foundation (nsf)sponsored research atucberkeley allowed continued exploration of this concept and broughtthe technology to the point that it could be commercialized by severalstartup companiesñand moreestablished database companies (including ibm). this pattern was also evident in the development of reducedinstruction set computing (risc). though developed at ibm, risc wasnot commercialized until darpa funded additional research at ucberkeley and stanford university as part of its very large scale integratedcircuit (vlsi) program of the late 1970s and early 1980s. a variety ofcompanies subsequently brought riscbased products to the marketplace, including ibm, the hewlettpackard company, the newly formedsun microsystems, inc., and another startup, mips computer systems.for both relational databases and vlsi, federal funding helped create acommunity of researchers who validated and improved on the initialwork. they rapidly diffused the technology throughout the community,leading to greater competition and more rapid commercialization.4. computing research has benefited from diverse sources ofgovernment support.research in computing has been supported by multiple federal agencies, including the department of defense (dod)ñmost notably the defense advanced research projects agency and the military servicesñthenational science foundation, national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), department of energy (doe), and national institutes ofhealth (nih). each has its own mission and means of supporting research. darpa has tended to concentrate large research grants in socalled centers of excellence, many of which over time have matured intosome of the countryõs leading academic computer departments. the office of naval research (onr) and nsf, in contrast, have supported individual researchers at a more diverse set of institutions. they have awardednumerous peerreview grants to individual researchers, especially in universities. nsf has also been active in supporting educational and researchneeds more broadly, awarding graduate student fellowships and providing funding for research equipment and infrastructure. each of these organizations employs a different set of mechanisms to support research,innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports41from fundamental research to missionoriented research and development projects, to procurement of hardware and software.such diversity offers many benefits. it not only provides researcherswith many potential sources of support, but also helps ensure explorationof a diverse set of research topics and consideration of a range of applications. darpa, nasa, and nih have all supported work in expert systems, for example, but because the systems have had different applicationsñdecision aids for pilots, tools for determining the structure ofmolecules on other planets, and medical diagnosticsñeach agency hassupported different groups of researchers who tried different approaches.perhaps more importantly, no single approach to investing in research is by itself a sufficient means of stimulating innovation; each playsa role in the larger system of innovation. different approaches work inconcert, ensuring continued support for research areas as they passthrough subsequent stages of development. organizations such as nsfand onr often funded seed work in areas that darpa, with its largercontract awards, later magnified and expanded. darpaõs project mac,which gave momentum to timeshared computing in the 1960s, for example, built on earlier nsfsponsored work on mitõs compatible timesharing system. conversely, nsf has provided continued support forprojects that darpa pioneered but was unwilling to sustain after themajor research challenges were resolved. for example, nsf funds themetal oxide semiconductor implementation service (mosis)ña systemdeveloped at xerox parc and institutionalized by darpa that providesuniversity researchers with access to fastturnaround semiconductormanufacturing services. once established, this program no longermatched darpaõs mission to develop leadingedge technologies, but itdid match nsfõs mission to support university education and researchinfrastructure. similarly, nsf built on darpaõs pioneering research onpacketswitched networks to construct the nsfnet, a precursor to todayõsinternet.5. strong program managers and flexible management structures haveenhanced the effectiveness of computing research.research in computing, as in other fields, is a highly unpredictableendeavor. the results of research are not evident at the start, and theirmost important contributions often differ from those originally envisioned. few expected that the navyõs attempt to build a programmableaircraft simulator in the late 1940s would result in the development of thefirst realtime digital computer (the whirlwind); nor could darpa program managers have anticipated that their early experiments on packetswitching would evolve into the internet and later the world wide web.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42innovation in information technologythe potential for unanticipated outcomes of research has two implications for federal policy. first, it suggests that measuring the results offederally funded research programs is extremely difficult. projects thatappear to have failed often make significant contributions to later technology development or achieve other objectives not originally envisioned.furthermore, research creates many intangible products, such as knowledge and educated researchers whose value is hard to quantify. second, itimplies that federal mechanisms for funding and managing research needto recognize the uncertainties inherent in computing research and to buildin sufficient flexibility to accommodate midcourse changes and respondto unanticipated results.a key element in agenciesõ ability to maintain flexibility in the pasthas been their program managers, who have responsibility for initiating,funding, and overseeing research programs. the funding and management styles of program managers at darpa during the 1960s and 1970s,for example, reflected an ability to marry visions for technologicalprogress with strong technical expertise and an understanding of theuncertainties of the research process. many of these program managersand office directors were recruited from academic and industry researchlaboratories for limited tours of duty. they tended to lay down broadguidelines for new research areas and to draw specific project proposalsfrom principal investigators, or researchers, in academic computer centers. this style of funding and management resulted in the governmentstimulating innovation with a light touch, allowing researchers room topursue new avenues of inquiry. in turn, it helped attract topnotch program managers to federal agencies. with close ties to the field and itsleading researchers, they were trusted byñand trusted inñthe researchcommunity.this funding style resulted in great advances in areas as diverse ascomputer graphics, artificial intelligence, networking, and computer architectures. although mechanisms are clearly needed to ensure accountability and oversight in governmentsponsored research, history demonstrates the benefits of instilling these values in program managers andproviding them adequate support to pursue promising research directions.6. collaboration between industry and university researchers hasfacilitated the commercialization of computing research andmaintained its relevance.innovation in computing requires the combined talents of universityand industry researchers. bringing them together has helped ensure thatindustry taps into new academic research and that university researchersinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports43understand the challenges facing industry. such collaboration also helpsfacilitate the commercialization of technology developed in a universitysetting. all of the areas described in this reportõs case studiesñrelationaldatabases, the internet, theoretical computer science, artificial intelligence,and virtual realityñinvolved university and industry participants. otherprojects examined, such as sage, project mac, and very large scale integrated circuits, demonstrate the same phenomenon.collaboration between industry and universities can take manyforms. some projects combine researchers from both sectors on the sameproject team. other projects involve a transition from academic researchlaboratories to industry (via either the licensing of key patents or thecreation of new startup companies) once the technology matures sufficiently. as the case studies demonstrate, effective linkages between industry and universities tended to emerge from projects, rather than being thrust upon them. project teams assembled to build large systemsincluded the range of skills needed for a particular project. universityresearchers often sought out productive avenues for transferring researchresults to industry, whether linking with existing companies or startingnew ones. such techniques have often been more effective than explicitattempts to encourage collaboration, many of which have foundered dueto the often conflicting time horizons of university and industry researchers.7. organizational innovation and adaptation are necessary elementsof federal research support.over time, new government organizations have formed to supportcomputing research, and organizations have continually evolved in orderto better match their structure to the needs of the research and policymaking communities. in response to proposals by vannevar bush andothers that the country needed an organization to fund basic research,especially in the universities, for example, congress established the national science foundation in 1950. a few years earlier, the navy foundedthe office of naval research to draw on science and engineering resourcesin the universities. in the early 1950s during an intense phase of the coldwar, the military services became the preeminent funders of computingand communications. the soviet unionõs launching of sputnik in 1957raised fears in congress and the country that the soviets had forged aheadof the united states in advanced technology. in response, the u.s. department of defense, pressured by the eisenhower administration, establishedthe advanced research projects agency (arpa, now darpa) to fundtechnological projects with military implications. in 1962 darpa createdthe information processing techniques office (ipto), whose initial reinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44innovation in information technologysearch agenda gave priority to further development of computers forcommandandcontrol systems.with the passage of time, new organizations have emerged, and oldones have often been reformed or reinvented to respond to new nationalimperatives and counter bureaucratic trends. darpaõs ipto has transformed itself several times to bring greater coherence to its research efforts and to respond to technological developments. nsf in 1967 established the office of computing activities and in 1986 formed thecomputer and information sciences and engineering (cise) directorateto couple and coordinate support for research, education, and infrastructure in computer science. in the 1980s nsf, which customarily has focused on basic research in universities, also began to encourage jointacademicindustrial research centers through its engineering researchcenters program. with the relative increase in industrial support of research and development in recent years, federal agencies such as nsfhave rationalized their funding policies to complement shortterm industrial r&d. federal funding of longterm, highrisk initiatives continues tohave a high priority.as this history suggests, federal funding agencies will need to continue to adjust their strategies and tactics as national needs and imperatives change. the cold war imperative shaped technological history during much of the last halfcentury. international competitiveness served asa driver of government funding of computing and communications during the late 1980s and early 1990s. with the end of the cold war and theglobalization of industry, the u.s. computing industries need to maintaintheir high rates of innovation, and federal structures for managing computing research may need to change to ensure that they are appropriatefor this new environment.sources of u.s. success(from pp. 2728): that the united states should be the leading country in computing and communications was not preordained. early in theindustryõs formation, the united kingdom was a serious competitor. theunited kingdom was the home of the difference engine and later theanalytical engine, both of which were programmable mechanical devicesdesigned and partially constructed by charles babbage and ada, countess of lovelace, in the 19th century. basic theoretical work defining auniversal computer was the contribution of alan turing in cambridgejust before the start of world war ii. the english defense industryñwithalan turingõs participationñconceived and constructed vacuum tubecomputers able to break the german military code. both machines andtheir accomplishments were kept secret, much like the efforts and sucinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports45cesses of the national security agency in this country. after the war,english universities constructed research computers and developed computer concepts that later found significant use in u.s. products. othereuropean countries, germany and france in particular, also made effortsto gain a foothold in this new technology.how then did the united states become a leader in computing? theanswer is manifold, and a number of external factors clearly played a role.the state of europe, england in particular, at the end of world war iiplayed a decisive role, as rebuilding a country and industry is a moredifficult task than shifting from a war economy to a consumer economy.the movement of people among universities, industry, and governmentlaboratories at the end of world war ii in the united kingdom and theunited states also contributed by spreading the experience gained duringthe war, especially regarding electronics and computing. american students and scholars who were studying in england as fulbright scholarsin the 1950s learned of the computer developments that had occurredduring the war and that were continuing to advance.industrial prowess also played a role. after world war ii, u.s. firmsmoved quickly to build an industrial base for computing. ibm andremington rand recognized quite early that electronic computers were athreat to their conventional electromechanical punchedcard business andlaunched early endeavors into computing. . . . over time, fierce competition and expectations of rapid market growth brought billions in venturemoney to the industryõs inventors and caused a flowering of small hightech innovators. rapid expansion of the u.s. marketplace for computingequipment created buyers for new computing equipment. the rapid postworld war ii expansion of civilianoriented industries and financialsources created new demands for data and data processing. insurancecompanies and banks were at the forefront of installing early computersin their operations. new companies, such as engineering research associates, datamatic, and eckertmauchly, as well as established companiesin the data processing field, such as ibm and sperry rand, saw an opportunity for new products and new markets. the combination of new companies and established ones was a powerful force. it generated fiercecompetition and provided substantial capital funds.these factors helped the nation gain an early lead in computing that ithas maintained. while firms from other nations have made inroads intocomputing technologyñfrom memory chips to supercomputersñu.s.firms have continued to dominate both domestic and international markets in most product categories. this success reflects the strength of thenationõs innovation system in computing technology, which has continually developed, marketed, and supported new products, processes, andservices.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46innovation in information technologyresearch and technological innovation(from pp. 2831): innovation is generally defined as the process ofdeveloping and putting into practice new products, processes, or services. it draws upon a range of activities, including research, productdevelopment, manufacturing, and marketing. although often viewed asa linear, sequential process, innovation is usually more complicated, withmany interactions among the different activities and considerable feedback. it can be motivated by new research advances or by recognition of anew market need. government, universities, and industry all play a rolein the innovation process.research is a vital part of innovation in computing. in dollar terms,research is just a small part of the innovation process, representing lessthan onefifth of the cost of developing and introducing new products inthe united states, with preparation of product specifications, prototypedevelopment, tooling and equipment, manufacturing startup, and marketing startup comprising the remainder. indeed, computer manufacturers allocated an average of just 20 percent of their research and development budgets to research between 1976 and 1995, with the balancesupporting product development. even in the largest computer manufacturers, such as ibm, research costs are only about 1 to 2 percent of totaloperating expenses. nevertheless, research plays a critical role in the innovation process, providing a base of scientific and technological knowledge that can be used to develop new products, processes, and services.this knowledge is used at many points in the innovation processñgenerating ideas for new products, processes, or services; solving particularproblems in product development or manufacturing; or improving existing products, for example. . . .traditionally, research expenditures have been characterized as either basic or applied. the term òbasic researchó is used to describe workthat is exploratory in nature, addressing fundamental scientific questionsfor which ready answers are lacking; the term òapplied researchó describes activities aimed at exploring phenomena necessary for determining the means by which a recognized need may be met. these terms, atbest, distinguish between the motivations of researchers and the mannerin which inquiries are conducted, and they are limited in their ability todescribe the nature of scientific and technological research. recent workhas suggested that the definition of basic research be expanded to includeexplicitly both basic scientific research and basic technological research.this definition recognizes the value of exploratory research into basictechnological phenomena that can be used in a variety of products. examples include research on the blue laser, exploration of biosensors, andmuch of the fundamental work in computer engineering.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports47(from pp. 2123): clearly, the future of computing will differ from thehistory of computing because both the technology and environmentalfactors have changed. attempts by companies to align their research activities more closely with product development processes have influencedthe role they may play in the innovation process. as the computing industry has grown and the technology has diffused more widely throughout society, government has continued to represent a proportionallysmaller portion of the industry.the benefits of public support of research(from pp. 4647): the development of scientific and technologicalknowledge is a cumulative process, one that depends on the prompt disclosure of new findings so that they can be tested and, if confirmed,integrated with other bodies of reliable knowledge. in this way openscience promotes the rapid generation of further discoveries and inventions, as well as wider practical exploitation of additions to the stock ofknowledge.the economic case for public funding of what is commonly referredto as basic research rests mainly on that insight, and on the observationthat business firms are bound to be considerably discouraged by thegreater uncertainties surrounding investment in fundamental, exploratoryinquiries (compared to commercially targeted r&d), as well as by thedifficulties of forecasting when and how such outlays will generate asatisfactory rate of return.the proposition at issue here is quantitative, not qualitative. onecannot adequately answer the question òwill there be enough?ó merelyby saying, òthere will be some.ó economists do not claim that withoutpublic patronage (or intellectual property protection), basic research willcease entirely. rather, their analysis holds that there will not be enoughbasic researchñnot as much as would be carried out were individualbusinesses (like society as a whole) able to anticipate capturing all thebenefits of this form of investment. therefore, no conflict exists betweenthis theoretical analysis and the observation that r&dintensive companies do indeed fund some exploratory research into fundamental questions. their motives for this range from developing a capability to monitor progress at the frontiers of science, to identifying ideas for potentiallines of innovation that may be emerging from the research of others, tobeing better positioned to penetrate the secrets of their rivalsõ technological practices.nevertheless, funding research is a longterm strategy, and thereforesensitive to commercial pressures to shift research resources toward advancing existing product development and improving existing processes,innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48innovation in information technologyrather than searching for future technological options. large organizations that are less asset constrained, and of course the public sector, arebetter able to take on the job of pushing the frontiers of science and technology. considerations of these kinds are important in addressing theissue of how to find the optimal balance for the national research effortbetween secrecy and disclosure of scientific and engineering information,as well as in trying to adjust the mix of exploratory and applicationsdriven projects in the national research portfolio.(from p. 137): quantifying the benefits of federal research support isa difficult, if not impossible, task for several reasons. first, the output ofresearch is often intangible. most of the benefit takes the form of newknowledge that subsequently may be instantiated in new hardware, software, or systems, but is itself difficult to measure. at other times, thebenefits take the form of educated people who bring new ideas or a freshperspective to an organization. second, the delays between the time aresearch program is conducted and the time the products incorporatingthe research results are sold make measurement even more difficult. often, the delays run into decades, making it difficult to tell midcourse howeffective a particular program has been. third, the benefits of a particularresearch program may not become visible until other technological advances are made. for example, advances in computer graphics did nothave widespread effect until suitable hardware was more broadly available for producing threedimensional graphical images. finally, projectsthat are perceived as failures often provide valuable lessons that can guideor improve future research. even if they fail to reach their original objectives, research projects can make lasting contributions to the knowledgebase.maintaining university research capabilities(from pp. 139140): federal funding has . . . maintained universityresearch capabilities in computing. universities depend largely on federalsupport for research programs in computer science and electrical engineering, the two academic disciplines most closely aligned with computing and communications. since 1973, federal agencies have providedroughly 70 percent of all funding for university research in computerscience. in electrical engineering, federal funding has declined from itspeak of 75 percent of total university research support in the early 1970s,but still represented 65 percent of such funding in 1995. additional support has come in the form of research equipment. universities need accessto stateoftheart equipment in order to conduct research and train students. although industry contributes some equipment, funding for uniinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports49versity research equipment has come largely from federal sources sincethe 1960s. between 1981 and 1995, the federal government provided between 59 and 76 percent of annual research equipment expenditures incomputer science and between 64 and 83 percent of annual research equipment expenditures in electrical engineering. such investments havehelped ensure that researchers have access to modern computing facilities and have enabled them to further expand the capabilities of computing and communications systems.universities play an important role in the innovation process. theytend to concentrate on research with broad applicability across companies and product lines and to share new knowledge openly. because theyare not usually subject to commercial pressures, university researchersoften have greater ability than their industrial counterparts to exploreideas with uncertain longterm payoffs. although it would be difficult todetermine how much university research contributes directly to industrial innovation, it is telling that each of the case studies and other majorexamples examined in [the source] reportñrelational databases, theinternet, theoretical computer science, artificial intelligence, virtualreality, sage, computer timesharing, very large scale integrated circuits,and the personal computerñinvolved the participation of universityresearchers. universities play an especially effective role in disseminating new knowledge by promoting open publication of research results.they have also served as a training ground for students who have takennew ideas with them to existing companies or started their own companies. diffusion of knowledge about relational databases, for instance, wasaccelerated by researchers at the university of california at berkeley whopublished the source code for their ingres system and made it availablefree of charge. several of the lead researchers in this project establishedcompanies to commercialize the technology or brought it back to existingfirms where they championed its use.creating human resources(from pp. 140141): in addition to supporting the creation of newtechnology, federal funding for research has also helped create the human resources that have driven the computer revolution. many industryresearchers and research managers claim that the most valuable result ofuniversity research programs is educated studentsñby and large, an outcome enabled by federal support of university research. federal supportfor university research in computer science grew from $65 million to $350million between 1976 and 1995, while federal support for university research in electrical engineering grew from $74 million to $177 million (inconstant 1995 dollars). much of this funding was used to support graduinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50innovation in information technologyate students. especially at the nationõs top research universities, the studies of a large percentage of graduate students have been supported byfederal research contracts. graduates of these programs, and faculty researchers who received federal funding, have gone on to form a numberof companies, including sun microsystems, inc. (which grew out of research conducted by forest baskett and andy bechtolsheim with sponsorship from darpa) and digital equipment corporation (founded byken olsen, who participated in the sage project). graduates also staffacademic faculties that continue to conduct research and educate futuregenerations of researchers.furthermore, the availability of federal research funding has enabledthe growth and expansion of computer science and computer engineeringdepartments at u.s. universities, which increased in number from 6 in1965 to 56 in 1975 and to 148 in 1995. the number of graduate students incomputer science also grew dramatically, expanding more than 40foldfrom 257 in 1966 to 11,500 in 1995, with the number of ph.d. degreesawarded in computer science increasing from 19 in 1966 to over 900 in1995. even with this growth in ph.d. production, demand for computingresearchers still outstrips the supply in both industry and academia.beyond supporting student education and training, federal fundinghas also been important in creating networks of researchers in particularfieldsñdeveloping communities of researchers who could share ideasand build on each otherõs strengths. despite its defense orientation,darpa historically encouraged open dissemination of the results of sponsored research, as did other federal agencies. in addition, darpa andother federal agencies funded large projects with multiple participantsfrom different organizations. these projects helped create entire communities of researchers who continued to refine, adopt, and diffuse newtechnology throughout the broader computing research community. development of the internet demonstrates the benefits of this approach: byfunding groups of researchers in an open environment, darpa createdan entire community of users who had a common understanding of thetechnology, adopted a common set of standards, and encouraged theiruse broadly. early users of the arpanet created a critical mass of peoplewho helped to disseminate the technology, giving the internet protocolan important early lead over competing approaches to packet switching.the organization of federal support: a historical review(from pp. 8586): rather than a single, overarching framework ofsupport, federal funding for research in computing has been managed bya set of agencies and offices that carry the legacies of the historical periodsin which they were created. crises such as world war ii, korea, sputnik,innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports51vietnam, the oil shocks, and concerns over national competitiveness haveall instigated new modes of government support. los alamos nationallaboratory, for example, a leader in supercomputing, was created by themanhattan project and became part of the department of energy. theoffice of naval research and the national science foundation emergedin the wake of world war ii to continue the successful contributions ofwartime science. the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa) and the national aeronautics and space administration(nasa) are products of the cold war, created in response to the launchof sputnik to regain the nationõs technological leadership. the nationalbureau of standards, an older agency, was transformed into the nationalinstitute of standards and technology in response to . . . concerns aboutnational competitiveness. each organizationõs style, mission, and importance have changed over time; yet each organization profoundly reflectsthe process of its development, and the overall landscape is the result ofnumerous layers of history.understanding these layers is crucial for discussing the role of thefederal government in computing research. [the following sectionsbriefly set] out a history of the federal governmentõs programmatic involvement in computing research since 1945, distinguishing the variouslayers in the historical eras in which they were first formed. the objectiveis to identify the changing role the government has played in these different historical periods, discuss the changing political and technologicalenvironment in which federal organizations have acted, and draw attention to the multiplicity, diversity, and flexibility of publicsector programsthat have stimulated and underwritten the continuing stream of u.s. research in computing and communications since world war ii. in fulfilling this charge, [the following text] reviews a number of prominent federal research programs that exerted profound influence on the evolvingcomputing industry. these programs are illustrative of the effects of federal funding on the industry at different times. other programs, too numerous to describe here, undoubtedly played key roles in the history ofthe computing industry but are not considered here.19451960: era of government computers(from pp. 8687): in late 1945, just a few weeks after atomic bombsended world war ii and thrust the world into the nuclear age, digitalelectronic computers began to whir. the eniac (electronic numericalintegrator and computer), built at the university of pennsylvania andfunded by the army ballistics research laboratory, was americaõs firstsuch machine. the following 15 years saw electronic computing growfrom a laboratory technology into a routine, useful one. computing hardinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52innovation in information technologyware moved from the ungainly and delicate world of vacuum tubes andpaper tape to the reliable and efficient world of transistors and magneticstorage. the 1950s saw the development of key technical underpinningsfor widespread computing: cheap and reliable transistors available inlarge quantities, rotating magnetic drum and disk storage, magnetic corememory, and beginning work in semiconductor packaging and miniaturization, particularly for missiles. in telecommunications, american telephone and telegraph (at&t) introduced nationwide dialing and the firstelectronic switching systems at the end of the decade. a fledgling commercial computer industry emerged, led by international business machines (ibm) (which built its electronic computer capability internally)and remington rand (later sperry rand), which purchased eckertmauchly computer corporation in 1950 and engineering research associates in 1952. other important participants included bendix, burroughs,general electric (ge), honeywell, philco, raytheon, and radio corporation of america (rca).in computing, the technical cutting edge, however, was usuallypushed forward in government facilities, at governmentfunded researchcenters, or at private contractors doing government work. governmentfunding accounted for roughly threequarters of the total computer field.a survey performed by the army ballistics research laboratory in 1957,1959, and 1961 lists every electronic storedprogram computer in use inthe country (the very possibility of compiling such a list says a great dealabout the community of computing at the time). the surveys reveal thelarge proportion of machines in use for government purposes, either byfederal contractors or in government facilities.the governmentõs early role(from pp. 8788): before 1960, governmentñas a funder and as acustomerñdominated electronic computing. federal support had nobroad, coherent approach, however, arising somewhat ad hoc in individual federal agencies. the period was one of experimentation, bothwith the technology itself and with diverse mechanisms for federal support. from the panoply of solutions, distinct successes and failures can bediscerned, from both scientific and economic points of view. after 1960,computing was more prominently recognized as an issue for federalpolicy. the national science foundation and the national academy ofsciences issued surveys and reports on the field.if government was the main driver for computing research and development (r&d) during this period, the main driver for governmentwas the defense needs of the cold war. events such as the explosion of asoviet atomic bomb in 1949 and the korean war in the 1950s heightenedinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports53international tensions and called for critical defense applications, especially commandandcontrol and weapons design. it is worth noting, however, that such forces did not exert a strong influence on telecommunications, an area in which most r&d was performed within at&t for civilianpurposes. longdistance transmission remained analog, although digitalsystems were in development at at&tõs bell laboratories. still, the newlyemergent field of semiconductors was largely supported by defense in itsearly years. during the 1950s, the department of defense (dod) supported about 25 percent of transistor research at bell laboratories.however much the cold war generated computer funding, duringthe 1950s dollars and scale remained relatively small compared to otherfields, such as aerospace applications, missile programs, and the navyõspolaris program (although many of these programs had significant computing components, especially for operations research and advanced management techniques). by 1950, government investment in computingamounted to $15 million to $20 million per year.all of the major computer companies during the 1950s had significantcomponents of their r&d supported by government contracts of sometype. at ibm, for example, federal contracts supported more than half ofthe r&d and about 35 percent of r&d as late as 1963 (only in the late1960s did this proportion of support trail off significantly, although absolute amounts still increased). the federal government supported projectsand ideas the private sector would not fund, either for national security,to build up human capital, or to explore the capabilities of a complex,expensive technology whose longterm impact and use was uncertain.many federally supported projects put in place prototype hardware onwhich researchers could do exploratory work.establishment of organizations(from pp. 8895): the successful development projects of world warii, particularly radar and the atomic bomb, left policymakers asking howto maintain the technological momentum in peacetime. numerous newgovernment organizations arose, attempting to sustain the creative atmosphere of the famous wartime research projects and to enhance nationalleadership in science and technology. despite vannevar bushõs efforts toestablish a new national research foundation to support research in thenationõs universities, political difficulties prevented the bill from passinguntil 1950, and the national science foundation (nsf) did not become asignificant player in computing until later in that decade. during the 15years immediately after world war ii, research in computing and communications was supported by mission agencies of the federal government, such as dod, the department of energy (doe), and nasa. ininnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54innovation in information technologyretrospect, it seems that the nation was experimenting with different models for supporting this intriguing new technology that required a subtlemix of scientific and engineering skill.military research officescontinuity in basic science was provided primarily by the office ofnaval research (onr), created in 1946 explicitly to perpetuate the contributions scientists made to military problems during world war ii. incomputing, the agency took a variety of approaches simultaneously. first,it supported basic intellectual and mathematical work, particularly innumerical analysis. these projects proved instrumental in establishing asound mathematical basis for computer design and computer processing.second, onr supported intellectual infrastructure in the infant field ofcomputing, sponsoring conferences and publications for information dissemination. members of onr participated in founding the associationfor computing machinery in 1947.onrõs third approach to computing was to sponsor machine designand construction. it ordered a computer for missile testing through thenational bureau of standards from raytheon, which became known asthe raydac machine, installed in 1952. onr supported whirlwind, mitõsfirst digital computer and progenitor of realtime commandandcontrolsystems. john von neumann built a machine with support from onr andother agencies at princetonõs institute for advanced study, known as theias computer. the project produced significant advances in computerarchitecture, and the design was widely copied by both government andindustrial organizations.other military services created offices on a model similar to that ofonr. the air force office of scientific research was established in 1950to manage u.s. air force r&d activities. similarly, the u.s. army established the army research office to manage and promote army programsin science and technology.national bureau of standardsarising out of its role as arbiter of weights and measures, the national bureau of standards (nbs) had long had its own laboratories andtechnical expertise and had long served as a technical advisor to othergovernment agencies. in the immediate postwar years, nbs sought toexpand its advisory role and help u.s. industry develop wartime technology for commercial purposes. nbs, through its national applied mathematics laboratory, acted as a kind of expert agent for other governmentagencies, selecting suppliers and overseeing construction and delivery ofinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports55new computers. for example, nbs contracted for the three initial univacmachinesñthe first commercial, electronic, digital, storedprogram computersñone for the census bureau and two for the air materiel command.nbs also got into the business of building machines. when the univacorder was plagued by technical delays, nbs built its own computer inhouse. the standards eastern automatic computer (seac) was built forthe air force and dedicated in 1950, the first operational, electronic,storedprogram computer in this country. nbs built a similar machine,the standards western automatic computer (swac) for the navy on thewest coast. numerous problems were run on seac, and the computeralso served as a central facility for diffusing expertise in programming toother government agencies. despite this significant hardware, however,nbsõs bid to be a government center for computing expertise ended in themid1950s. caught up in postwar debates over science policy and a controversy over battery additives, nbs research funding was radically reduced, and nbs lost its momentum in the field of computing.atomic energy commissionnuclear weapons design and research have from the beginning provided impetus to advances in largescale computation. the first atomicbombs were designed only with desktop calculators and punchedcardequipment, but continued work on nuclear weapons provided some ofthe earliest applications for the new electronic machines as they evolved.the first computation job run on the eniac in 1945 was an early calculation for the hydrogen bomb project òsuper.ó in the late 1940s, the losalamos national laboratory built its own computer, maniac, based onvon neumannõs design for the institute for advanced study computer atprinceton, and the atomic energy commission (aec) funded similarmachines at argonne national laboratory and oak ridge national laboratory.in addition to building their own computers, the aec laboratorieswere significant customers for supercomputers. the demand created byaec laboratories for computing power provided companies with an incentive to design more powerful computers with new designs. in theearly 1950s, ibm built its 701, the defense calculator, partly with theassurance that los alamos and livermore would each buy at least one. in1955, the aec laboratory at livermore, california, commissionedremington rand to design and build the livermore automatic researchcomputer (larc), the first supercomputer. the mere specification forlarc advanced the state of the art, as the bidding competition requiredthe use of transistors instead of vacuum tubes. ibm developed improvedinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56innovation in information technologyferritecore memories and supercomputer designs with funding from thenational security agency, and designed and built the stretchsupercomputer for the los alamos scientific laboratory, beginning it in1956 and installing it in 1961. seven more stretch supercomputers werebuilt. half of the stretch supercomputers sold were used for nuclearweapon research and design.the aec continued to specify and buy newer and fastersupercomputers, including the control data 6600, the star 100, and thecray 1 (although developed without aec funds), practically ensuring amarket for continued advancements. aec and doe laboratories alsodeveloped much of the software used in highperformance computingincluding operating systems, numerical analysis software, and matrixevaluation routines. in addition to stimulating r&d in industry, the aeclaboratories also developed a large talent pool on which the computerindustry and academia could draw. in fact, the head of ibmõs appliedscience department, cuthbert hurd, came directly to ibm in 1949 fromthe aecõs oak ridge national laboratory. physicists worked on nationalsecurity problems with government support providing demand, specifications, and technical input, as well as dollars, for industry to make significant advances in computing technology.private organizationsnot all the new organizations created by the government to supportcomputing were public. a number of new private organizations alsosprang up with innovative new charters and government encouragementthat held prospects of initial funding support. in 1956, at the request of theair force, the massachusetts institute of technology (mit) created projectlincoln, now known as the lincoln laboratory, with a broad charter tostudy problems in air defense to protect the nation from nuclear attack.the lincoln laboratory then oversaw the construction of the semiautomatic ground environment (sage) airdefense system. in 1946, the airforce and douglas aircraft created a joint venture, project rand, tostudy intercontinental warfare. in the following year rand separatedfrom douglas and became the independent, nonprofit rand corporation.rand worked only for the air force until 1956, when it began todiversify to other defense and defenserelated contractors, such as theadvanced research projects agency and the atomic energy commission, and provided, for a time, what one researcher called òin some sensethe worldõs largest installation for scientific computing [in 1950].ó randspecialized in developing computer systems, such as the johnniac, basedon the ias computer, which made rand the logical source for the proinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports57gramming on sage. while working on sage, rand trained hundredsof programmers, eventually leading to the spinoff of randõs systemsdevelopment division and systems training program into the systemsdevelopment corporation. computers made a major impact on the systems analysis and game theoretic approaches that rand and other similar think tanks used in attempts to model nuclear and conventionalwarfighting strategies.engineering research associates (era) represented yet another formof government support: the private contractor growing out of a singlegovernment agency. with era, the navy effectively privatized its wartime cryptography organization and was able to maintain civilian expertise through the radical postwar demobilization. era was founded in st.paul, minnesota, in january 1946 by two engineers who had done cryptography for the navy and their business partners. the navy moved itsnaval computing machine laboratory from dayton to st. paul, and eraessentially became the laboratory. era did some research, but it primarily worked on taskoriented, costplus contracts. as one participant recalled, òit was not a university atmosphere. it was ôbuild stuff. make itwork. how do you package it? how do you fix it? how do you documentit?õó era built a community of engineering skill, which became thefoundation of the minnesota computer industry. in 1951, for example, thecompany hired seymour cray for his first job out of the university ofminnesota.as noted earlier, the rand corporation had contracted in 1955 towrite much of the software for sage owing to its earlier experience in airdefense and its large pool of programmers. by 1956, the systems trainingprogram of the rand corporation, the division assigned to sage, waslarger than the rest of the corporation combined, and it spun off into thenonprofit systems development corporation (sdc). sdc played a significant role in computer training. as described by one of the participants,òpart of sdcõs nonprofit role was to be a university for programmers.hence our policy in those days was not to oppose the recruiting of ourpersonnel and not to match higher salary offers with an sdc raise.ó by1963, sdc had trained more than 10,000 employees in the field of computer systems. of those, 6,000 had moved to other businesses across thecountry.observations(from pp. 9596): in retrospect, the 1950s appear to have been a period of institutional and technological experimentation. this diversity ofapproaches, while it brought the field and the industry from virtuallynothing to a tentative stability, was open to criticisms of waste, duplicainnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58innovation in information technologytion of effort, and ineffectiveness caused by rivalries among organizationsand their funding sources. the field was also driven largely by the needsof government agencies, with relatively little input from computeroriented scientists at the highest levels. criticism remained muted duringthe decade when the military imperatives of the cold war seemed todominate all others, but one event late in the decade opened the entiresystem of federal research support to scrutiny: the launch of sputnik in1957. attacks mounted that the system of r&d needed to be changed, andthey came not only from the press and the politicians but also from scientists themselves.19601970: supporting a continuing revolution(from p. 96): several significant events occurred to mark a transitionfrom the infancy of information technology to a period of diffusion andgrowth. most important of these was the launching of sputnik in 1957,which sent convulsions through the u.s. science and engineering worldand redoubled efforts to develop new technology. president eisenhowerelevated scientists and engineers to the highest levels of policy making.thus was inaugurated what some have called the golden age of u.s.research policy. government support for information technology took offin the 1960s and assumed its modern form. the kennedy administrationbrought a spirit of technocratic reform to the pentagon and the introduction of systems analysis and computerbased management to all aspectsof running the military. many of the visions that set the research agendasfor the following 15 years (and whose influence remains today) were setin the early years of the decade.maturing of a commercial industry(from pp. 9697): perhaps most important, the early 1960s can bedefined as the time when the commercial computer industry became significant on its own, independent of government funding and procurement. computerized reservation systems began to proliferate, particularly the ibm/american airlines sabre system, based in part on priorexperience with military commandandcontrol systems (such as sage).the introduction of the ibm system/360 in 1964 solidified computer applications in business, and the industry itself, as significant componentsof the economy.this newly vital industry, dominated by òsnow whiteó (ibm) and theòseven dwarfsó (burroughs, control data, ge, honeywell, ncr, rca,and sperry rand), came to have several effects on governmentsupportedr&d. first, and most obvious, some companies (mostly ibm) becameinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports59large enough to conduct their own inhouse research. ibmõs thomas j.watson research center was dedicated in 1961. its director, emanuelpiore, was recruited from onr, and he emphasized basic research. suchlaboratories not only expanded the pool of researchers in computing andcommunications but also supplied a source of applied research that allowed or, conversely, pushed federal support to focus increasingly on thelongestterm, riskiest ideas and on problems unique to government. second, the industry became a growing employer of computer professionals,providing impetus to educational programs at universities and makingcomputer science and engineering increasingly attractive career paths totalented young people.these years saw turning points in telecommunications as well. in1962, at&t launched the first active communications satellite, telstar,which transmitted the first satelliterelay telephone call and the first livetransatlantic television signal. that same year, a lessnoticed but equallysignificant event occurred when at&t installed the first commercial digitaltransmission system. twentyfour digital speech channels were timemultiplexed onto a repeatered digital transmission line operating at 1.5megabits per second. in 1963, the first stored program control electronicswitching system was placed into service, inaugurating the use of digitalcomputer technology for mainstream switching.the 1960s also saw the emergence of the field called computer science, and several important university departments were founded duringthe decade, at stanford and carnegie mellon in 1965 and at mit in 1968.hardware platforms had stabilized enough to support a community ofresearchers who attacked a common set of problems. new languagesproliferated, often initiated by government and buoyed by the needs ofcommercial industry. the navy had sponsored grace hopper and othersduring the 1950s to develop automatic programming techniques that became the first compilers. john backus and a group at ibm developedfortran, which was distributed to ibm users in 1957. a team led byjohn mccarthy at mit (with government support) began implementinglisp in 1958, and the language became widely used, particularly for artificial intelligence programming, in the early 1960s. in 1959, the pentagonbegan convening a group of computer experts from government,academia, and industry to define common business languages for computers. the group published a specification in 1959, and by 1960 rca andremington rand univac had produced the first cobol compilers. bythe beginning of the 1960s, a number of computer languages, standardacross numerous hardware platforms, were beginning to define programming as a task, as a profession, and as a challenging and legitimate subjectof intellectual inquiry.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60innovation in information technologythe changing federal role(from pp. 98107): the forces driving government support changedduring the 1960s. the cold war remained a paramount concern, but to itwere added the difficult conflict in vietnam, the great society programs,and the apollo program, inaugurated by president kennedyõs 1961 challenge. new political goals, new technologies, and new missions provokedchanges in the federal agency population. among these, two agenciesbecame particularly important in computing: the new advanced researchprojects agency and the national science foundation.the advanced research projects agencythe founding of the advanced research projects agency (arpa) in1958, a direct outgrowth of the sputnik scare, had immeasurable impacton computing and communications. arpa, specifically charged with preventing technological surprises like sputnik, began conducting longrange, highrisk research. it was originally conceived as the dodõs ownspace agency, reporting directly to the secretary of defense in order toavoid interservice rivalry. space, like computing, did not seem to fit intothe existing military service structure. arpaõs independent status notonly insulated it from established service interests but also tended tofoster radical ideas and keep the agency tuned to basic research questions: when the agencysupported work became too much like systemsdevelopment, it ran the risk of treading on the territory of a specific service.arpaõs status as the dod space agency did not last long. soon afternasaõs creation in 1958, arpa retained essentially no role as a spaceagency. arpa instead focused its energies on ballistic missile defense,nuclear test detection, propellants, and materials. it also established acritical organizational infrastructure and management style: a small, highquality managerial staff, supported by scientists and engineers on rotation from industry and academia, successfully employing existing dodlaboratories and contracting procedures (rather than creating its own research facilities) to build solid programs in new, complex fields. arpaalso emerged as an agency extremely sensitive to the personality andvision of its director.arpaõs decline as a space agency raised questions about its role andcharacter. a new director, jack ruina, answered the questions in no uncertain terms by cementing the agencyõs reputation as an elite, scientifically respected institution devoted to basic, longterm research projects.ruina, arpaõs first scientistdirector, took office at the same time askennedy and mcnamara in 1961, and brought a similar spirit to theinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports61agency. ruina decentralized management at arpa and began the tradition of relying heavily on independent office directors and program managers to run research programs. ruina also valued scientific and technicalmerit above immediate relevance to the military. ruina believed both ofthese characteristicsñindependence and intellectual qualityñwere critical to attracting the best people, both to arpa as an organization and toarpasponsored research. interestingly, arpaõs managerial success didnot rely on innovative managerial techniques per se (such as the computerized project scheduling typical of the navyõs polaris project) but ratheron the creative use of existing mechanisms such as ònoyear money,óunsolicited proposals, solesource procurement, and multiyear forwardfunding.arpa and information technology. from the point of view of computing, the most important event at arpa in the early 1960s, indeed in all ofarpaõs history, was the establishment of the information processingtechniques office, ipto, in 1962. the impetus for this move came fromseveral directions, including kennedyõs call a year earlier for improvements in commandandcontrol systems to make them òmore flexible,more selective, more deliberate, better protected, and under ultimate civilian authority at all times.ó computing as applied to command andcontrol was the ideal arpa programñit had no clearly established service affinity; it was òa new area with relatively little established serviceinterest and entailed far less constraint on arpaõs freedom of action,óthan more familiar technologies. ruina established ipto to be devotednot to command and control but to the more fundamental problems incomputing that would, eventually, contribute solutions.consistent with his philosophy of strong, independent, and scientificoffice managers, ruina appointed j.c.r. licklider to head ipto. theharvardtrained psychologist came to arpa in october 1962, primarilyto run its command and control group. licklider split that group intotwo disciplineoriented offices: behavioral sciences office and ipto.licklider had had extensive exposure to the computer research of the timeand had clearly defined his own vision of òmancomputer symbiosis,ówhich he had published in a landmark paper of 1960 by the same name.he saw humancomputer interaction as the key, not only to commandand control, but also to bringing together the thendisparate techniques ofelectronic computing to form a unified science of computers as tools foraugmenting human thought and creativity. licklider formed ipto in thisimage, working largely independently of any direction from ruina, whospent the majority of his time on higherprofile and higherfunded missiledefense issues. lickliderõs timing was opportune: the 1950s had produceda stable technology of digital computer hardware, and the big systemsinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62innovation in information technologyprojects had shown that programming these machines was a difficult butinteresting problem in its own right. now the pertinent questions concerned how to use òthis tremendous power . . . for other than purelynumerical scientific calculations.ó licklider not only brought this visionto ipto itself, but he also promoted it with missionary zeal to the researchcommunity at large. lickliderõs and iptoõs success derived in large partfrom their skills at òselling the visionó in addition to òbuying the research.óanother remarkable feature of ipto, particularly during the 1960s,was its ability to maintain the coherent vision over a long period of time;the office director was able to handpick his successor. licklider choseivan sutherland, a dynamic young researcher he had encountered as agraduate student at mit and the lincoln laboratory, to succeed him in1964. sutherland carried on lickliderõs basic ideas and made his ownimpact by emphasizing computer graphics. sutherlandõs own successor,robert taylor, came in 1966 from a job as a program officer at nasa andrecalled, òi became heartily subscribed to the licklider vision of interactive computing.ó while at ipto, taylor emphasized networking. the lastipto director of the 1960s, lawrence roberts, came, like sutherland, frommit and lincoln laboratory, where he had worked on the early transistorized computers and had conducted arpa research in both graphicsand communications.during the 1960s, arpa and ipto had more effect on the science andtechnology of computing than any other single government agency, sometimes raising concern that the research agenda for computing was beingdirected by military needs. iptoõs sheer size, $15 million in 1965, dwarfedother agencies such as onr. still, it is important to note, onr and arpaworked closely together; onr would often let small contracts to researchers and serve as a talent agent for arpa, which would then fund promising projects at larger scale. arpa combined the best features of existingmilitary research support with a new, lean administrative structure andinnovative management style to fund highrisk projects consistently. theagency had the freedom to administer large block grants as well as multipleyear contracts, allowing it the luxury of a longterm vision to fostertechnologies, disciplines, and institutions. further, the national defensemotivation allowed ipto to concentrate its resources on centers of scientific and engineering excellence (such as mit, carnegie mellon university, and stanford university) without regard for geographical distribution questions with which nsf had to be concerned. such an approachhelped to create universitybased research groups with the critical massand stability of funding needed to create significant advances in particular technical areas. but although it trained generations of young researchers in those areas, arpaõs funding style did little to help them pursue theinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports63same lines of work at other universities. as an indirect and possibly unintended consequence, the research approaches and tools and the generictechnologies developed under arpaõs patronage were disseminatedmore rapidly and widely, and so came to be applied in new nonmilitarycontexts by the young m.s. and ph.d. graduates who had been trained inthat environment but could not expect to make their research careerswithin it.arpaõs management style. to evaluate research proposals, ipto did notemploy the peerreview process like nsf, but rather relied on internalreviews and the discretion of program managers as did onr. these program managers, working under office managers such as licklider,sutherland, taylor, and roberts, came to have enormous influence overtheir areas of responsibility and became familiar with the entire field bothpersonally and intellectually. they had the freedom and the resources toshape multiple r&d contracts into a larger vision and to stimulate newareas of inquiry. the education, recruiting, and responsibilities of theseprogram managers thus became a critical parameter in the character andsuccess of arpa programs. arpa frequently chose people who had training and research experience in the fields they would fund, and thus whohad insight and opinions on where those fields should go.to have such effects, the program managers were given enough fundsto let a large enough number of contracts and to shape a coherent researchprogram, with minimal responsibilities for managing staffs. program budgets usually required only two levels of approval above the programmanager: the director of ipto and the director of arpa. one ipto member described what he called òthe joy of arpa. . . . you know, if a program manager has a good idea, he has got two people to convince thatthat is a good idea before the guy goes to work. he has got the director ofhis office and the director of arpa, and that is it. it is such a short chainof command.ópart of arpaõs philosophy involved aiming at radical change ratherthan incremental improvement. as robert taylor put it, for example,incremental innovation would be taken care of by the services and theircontractors, but, arpaõs aim was òan order of magnitude difference.óarpa identified good ideas and magnified them. this strategy often necessitated funding large, grouporiented projects and institutions ratherthan individuals. taylor recalled, òi donõt remember a single case wherewe ever funded a single individualõs work. . . . the individual researcherwho is just looking for support for his own individual work could [potentially] find many homes to support that work. so we tended not to fundthose, because we felt that they were already pretty well covered. instead,we funded larger groupsñteams.ó nsfõs peerreview process workedinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64innovation in information technologywell for individual projects, but was not likely to support large, teamoriented research projects. nor did it, at this point in history, supportentire institutions and research centers, like the laboratory for computerscience at mit. iptoõs style meshed with its emphasis on humanmachine interaction, which it saw as fundamentally a systems problem andhence fundamentally team oriented. in taylorõs view, the university reward structure was much more oriented toward individual projects, soòsystems research is most difficult to fund and manage in a university.óthis philosophy was apparent in arpaõs support of project mac, anmitled effort on timeshared computing. . . .arpa, with its clearly defined mission to support dod technology,could also afford to be elitist in a way that nsf, with a broader charter tosupport the countryõs scientific research, could not. òarpa had no commitment, for example, to take geography into consideration when itfunded work.ó another important feature of arpaõs multiyear contractswas their stability, which proved critical for graduate students who couldrely on funding to get them through their ph.d. program. arpa also paidparticular attention to building communities of researchers and disseminating the results of its research, even beyond traditional publications.ipto would hold annual meetings for its contract researchers at whichresults would be presented and debated. these meetings proved effectivenot only at advancing the research itself but also at providing valuablefeedback for the program managers and helping to forge relationshipsbetween researchers in related areas. similar conferences were convenedfor graduate students only, thus building a longerterm community ofresearchers. arpa also put significant effort into getting the results of itsresearch programs commercialized so that dod could benefit from thedevelopment and expansion of a commercial industry for informationtechnology. arpa sponsored conferences that brought together researchers and managers from academia and industry on topics such as timesharing, for example.much has been made of arpaõs management style, but it would be amistake to conclude that management per se provided the keys to theagencyõs successes in computing. the key point about the style, in fact,was its light touch. red tape was kept to a minimum, and project proposals were turned around quickly, frequently into multipleyear contracts.typical dod research contracts involved close monitoring and carefuladherence to requirements and specifications. arpa avoided this approach by hiring technically educated program managers who had continuing research interests in the fields they were managing. this realitycounters the myth that government bureaucrats heavyhandedly selectedr&d problems and managed the grants and contracts. especially duringthe 1960s and 1970s, program managers and office directors were notinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports65bureaucrats but were usually academics on a 2year tour of duty. theysaw arpa as a pulpit from which to preach their visions, with money tohelp them realize those visions. the entire system displayed something ofa selforganizing, selfmanaging nature. as ivan sutherland recalled,ògood research comes from the researchers themselves rather than fromthe outside.ónational science foundationwhile arpa was focusing on large projects and systems, the national science foundation played a large role in legitimizing basic computer science research as an academic discipline and in funding individual researchers at a wide range of institutions. its programs incomputing have evolved considerably since its founding in 1950, but havetended to balance support for research, education, and computing infrastructure. although early programs tended to focus on the use of computing in other academic disciplines, nsf subsequently emerged as the leading federal funder of basic research in computer science.nsf was formed before computing became a clearly defined researcharea, and it established divisions for chemistry, physics, and biology, butnot computing. nsf did provide support for computing in its early years,but this support derived more from a desire to promote computerrelatedactivities in other disciplines than to expand computer science as a discipline, and as such was weighted toward support for computing infrastructure. for example, nsf poured millions of dollars into universitycomputing centers so that researchers in other disciplines, such as physicsand chemistry, could have access to computing power. nsf noted thatlittle computing power was available to researchers at american universities who were not involved in defenserelated research and that òmanyscientists feel strongly that further progress in their field will be seriouslyaffected by lack of access to the techniques and facilities of electroniccomputation.ó as a result, nsf began supporting computing centers atuniversities in 1956 and, in 1959, allocated a budget specifically for computer equipment purchases. recognizing that computing technology wasexpensive, became obsolete rapidly, and entailed significant costs for ongoing support, nsf decided that it would, in effect, pay for americancampuses to enter the computer age. in 1962, it established its first officedevoted to computing, the program for computers and computing sciencewithin the mathematical sciences division. by 1970, the institutionalcomputing services (or facilities) program had obligated $66 million touniversity computing centers across the country. nsf intended that useof the new facilities would result in trained personnel to fulfill increasingneeds for computer proficiency in industry, government, and academia.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66innovation in information technologynsf provided some funding for computerrelated research in its earlyyears. originally, such funding came out of the mathematics division inthe 1950s and grew out of an interest in numerical analysis. by 1955, nsfbegan to fund basic research in computer science theory with its firstgrants for the research of recursion theory and one grant to develop ananalytical computer program under the mathematical sciences program.although these projects constituted less than 10 percent of the mathematics budget, they resulted in significant research.in 1967, nsf united all the facets of its computing support into asingle office, the office of computing activities (oca). the new officeincorporated elements from the directorates of mathematics and engineering and from the facilities program, unifying nsfõs research andinfrastructure efforts in computing. it also incorporated an educationalelement that was intended to help meet the radically increasing demandfor instruction in computer science. the oca was headed by miltonrose, the former head of the mathematical sciences section, and reporteddirectly to the director of nsf.originally, the ocaõs main focus was improving university computing services. in 1967, $11.3 million of the officeõs $12.8 million total budgetwent toward institutional support. because not all universities were largeenough to support their own computing centers but would benefit fromaccess to computing time at other universities, the oca also began tosupport regional networks linking many universities together. in 1968,the oca spent $5.3 million, or 18.6 percent of its budget, to provide linksbetween computers in the same geographic region. in the 1970s, thecomputer center projects were canceled, however, in favor of shiftingemphasis toward education and research.beginning in 1968, through the education and training program, theoca began funding the inauguration of universitylevel computer science programs. nsf funded several conferences and studies to developcomputer science curricula. the education and training program obligated $12.3 million between 1968 and 1970 for training, curricula development, and support of computerassisted instruction.although the majority of the ocaõs funding was spent on infrastructure and education, the office also supported a broad range of basic computer science research programs. these included compiler and languagedevelopment, theoretical computer science, computation theory, numerical analysis, and algorithms. the computer systems design program concentrated on computer architecture and systems analysis. other programsfocused on topics in artificial intelligence, including pattern recognitionand automatic theory proving.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports6719701990: retrenching and international competition(from p. 107): despite previous successes, the 1970s opened withcomputing at a critical but fragile point. although produced by a largeand established industry, commercial computers remained the expensive,relatively esoteric tools of large corporations, research institutions, andgovernment. computing had not yet made its way to the common user,much less the man in the street. this movement would begin in the mid1970s with the introduction of the microprocessor and then unfold in the1980s with even greater drama and force. if the era before 1960 was one ofexperimentation and the 1960s one of consolidation and diffusion in computing, the two decades between 1970 and 1990 were characterized byexplosive growth. still, this course of events was far from clear in theearly 1970s.accomplishing federal missions(from pp. 141142): in addition to supporting industrial innovationand the economic benefits that it brings, federal support for computingresearch has enabled government agencies to accomplish their missions.investments in computing research by the department of energy (doe),the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa), and thenational institutes of health (nih), as well as the department of defense(dod), are ultimately based on agency needs. many of the missions theseagencies must fulfill depend on computing technologies. dod, for example, has maintained a policy of achieving military superiority overpotential adversaries not through numerical superiority (i.e., having moresoldiers) but through better technology. computing has become a centralpart of information gathering, management, and analysis for commanders and soldiers alike.similarly, doe and its predecessors would have been unable to support their mission of designing nuclear weapons without the simulationcapabilities of large supercomputers. such computers have retained theirvalue to doe as its mission has shifted toward stewardship of the nuclearstockpile in an era of restricted nuclear testing. its accelerated strategiccomputing initiative builds on doeõs earlier success by attempting tosupport development of simulation technologies needed to assess nuclearweapons, analyze their performance, predict their safety and reliability,and certify their functionality without testing them. in addition, nasacould not have accomplished its space exploration or its earth observation and monitoring missions without reliable computers for controllingspacecraft and managing data. new computing capabilities, includingthe world wide web, have enabled the national library of medicine toexpand access to medical information and have provided tools for researchers who are sequencing the human genome.innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68innovation in information technologyevolving the high performance computing andcommunications initiative to support the nationõsinformation infrastructure (1995)citation: computer science and telecommunications board (cstb),national research council. 1995. evolving the high performance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure. national academy press, washington, d.c.continued federal investment is necessary to sustain our lead(from pp. 2325): what must be done to sustain the innovation andgrowth needed for enhancing the information infrastructure and maintaining u.s. leadership in information technology? rapid and continuingchange in the technology, a 10 to 15year cycle from idea to commercialsuccess, and successive waves of new companies are characteristics of theinformation industry that point to the need for a stable source of expertiseand some room for a longterm approach. three observations seem pertinent.1.industrial r&d cannot replace government investment in basic research.very few companies are able to invest for a payoff that is 10 years away.moreover, many advances are broad in their applicability and complexenough to take several engineering iterations to get right, and so the keyinsights become òpublicó and a single company cannot recoup the research investment. public investment in research that creates a reservoirof new ideas and trained people is repaid many times over by jobs andtaxes in the information industry, more innovation and productivity inother industries, and improvements in the daily lives of citizens. thisinvestment is essential to maintain u.s. international competitiveness. . . .because of the long time scales involved in research, the full effect ofdecreasing investment in research may not be evident for a decade, but bythen, it may be too late to reverse an erosion of research capability. thus,even though many privatesector organizations that have weighed in onone or more policy areas relating to the enhancement of information infrastructure typically argue for a minimal government role in commercialization, they tend to support a continuing federal presence in relevantbasic research.2.it is hard to predict which new ideas and approaches will succeed. overthe years, federal support of computing and communications research inuniversities has helped make possible an environment for explorationand experimentation, leading to a broad range of diverse ideas from whichthe marketplace ultimately has selected winners and losers. . . . [i]t isinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.excerpts from earlier cstb reports69difficult to know in advance the outcome or final value of a particular lineof inquiry. but the history of development in computing and communications suggests that innovation arises from a diversity of ideas and somefreedom to take a longrange view. it is notoriously difficult to place aspecific value on the generation of knowledge and experience, but suchbenefits are much broader than sales of specific systems.3.research and development in information technology can make good useof equipment that is 10 years in advance of current òcommodityó practice. whenit is first used for research, such a piece of equipment is often asupercomputer. by the time that research makes its way to commercialuse, computers of equal power are no longer expensive or rare. . . .the largescale systems problems presented both by massive parallelism and by massive information infrastructure are additional distinguishing characteristics of information systems r&d, because they imply aneed for scale in the research effort itself. in principle, collaborative efforts might help to overcome the problem of attaining critical mass andscale, yet history suggests that there are relatively few collaborations inbasic research within any industry, and purely industrial (and increasingly industryuniversity or industrygovernment) collaborations tend todisseminate results more slowly than universitybased research.the governmentsupported research program . . . is small comparedto industrial r&d . . . but it constitutes a significant portion of the researchcomponent, and it is a critical factor because it supports the exploratorywork that is difficult for industry to afford, allows the pursuit of ideasthat may lead to success in unexpected ways, and nourishes the industryof the future, creating jobs and benefits for ourselves and our children.the industrial r&d investment, though larger in dollars, is different innature: it focuses on the near termñincreasingly so, as noted earlierñandis thus vulnerable to major opportunity costs. the increasing tendency tofocus on the near term is affecting the body of the nationõs overall r&d.despite economic studies showing that the united states leads the worldin reaping benefits from basic research, pressures in all sectors appear tobe promoting a shift in universities toward nearterm efforts, resulting ina decline in basic research even as a share of university research. thus, ageneral reduction in support for basic research appears to be taking place.it is critical to understand that there are dramatic new opportunitiesthat still can be developed by fundamental research in information technologyñopportunities on which the nation must capitalize. these include highperformance systems and applications for science and engineering; highconfidence systems for applications such as health care, lawenforcement, and finance; building blocks for globalscale informationutilities (e.g., electronic payment); interactive environments for applicainnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70innovation in information technologytions ranging from telemedicine to entertainment; improved user interfaces to allow the creation and use of ever more sophisticated applicationsby ever broader cross sections of the population; and the creation of thehuman capital on which the next generationõs information industries willbe based. fundamental research in computing and communications is thekey to unlocking the potential of these new applications.how much federal research support is proper for the foreseeable future and to what aspects of information technology should it be devoted?answering this question is part of a larger process of considering how toreorient overall federal spending on r&d from a context dominated bynational security to one driven more by other economic and social goals.it is harder to achieve the kind of consensus needed to sustain federalresearch programs associated with these goals than it was under thenational security aegis. nevertheless, the fundamental rationale for federal programs remains:that r&d can enhance the nationõs economic welfare is not, by itself,sufficient reason to justify a prominent role for the federal governmentin financing it. economists have developed a further rationale for government subsidies. their consensus is that most of the benefits of innovation accrue not to innovators but to consumers through products thatare better or less expensive, or both. because the benefits of technological progress are broadly shared, innovators lack the financial incentiveto improve technologies as much as is socially desirable. therefore, thegovernment can improve the performance of the economy by adoptingpolicies that facilitate and increase investments in research. [linda r.cohen and roger g. noll. 1994. òprivatizing public research,ó scientificamerican 271(3): 73]innovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71what is cstb?as a part of the national research council, the computer science andtelecommunications board (cstb) was established in 1986 to provideindependent advice to the federal government on technical and publicpolicy issues relating to computing and communications. composed ofleaders from industry and academia, cstb conducts studies of criticalnational issues and makes recommendations to government, industry,and academia. cstb also provides a neutral meeting ground for consideration of complex issues where resolution and action may be premature.it convenes discussions that bring together principals from the public andprivate sectors, assuring consideration of key perspectives. the majorityof cstbõs work is requested by federal agencies and congress, consistentwith its national academies context.a pioneer in framing and analyzing internet policy issues, cstb isunique in its comprehensive scope and effective, interdisciplinary appraisal of technical, economic, social, and policy issues. beginning withearly work in computer and communications security, cyberassuranceand information systems trustworthiness have been a crosscutting themein cstbõs work. cstb has produced several reports known as classics inthe field, and it continues to address these topics as they grow in importance.to do its work, cstb draws on some of the best minds in the countryand from around the world, inviting experts to participate in its projectsas a public service. studies are conducted by balanced committees without direct financial interests in the topics they are addressing. thoseinnovation in information technologycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72innovation in information technologycommittees meet, confer electronically, and build analyses through theirdeliberations. additional expertise is tapped in a rigorous process ofreview and critique, further enhancing the quality of cstb reports. byengaging groups of principals, cstb gets the facts and insights critical toassessing key issues.the mission of cstb is to¥respond to requests from the government, nonprofit organizations,and private industry for advice on computer and telecommunicationsissues and from the government for advice on computer and telecommunications systems planning, utilization, and modernization;¥monitor and promote the health of the fields of computer science andtelecommunications, with attention to issues of human resources, information infrastructure, and societal impacts;¥initiate and conduct studies involving computer science, technology,and telecommunications as critical resources; and¥foster interaction among the disciplines underlying computing andtelecommunications technologies and other fields, at large and within thenational academies.cstb projects address a diverse range of topics affected by the evolution of information technology. recently completed reports includebeyond productivity: information technology, innovation, and creativity;cybersecurity today and tomorrow: pay now or pay later; youth, pornography, and the internet; broadband: bringing home the bits; the digital dilemma:intellectual property in the information age; idsñnot that easy: questionsabout nationwide identity systems; the internet under crisis conditions:learning from september 11; and it roadmap to a geospatial future. forfurther information about cstb reports and active projects, see <http://cstb.org>.