detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10803the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the21st century190 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309087193 | doi 10.17226/10803organizing committee for the workshop on the environment; committee onchallenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century; board on chemicalsciences and technology; division on earth and life studies; national researchcouncilthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.organizing committee for the workshop onthe environmentcommittee on challenges for the chemical sciencesin the 21st centuryboard on chemical sciences and technologydivision on earth and life studiesthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.educhallenges for the chemical sciencesin the 21st centurythe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press ¥ 500 fifth street, n.w. ¥ washington, d.c. 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosenfor their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this study was provided by the national research council, the u.s.department of energy (deat010ee41424, bes defg0200er15040, anddeat0103er15386), the national science foundation (cts9908440), the defenseadvanced research projects agency (dod mda97201m0001), the u.s. environmentalprotection agency (r82823301 and x83080801), the american chemical society, theamerican institute of chemical engineers, the camille and henry dreyfus foundation,inc. (sg00093), the national institute of standards and technology (na13410121070and 43nanb010995), the national institutes of health (ncin01od42139 andnigmsn01od42139), the green chemistry institute, and the chemical industryall opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed herein are thoseof the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies thatprovided support for this project.international standard book number 0309087198 (book)international standard book number 0309526663 (pdf)additional copies of this report are available from:the national academies press500 fifth street, n.w.box 285washington, dc 2005580062462422023343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)http://www.nap.educopyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americathe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.dr.bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superiorachievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy ofengineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute ofmedicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by bothacademies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf arechair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivorganizing committee for theworkshop on the environmentmario j. molina, massachusetts institute of technology, cochairjohn h. seinfeld, california institute of technology, cochairphilip h. brodsky, pharmacia (retired)jean h. futrell, pacific northwest national laboratoryparry m. norling, rand corporationchristine s. sloane, general motors corporationisiah m. warner, louisiana state universityliaisonsmark a. barteau, university of delaware (steering committee liaison)a. welford castleman, jr., the pennsylvania state university (bcstliaison)joseph m. desimone, university of north carolina, chapel hill, and northcarolina state university (bcst liaison)jeffrey j. siirola, eastman chemical company (steering committee liaison)robert m. sussman, latham & watkins (bcst liaison)staffjennifer j. jackiw, program officersybil a. paige, administrative associatedouglas j. raber, senior scholardavid c. rasmussen, program assistantthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.v1committee member until july 2001; subsequently the board on chemical sciences and technology (bcst) liaison to the committee in her role as bcst cochair.2committee member until march 2002, following his retirement from dupont.committee on challenges for the chemical sciencesin the 21st centuryronald breslow, columbia university, cochairmatthew v. tirrell, university of california at santa barbara, cochairmark a. barteau, university of delawarejacqueline k. barton, california institute of technologycarolyn r. bertozzi, university of california at berkeleyrobert a. brown, massachusetts institute of technologyalice p. gast,1 stanford universityignacio e. grossmann, carnegie mellon universityjames m. meyer,2 dupont co.royce w. murray, university of north carolina at chapel hillpaul j. reider, amgen, inc.william r. roush, university of michiganmichael l. shuler, cornell universityjeffrey j. siirola, eastman chemical companygeorge m. whitesides, harvard universitypeter g. wolynes, university of california, san diegorichard n. zare, stanford universitystaffjennifer j. jackiw, program officerchristopher k. murphy, program officersybil a. paige, administrative associatedouglas j. raber, senior scholardavid c. rasmussen, program assistantthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viboard on chemical sciences and technologyalice p. gast, massachusetts institute of technology, cochairwilliam klemperer, harvard university, cochairarthur i. bienenstock, stanford universitya. welford castleman, jr., the pennsylvania state universityandrea w. chow, caliper technologies corp.thomas m. connelly, jr., e. i. du pont de nemours & co.jean de graeve, institut de pathologie, lige, belgiumjoseph m. desimone, university of north carolina, chapel hill, and northcarolina state universitycatherine fenselau, university of marylandjon franklin, university of marylandmary l. good, university of arkansas, little rockrichard m. gross, dow chemical companynancy b. jackson, sandia national laboratorysangtae kim, eli lilly and companythomas j. meyer, los alamos national laboratorypaul j. reider, amgen, inc.arnold f. stancell, georgia institute of technologyrobert m. sussman, latham & watkinsjohn c. tully, yale universitychihuey wong, scripps research institutestaffjennifer j. jackiw, program officerchristopher k. murphy, program officersybil a. paige, administrative associatedouglas j. raber, senior scholardavid c. rasmussen, program assistanteric l. shipp, postdoctoral associatedorothy zolandz, directorthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethe workshop on the environment was held in irvine, california, on november 1719, 2002. this workshop was the third in a series of six workshopsthat make up the study challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century.the task for each of the workshops was defined as follows:each workshopand its subsequent reportwill address a series of common themes:discovery: identify major discoveries or advances in the chemical sciences during the last several decades.interfaces: identify the major discoveries and challenges at the interfacesbetween chemistry/chemical engineering and such areas as biology, environmental science, materials science, medicine, and physics.challenges: identify the grand challenges that exist in the chemical sciences.infrastructure: identify the issues and opportunities that exist in the chemical sciences to improve the infrastructure for research and education, and demonstrate the value of these activities to society.the workshop on the environment brought together a diverse group ofparticipants (appendix f) from the chemical sciences who were addressed byinvited speakers in plenary session on a variety of issues and challenges for thechemical sciences as they relate to environmental science and technology (appendix c). these presentations served as a starting point for discussions and comments by the participants. the workshop participants were then divided into smallgroups that met periodically during the workshop to further discuss and analyzethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacethe relevant issues. each group reported its discussions to the workshop as awhole.this report is intended to reflect the concepts discussed and opinions expressed at the workshop on the environment and is not intended to be a comprehensive overview of all of the potential challenges that exist for the chemicalsciences in the areas of environmental science and technology. the organizingcommittee has used this input from workshop participants as a basis for the conclusions expressed in this report. however, sole responsibility for these conclusions rests with the organizing committee.although much progress has been achieved toward detailed mechanisticunderstanding in all environmental sciences, the greatest advances appear to haveoccurred in the atmospheric chemistry field, reflecting most likely the greatercomplexity of aquatic and terrestrial systems and their biological components.this study was conducted under the auspices of the national researchcouncils board on chemical sciences and technology, with assistance providedby its staff. the committee acknowledges this support.a number of our colleagues across the chemical sciences community provided the committee with helpful input. the committee thanks patrick g. hatcher,robert g. keesee, karl t. mueller, and paul ziemann.mario j. molina and john h. seinfeld, cochairs,organizing committee for the workshop on the environmentchallenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurythe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councils (nrcs) report review committee.the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound aspossible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity,evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draftmanuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation in the review ofthis report:heather c. allen, the ohio state universityliese dallbauman, gas technology institutethom h. dunning, jr., oak ridge national laboratory and university oftennesseewilliam h. glaze, oregon health & science universitygeorge m. hornberger, university of virginiahenry t. kohlbrand, the dow chemical companystephen g. maroldo, rohm and haas companypeggy oday, university of california, merceded yeung, iowa state universityalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions orrecommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xacknowledgment of reviewersthe review of this report was overseen by george e. keller ii (union carbide,retired). appointed by the national research council, he was responsible formaking certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out inaccordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirelywith the authoring committee and the institution.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xicontentsexecutive summary11introduction72successes and discoveries in environmentalchemical science10analytical capabilities, 10fundamental chemical science, 11models and databases, 12pollution control, remediation, and purification, 12pollution prevention: synthesis, manufacturing, and process advances, 15identification of problems, 17atmosphere, 17water, 20soil, 20interdisciplinary discoveries, 203challenges in environmental chemical science22fundamental understanding, 25human influence on the natural environment, 25water and sediment chemistry, 26gastoparticle conversion and combustion aerosol formation, 30putting it all together: understanding biogeochemical cycles, 32the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontentsinstrumentation and research tools, 33measurement tools, 35modeling, simulation, and computational chemistry, 41approaches to solutions, 44pollution prevention: green process technology, 44remediation, 46costeffectiveness, 48interfaces and infrastructure, 484conclusions and key opportunities50appendixesastatement of task57bbiographies of the organizing committee members58cworkshop agenda62dworkshop presentationsjames g. anderson, 66thomas w. asmus, 75ruben g. carbonell, 80uma chowdhry, 85barry dellinger, 97david a. dixon, 102william h. farland, 113janet g. hering, 119charles e. kolb, 127franois m.m. morel, 136michael k. stern, 140mark h. thiemens, 144ebiographies of workshop speakers149fworkshop participants155greports from breakout session groups158discovery, 158interfaces, 162challenges, 168infrastructure, 172hlist of acronyms176the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarythe chemical sciences have made enormous contributions to the wellbeingof our nation and to that of the worldñas an economic driver and through themanufactured substances that range from lifesaving pharmaceuticals to materials that improve the safety of our automobiles. at the same time, the relationshipbetween the chemical sciences and the environment is on less firm ground. indeed,to a great extent the environmental movement in the 1970s began in response toharmful effects of certain industrial chemicals. it matters little that those harmfuleffects were unintentional, because the harm was real.over the last several decades, chemists and chemical engineersñindeed, theentire chemical enterpriseñhave made remarkable progress on several fronts.earlier practicesñof disposing of chemical waste directly into the air, waterways, and soilñlargely have been replaced with approaches that have much lowerenvironmental impact. industrial and automotive smog have been greatly reduced,our rivers and streams are much cleaner than they were three decades ago, and wehave almost completely eliminated the use of chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs) andother halogenated compounds that cause ozone depletion in the stratosphere.modern pesticides are safer for the environment and are used in much smallerquantities, and the chemical industry has adopted a program of responsible care1in which it practices stewardship of the chemicals it produces from cradle tograve. perhaps most importantly, the research activities of chemists and chemicalengineers have made huge strides toward understanding the chemistry of the environment at a fundamental level.1http://www.americanchemistry.com/the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2the environmenthowever, much remains to be done. the challenge is global in nature: notonly do countries around the world face environmental problems, but pollutantsgenerated in one location are transported across continents and oceans. similarly,the different parts of the environment are interconnected, and attempting to manage environmental sinks separately will only move the problem from one phaseto another. the magnitude and scope of the problem is huge, and the inescapabilityof environmental problems demands major effort in science and engineering. innovember 2002, as part of challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21stcentury, the board on chemical sciences and technology convened the workshop on the environment in irvine, california. the workshop organizing committee assembled a group of top environmental scientists to deliver plenary lectures (appendix c), and an outstanding group of chemical scientists andengineersñfrom academia, government, national laboratories, and industriallaboratoriesñwas recruited to participate in the workshop (appendix f). throughthe use of extensive discussion periods and breakout sessions, input from theentire group of participants was obtained during the course of the workshop. theresults of the breakout sessions are presented in appendix g, and written versionsof the speakersõ presentations are provided in appendix d. in combination withother references cited in this report, the data collected at the workshop providethe basis for this report.the structure of the workshop on the environment followed that of the parent project and each of the other workshops that were held as part of the study ofchallenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century (materials and manufacturing, energy and transportation, national security and homeland defense,information and communications, and health and medicine). under this structure, the workshop addressed four specific themes:1.discovery:what major discoveries or advances related to the environment have been made in the chemical sciences during the last several decades?2.interfaces:what are the major environmentrelated discoveries and challenges at the interfaces between chemistryðchemical engineering and other disciplines, including biology, information science, materials science, and physics?3.challenges:what are the environmentrelated grand challenges in thechemical sciences and engineering?4.infrastructure:what are the issues at the intersection of environmentalstudies and the chemical sciences for which there are structural challenges andopportunitiesñin teaching, research, equipment, codes and software, facilities,and personnel?workshop participants provided a broad range of experience and perspective, and their discussions and presentations identified a wide variety of opportunities and challenges in chemistry and chemical engineering. these opportunitiesand challenges, which are documented throughout this report (including many ofthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3the specifics described in appendix d and appendix g), led the committee to itsoverarching conclusions.conclusion: chemistry and chemical engineering have made major contributions to solving environmental problems.specific areas of accomplishment include¥major increases in analytical capabilitiesñdetection, monitoring, andmeasurement;¥increased understanding of biogeochemical processes and cycles;¥advances in industrial ecologyñnew attitudes about pollution prevention;¥development of environmentally benign materials (e.g., cfc replacements);¥new methods for waste treatment and pollution prevention;¥green chemistry and new chemical processes;¥discovery of environmental problems and identification of their underlying causes and mechanisms; and¥development of improved modeling and simulation techniques.conclusion: collaboration of chemists and chemical engineers with scientists and engineers in other disciplines has led to important discoveries.these contributions have enhanced both basic understanding and the solution of environmental problems through work at the interfaces of the chemicalsciences with biology, physics, engineering, materials science, mathematics, computer science, atmospheric science, meteorology, and geology.conclusion: manifold challenges and opportunities in chemistry andchemical engineering exist at the interface with the environmental sciences.by responding to these opportunities and challenges, the chemical sciencescommunity will be able to make substantial contributions to¥fundamental understanding of the environment,¥remediation of environmental problems that currently exist,¥prevention of environmental problems in the future, and¥protection of the environment.the stakes for responding to these challenges are high because regulatorydecisions might cost or preserve billions of dollars, impact millions of humanlives, or even determine the fate of entire species.much of the discussion at the workshop emphasized the interrelated natureof the many parts of the environment. typically, it is not possible to take action inthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4the environmentone area without creating at least the possibility of impacting other areas as well.in order to avoid such undesired consequences, a systems approach will be neededfor the discovery and management of problems of the atmosphere, water, andsoil. this will be necessary not only for understanding the complexity of eachmedium but for avoiding regulatorydriven tendencies to simply shift impactsfrom one medium to another.a lifecycle systems approach, similar to what has been developed to evaluate energy impacts, will facilitate sound management of environmental impacts.this will provide a clear understanding of both where and when environmentalimpacts occur in the life of a product, process, or service. it also will make itpossible to appreciate all impacts, and to see how interactions and alternatives ateach point in a life cycle can influence other parts of the life cycle. for chemicalprocessing and manufacturing, significant impact can occur at various stages,including extraction and preparation of raw materials, conversion of raw materials into products, separation and purification of materials, product distribution,end use of products, and final disposition after the useful life of products.conclusion: a systems approach is essential for solution of environmental problems.the systems approach will be needed in several areas, including¥actions that affect any of the three principal environmental sinks (air, water, and soil) and the biological systems with which they interact, where attemptsto manage each of them separately will surely transfer impacts from one mediumto another;¥spatial management of environmentalimpact sourcesñwhere the impactsare generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence; and¥temporal management of environmentalimpact sourcesñwhen the impacts are generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence.the use of systems approaches will necessitate simulation and modeling ofenormously large and complex systems. this will require significant computational resources, intensive efforts in complex optimization, and formulation ofmathematical models. input and expertise from a broad array of scientific, engineering, and social disciplines will be an essential part of developing the necessary tools.conclusion: solving environmental problems will require intensivemathematical modeling, complex optimization, and computational resources.systems approaches will necessitate extensive collaborations among a widerange of scientific, engineering, and social disciplines. modeling of large envithe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5ronmental systems (e.g., climate modeling that spans large temporal and spatialranges) will generate massive datasets, fast and robust networks, and powerfulcomputers for processing the data arrays.a broad array of research challenges face the chemical sciences, both inareas of fundamental understanding and for specific environmental problems.conclusion: important opportunities exist for chemists and chemical engineers to contribute to a better understanding of the environment.many of these research opportunities will involve work at the interfaces withother disciplines or interdisciplinary collaborations with scientists and engineersfrom those disciplines. just as these collaborations have led to significant progressin the past, they should be expected to play an important role in the future to fullyunderstand and solve environmental problems. examples include the need to understand (or better understand)¥structuretoxicity relations;¥chemical processes at the molecular level;¥biological and physicochemical interactions in response to environmentalstresses;¥fate and transport of anthropogenic chemicals;¥biogeochemical cycles;¥gastoparticle conversion in the atmosphere;¥functional genomics and the chemical processes that govern organismenvironment relationships; and¥chemicalgene interactions in the real environment.as we continue to better understand the underlying science of the environment, further advances will require new tools and instruments.conclusion: chemists and chemical engineers will need to develop newanalytical instruments and tools.these tools and instruments will have to function effectively in an increasingly complex research arena that involves measurements of vanishingly smallquantities of substances in the presence of contamination from other chemicals,under circumstances that make sample acquisition difficult. they will have toaddress three principal areas of measurement:1.laboratory analyses2.field measurements3.theoretical tools for modeling and comparison with experimentconclusion: improved methods for sampling and monitoring must bedeveloped.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6the environmentchemists and chemical engineers will have to address the challenges ofsampling and monitoringñair, water, and soilñmore extensively and morefrequently than can be done now. this will require improvements in instrumentation, in sampling methodology, and in techniques for remote measurements.conclusion: the new approaches of green chemistry and sustainablechemistry offer the potential for developing chemical and manufacturing processes that are environmentally beneficial.we are still in the early stages, but successful examples already have beenreported. if the necessary investment is made in these new directions, chemistsand chemical engineers will be able to make major strides in improving environmental quality.conclusion: strong and continued support of the chemical sciences willbe an essential part of the federal research investment for understanding, improving, and protecting the environment.chemists and chemical engineers will be able to respond effectively to thechallenges described here only if they have the resources needed to carry out thenecessary research. this impact of support will be enhanced if it facilitates interdisciplinary research and encourages industrial partnerships. the scientificprogress resulting from such support will inform and enable the policymakingand decision process that is essential to future environmental improvement.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71introductionfor millennia, advances in human progress have been tied to our ability toprotect ourselves from the harmful effects of the wastes we produceñrangingfrom human waste to the organic and inorganic byproducts of everyday living.across the world, cultures learned to bury their dead away from their homes andto burn their waste or make certain that it was carried away by streams and riversflowing downstream from their homes. those cultures that learned this most effectively thrived. when the industrial revolution took place in the nineteenth century, rivers again enabled progress. they provided water needed for power andenergy, and they carried away the waste materials from industrial processes.however, things had changed by the middle of the twentieth century. theincrease in human population and the growth of modern industry were leading tosigns that the system was overloaded. there were reports of rivers that had turnedorange or had caught on fire, the smog over some cities was becoming intolerable, and there were signs of negative health consequences from buried waste.the methods of waste disposal that had helped us build our modern society wereturning back on us. public attention was captured by rachel carsonõs book silentspring,1 and events surrounding the vietnam war were changing the politicallandscape. in 1970 the u.s. environmental protection agency was formed, andthe clean air act was passed later that same year. additional legislation followed to cover other areas of the environment.many of the problems that needed to be solved were chemical in nature, andthe chemical industry was seen by many as the source of our environmental prob1rachel carson, silent spring; houghton mifflin: new york, 1962.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8the environmentlems. suddenly we had moved beyond industry and modern technology as thesource of our high quality of life. the chemical industry was no longer viewed ina positive light. as with most such situations, there were conflicts between regulatory policy and the financial interests of the companies being regulated, andprogress was sometimes slow. but changes have been made. the rivers arecleaner, and the smog has decreased. bird populations are no longer suffering theeffects of ddt, and disposal of chemical waste is carried out in a safer and morereliable manner. the chemical industry, through the american chemistry council, has established a strong industry standard with its responsible care program.the committee organized a workshop that was held in irvine, california, innovember 2002, to address ways in which chemists and chemical engineers couldfocus their r&d efforts on the solution of environmental problems. this report ispart of a broader project, challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century. the overview report for the project includes a chapter on atmospheric andenvironmental chemistry.2 a series of speakers (appendix f) presented lectures(appendix d) on topics that covered all parts of the environmentñthe biosphere,the atmosphere, soil, and water. they addressed issues in manufacturing, energyproduction, and remediation of those parts of the environment that already havesuffered damage. considerable input for the report was also provided by a seriesof breakout sessions (appendix g) in which all workshop attendees participated(appendix e). these breakout sessions explored the ways in which chemists andchemical engineers already have contributed to solving environmental problems,the technical challenges that they can help to overcome in the future, and thebarriers that will have to be overcome for them to do so. the specific questionsaddressed in the four breakout sessions were the following:¥discovery:what major discoveries or advances related to the environment have been made in the chemical sciences during the last several decades?¥interfaces:what are the major environmentrelated discoveries and challenges at the interfaces between chemistryðchemical engineering and other disciplines, including biology, information science, materials science, and physics?¥challenges:what are the environmentrelated grand challenges in thechemical sciences and engineering?¥infastructure:what are the issues at the intersection of environmentalstudies and the chemical sciences for which there are structural challenges andopportunitiesñin teaching, research, equipment and instrumentation, facilities,and personnel?2beyond the molecular frontier: challenges for chemistry and chemical engineering, nationalresearch council, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2003.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction9weõve seen much progress in the past few decades, but more remains to be done.some regulations are in place, while others are still being developed. the anxietyover global climate change has introduced an entirely new set of concerns in thelast decade, with conflicting proposals about how the world should respond. onething is certain, however, and that is the need for the chemical sciences community to participate in solving the problems.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102successes and discoveries inenvironmental chemical scienceprogress in environmental science during the last several decades has depended heavily on contributions from chemistry and chemical engineering. thesecontributions range from understanding fundamental concepts of the behavior ofmaterials in the environment to the development of procedures for protecting theenvironment and remediating environmentally contaminated sites. in the areas offundamental science and engineering, the contributions fall into the categories ofnew or enhanced analytical capabilities, advances in fundamental science, andthe development of new models and databases. chemical contributions in theareas of environmental protection and remediation can be classified into technologies for pollution control and remediation and for pollution prevention viasynthesis, manufacturing, and process advances.analytical capabilitiesdevelopments in analytical capabilities have allowed chemists and chemicalengineers to detect ever smaller quantities of chemical substances. one hundredyears ago, chemists were challenged by the task of carrying out analysis onsamples smaller than a gram. but in some cases it is now possible to detect andmeasure the presence of substances at the level of single molecules, an improvement of some 20 orders of magnitude. increases in time resolution have beensimilarly astonishing, from a situation in which it was difficult to measure eventstaking place at a time scale of less than a second to the investigation of processesthat take place on the femtosecond (10ð15 s) time scale. often the measurementsmust be made remotely or must examine substances that are present in vanishingly small concentrations.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.successes and discoveries in environmental chemical science11some of the improvements in detection, monitoring, and measurementscience that have contributed to advances in environmental science include thedevelopment of the electroncapture detector (with its high sensitivity for halogenated organic compounds), the application of gas chromatographymass spectrometry (which combines separation of mixtures with reliable identification oftheir components), advances in sensor technology, and the availability of synchrotronbased methods for xray studies. improved mass spectrometric methodshave made it possible to characterize single aerosol particles in the atmosphereand have provided improved time resolution for atmospheric measurements. satellitebased technology and remote sensing have enabled monitoring and spacebased measurements that are far more comprehensive than those that were possible using aircraft and balloons.fundamental chemical scienceadvances in the understanding of basic chemical science have been responsible for substantial progress in environmental science. similarly, progress inenvironmental chemistry has driven fundamental science, as illustrated by thevastly improved understanding of the nature of complex bimolecular reactionsbrought about by investigations of important atmospheric chemical processes.key contributions include the following:¥advances in fundamental understanding of the chemistry of free radicals,which play key roles in a variety of atmospheric, aquatic, and terrestrial chemicalprocesses;¥advances in surface chemistry that have provided a better understandingof reactions on surfaces and in microporous regions;¥better understanding of homogeneous gasphase chemistry;¥establishing structureactivity relationships for the activity and fate ofchemical species in the environment;¥advances in genetics at the molecular level that have made it possible touse bioremediation to clean up environmentally contaminated sites and to understand generic geneenvironment relationships in the environment;¥fundamental understanding of the internal combustion process, which hasled to improved engine efficiency; and¥advances in chemically based technologies (e.g., fuel cells, batteries, andphotovoltaics) that have contributed to environmental improvements in the energy and transportation sectors.11 also see the related report in this series: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century: energy and transportation, national research council, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2003.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12the environmentsome of the advances in fundamental science that have led to new attitudesand approaches to environmental problems include the use of correlated chemicalmeasurements to investigate environmental processes, development of industrialecology as a framework for studying issues, use of lifecycle analysis to evaluatethe impact of substances in the environment, recognition of the importance ofspeciation (in contrast to total concentration) of chemical substances, and recognition that a systems approach is often necessary to address complex environmental issues.models and databasesby any criteria one might employ, the environment is a large and complexsystem. as a consequence, there are large barriers to developing predictive capabilities, even for localized portions of the environment. however, these barriershave been partially surmounted by the substantial progress that has been made incomputingrelated areas, enabled in large part by the tremendous growth over thelast several decades in computing speed and capabilities. specific areas of accomplishment include the generation of databases of kinetic and thermodynamicdata, new software and modeling techniques (at scales from molecular to global),development of computational models that permit the simulation of both fundamental and complex systems with ever increasing fidelity, and to some extent,advances in predicting risk and taking riskbased corrective action.pollution control, remediation, and purificationtechnical solutions have been developed to a number of important environmental problems. one of the most important contributions to human health hasbeen the chemical purification of drinking water, which has nearly eliminatedwaterborne diseases in developed countries.2 disinfection with chlorine andozonation have been used to eliminate pathogens, and advances in membranescience have enabled removal of various substances from water. many of thetechnical solutions have been developed in response to unexpected problems created by other technical advances.solutions have not been limited to water, however. atmospheric pollutionfrom automobiles has decreased dramatically in the last 25 years since the development and deployment of the catalytic converter (box 21). modern threewaycatalysts can simultaneously reduce the concentrations of carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and nitrogen oxides in the automobileõs exhaust stream. also, newmethods for remediation of contaminated soils have been provided by the selection of unique plants and microbes for this purpose.2greatest engineering achievements of the 20th century; national academy of engineering:washington, dc, 2000; http://www.greatachievements.org/.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.successes and discoveries in environmental chemical science13box 21automotive exhaust emission controlautomotive emissions have declined markedly over the past 15 yearsas illustrated in the chart below. with advances in combustion and aftertreatment technologies, the period 19902005 will have seen an 80%reduction in hydrocarbon emissions and a more than 90% reduction innitrogen oxide emissions. this remarkable improvement follows a comparable reduction in the preceding 15year interval. the success of automotive emissions control has required a systems approach involving fuelquality, engine control theory, engine control computation power andsoftware, engine control hardware, and catalytic converter technology.continued 0100200300400500tier 0tier inlevtier 2ftp nmhc emissions, g/mile8394940004109906federal standardsu.s. hydrocarbon standards passenger cars020040060080010001200tier 0tier inlevtier 2ftp nox emissions, g/mileu.s. nox standardspassenger carscatalytic converter technology for todayõs gasoline enginesthe threeway exhaust catalytic converter is used to complete thecombustion of carbon monoxide and unburned fuel elements and toremove the no and no2 produced during combustion. the primary components of the catalytic converter are the catalyst and its physical support. the catalyst is composed of a highsurfacearea support that incorporates the primary catalytically active materials, typically mixtures ofone or more of platinum, palladium, or rhodium (precious group metals,pgms). the catalyst also contains promoters that improve the efficiencyand stability of the pgm. of these, the most important is cerium oxide, athe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14the environmentpromoter that is used to buffer small compositional swings in the exhaustcomposition within the catalytic converter.major improvements in hydrocarbon oxidation activity and overallthermal durability were achieved through the use of more palladiumrichformulations as lead disappeared from the fuel supply. palladium is highlyprone to leadbased deactivation. the dramatic increase in palladium inthe late 1990s caused a significant supplydemand imbalance in the pgmmarkets in 2000, driving up palladium prices tenfold. the recent effort toreduce requirements for palladium without affecting hydrocarbon performance restored the market balance.additional improvement has come from 34 times faster warmup ofthe catalytic converter to 250 c, the temperature at which it becomesactive. the majority of vehicle emissions occur during this catalyst òlightoffó period. two features led to faster lightoff. the catalyst was positioned closer to the engine to experience highertemperature exhaust,and the thermal mass of the catalyst was reduced. this required catalystmaterials with enhanced thermal durability and resistance to sinteringand chemical poisoning from exhaust gas components. neither thermaldegradation nor chemical degradation is particularly well understood.a key was the development of more thermally stable forms of ceriumoxide. unstabilized cerium oxide degrades rapidly at exhaust temperatures in excess of 800 c, and this degradation significantly reduces theefficiency of the catalyst for nono2 reduction. greater thermal stabilitywas achieved by forming solid solutions of stabilizers such as zirconiumoxide and lanthanum oxide in cerium oxide. hence, these new materialsare the most significant enablers for the lower nono2 standards required for 2004 and beyond.reduced thermal mass came from changes to the catalyst support.the catalyst materials are deployed as a thin coating on a ceramic honeycomb substrate. the surface area for the deployment of the catalyticcoating, and the mass of the substrate both contribute to the overall performance of the catalytic converter. the surface area was increased byreducing the thickness of the channel walls, thereby increasing the flowchannel density and reducing the thermal mass of the substrate.catalytic converter technology: leanburn enginesthe threeway catalyst works in a narrow range of airfuel ratio, approximately the stoichiometric ratio. hence, it is not effective with leanburn engines that offer higher fuel efficiency at the expense of highernox emissions. catalytic systems under development for post2004 u.s.nox emission regulations are based on nox traps, which adsorb nox asnitrates. these emission control systems are òactive.ó they require peribox 21 continuedcontinuedthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.successes and discoveries in environmental chemical science15odic temperature increases and injection of reductant to regenerate thenox traps by release and catalytic conversion of the adsorbed nitrates tofree the adsorption sites for further activity. gasoline leanburn enginescan be controlled for periodic stoichiometric operation, but other strategies are required for leanburn diesel engine systems. prototype systems have used postengine injections of urea or fuel as the triggeringreductant with marginal success. similarly, particles in diesel exhaustrequire filters where the particles are removed either continuously with acatalyst coating that promotes their oxidation or by periodic hightemperature excursions in engine conditions to incinerate particles trappedon a filter. combustion in diesel engines is carefully controlled to balancenox and particulate matter (pm). several prototype pm filter systemshave been demonstrated successfully with diesel engines, but nox control remains a challenge for engine operation and catalyst technology.the key chemical science challenge is kinetics. how does one obtain quantitative kinetic information for real, commercial, heterogeneouscatalysts without resorting to timeconsuming experiments? similarly,simulations are required to design catalyst systems for performance atend of life, 150,000 miles. simulations currently use empirically derived,agedcatalyst parameters. driving vehicles to end of life to acquire datafor variants of aftertreatment systems is laborious and does not providesufficient statistical confidence. hence, the science of accelerated agingand simulation tools for complex flow in chemically active heterogeneoussystems is key to addressing challenges for bringing leanburn, fuelefficient engines to u.s. roads.pollution prevention:synthesis, manufacturing, and process advancesenvironmental contributions from the chemical sciences have not been limited to cleaning up existing problems. major contributions have been also beenmade in pollution prevention, so that the undesired components are never generated in the first place. some of the contributions include¥using lifecycle analysis to identify more clearly where and when environmental impacts occur in the cycle of raw material production and productmanufacture, packaging, storage, use, and disposal;¥improving existing processes, such as the development of cleanerburningfuels, for which less exhauststream treatment is needed;box 21 continuedthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16the environment¥using substitutesñfor example, replacing organic solvents with water orsupercritical carbon dioxide to reduce emissions of organic solvents into the environment; other substitutes include replacement for heavy metals and chlorofluorocarbon (cfc) replacements as discussed in box 22;¥enhancing energy efficiency and development of improved photovoltaicdevices;¥developing degradable materials such as pesticides and polymers to reducepotential problems associated with persistent chemicals and materials;¥using biomass rather than petroleum as a feedstock for chemical processes;and¥employing atom economy as a strategy in chemical processes, therebyminimizing the amounts of waste for disposal.much of the contribution that has been made in these areas is encompassed by the phrase green chemistry,which is an approach to doing chemistryand chemical engineering that minimizes negative impacts on the environmentthrough pollution prevention. it has been defined as the òdesign of chemical products and processes that reduce or eliminate the use and generation of hazardoussubstances.ó3 such processes continue to be developed, and they demonstratethat such technologies can be both economically and environmentally viable. several speakers at the workshop presented examples of green process technologies(see appendix d):¥development of new catalysts eliminates carbon tetrachloride as a byproduct in the production of phosgene from carbon monoxide and chlorine (u.chowdhry);¥manufacture of new highsolids enamel for automotive coatings reducesvolatile organic compound emissions, reduces odor emissions by 86%, andreduces total raw materials use by 20% (u. chowdhry);¥the use of a biobased catalyst to make a key intermediate (5cyanovaleramide) in the production of a new herbicide has increased the yield from20% to 93% and greatly reduced the quantity of catalyst waste (u. chowdhry);¥polymerization of fluoroolefins in liquid and supercritical carbon dioxideeliminates the use of water and c8 surfactant that has been identified as a persistent organic pollutant (r. carbonell);¥the development of surfactants for co2 has made possible the commercialization of a dry cleaning process replacing perchloroethylene (r. carbonell);¥the use of new catalyst in the process for manufacture of glyphosate (aherbicide with desirable environmental properties) results in the use of reducedwaste, raw materials with lower toxicity and volatility, and lower energy consumption (m. stern); and3http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/greenchemistry/the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.successes and discoveries in environmental chemical science17¥genetic modification of soybeans, corn, canola, and cotton has producedglyphosateresistant crops that lead to lower pesticide use, yield improvement,and improved water quality (m. stern).the presidential green chemistry challenge awards program4 has recognized a wide range of accomplishments that include the following:¥costeffective production of 1,3propanediol, a new feedstock for polyesters, using a genetically engineered fermentation pathway (dupont, 2003);¥polylactic acid, a polymer for fibers and packaging that is derived fromrenewable resources (cargill dow llc, 2002);¥wastefree manufacture of an environmentally friendly chelating agent(bayer corporation and bayer ag, 2001);¥enzymes and processes for largescale organic synthesis (chihueywong, 2000);¥a new catalyst for oxidation in pharmaceutical manufacturing that reduces chromium waste and solvent usage (lilly research laboratories, 1999);¥the concept of atom economy (barry m. trost, 1998);¥surfactants for supercritical co2 (joseph m. desimone, 1997); and¥manufacturing of polystyrene foam with co2 replacing cfcs as the blowing agent (dow chemical company, 1996).identification of problemsenvironmental problems cannot be solved if they have not first been detected. many environmental problems have been chemical in nature, but theyhave occurred as unexpected consequences of other processes or developments.discovering such problemsñincluding identification of their underlying causesand elucidation of the details of the chemical processes involvedñhas reliedheavily on the work of chemists and chemical engineers.atmospherechemically related atmospheric problems have had high visibility in recentyears. no matter how cautious one may be on the topic of global warming, it isclear that the greenhouse effect of carbon dioxide, methane, ozone, nitrous oxide,and the cfcs must be considered as a factor in global climate change. the molecular behavior of the greenhouse gases explain their ability to absorb infraredradiation from the earth and convert it to heat. similarly, the photochemistry ofchlorofluorocarbons (cfcs)ñmolecules originally believed to be completelybenignñprovided the explanation for stratospheric ozone depletion.4 http://www.epa.gov/opptintr/greenchemistry/docs/awardrecipients19962002.pdfthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18the environmentbox 22 cfc replacements a,bfor nearly half a century, chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs) were regardedas versatile wonder chemicals. originally developed in the 1930s as nontoxic and nonflammable alternatives to hazardous chemicals such asammonia and sulfur dioxide for refrigeration applications, in subsequentdecades they found a host of applications ranging from cleaning anddegreasing agents, to polymer foam blowing agents, to aerosol propellants. as the connection of these compounds to stratospheric ozonedepletion was made, and the understanding of the chemical and physicalprocesses behind this phenomenon developed, phaseout of the use andmanufacture of these compounds was mandated, beginning with themontreal protocol of 1987 and its subsequent amendments.in the decade and a half since, a number of applicationspecific alternatives have been developed. cleaning and degreasing agents include liquid co2, citric acid, and other compounds for demanding applications such as microelectronics manufacturing. blowing and propellantagents include co2 and butane, among others. significant capture andrecycling efforts have also been implemented, since release and largescale accumulation of any chemical, cfcs or their replacements, in theenvironment is likely to have some negative impact, whether in the stratosphere or not.the most visible consequence of cfc elimination for the consumerhas been in refrigeration and airconditioning applications. cfcs in latemodel refrigerators, and home and automobile air conditioners have beensupplanted by hydrofluorocarbons (hfcs) and hydrochlorofluorocarbons(hcfcs). cfc12 (cf2cl2) has been eliminated in automotive units infavor of hfc134a (cf3ch2f). while this changeover has occurred in aremarkably short period, the magnitude of the scientific and technological challenges surmounted should not be understated. ideal specifications for a cfc replacement include thermophysical properties of boththe liquid and gaseous states that match those of the cfc in use, nonflammability, nontoxicity, compatibility with system components and lubricants, ease of manufacture, low cost, and of course, greatly reducedpotential for depletion of stratospheric ozone. meeting all of these challenges to come up with the alternatives that we use today required significant theoretical and experimental efforts. advanced theoretical andcomputational tools were needed to calculate the thermodynamic properties of candidate cfc replacements and to model their transport, reaction, and ozonedepleting potential in the atmosphere. experimental studies developed databases of hfc and hcfc property measurements,and created new catalysts and processes for manufacturing these compounds. new manufacturing facilities were constructed for commercialproduction.why is hfc134a instead of cfc12 in our cars and homes today?the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.successes and discoveries in environmental chemical science19the simple answer is that it has practically no impact (zero ozone depletion potential) on the stratosphere. the reason for this involves severaldifferent characteristics of the hfc molecule. first, it contains no chlorine, and therefore cannot release the principal ozonedepleting photochemical product of cfc12, chlorine atoms, into the atmosphere. second, because it incorporates hydrogen, hfc134a is less stable thancfcs in the atmosphere. the strategy here may seem counterintuitive atfirst. if the deleterious effects of cfcs are due to their degradation products, one might attempt to make their replacements more stable andthereby reduce the release of such products. yet the key is not just whatand how much is released, but where. part of the lower ozone depletionpotential of hfc134a is that it degrades sooner (i.e., at lower elevation)and does not reach the stratosphere to react with ozone there.hfcs and hcfcs both act as greenhouse gases, so environmentalconcerns about those effects have not yet been resolved by using themas replacements for cfcs. however, their atmospheric lifetimes are onlya few years, in contrast to those of the cfc, which may be many decades.what lessons can we learn from this example? first, no compound,however wonderful, is likely to be entirely benign when released into theenvironment in large quantities and over a significant length of time.sooner or later its effects will be felt because of its accumulation, appearance, and action in unexpected places (and often by unexpected mechanisms). the inertness of cfcs that made them appealing in a wide rangeof applications, including consumer products, allowed them to reach thestratosphere in significant quantities before degrading. moreover the chlorine atoms released there act as catalysts for ozone destruction, greatlyamplifying their impact. thus, a second lesson has to do with the persistence and the action of compounds in the environment. it is desirable thatthese compounds exhibit limited lifetimes and that they and their degradation products not act by catalytic or selfreplicating processes thatamplify their environmental impact. yet another lesson is that the process of reduction of the environmental impact of human creations is acontinuous one. although hfcs are in wide use today, some see theseas merely the first step away from cfcs toward even more environmentally desirable alternatives. these and other challenges will continue torequire the best efforts of chemists, chemical engineers, environmentalscientists, atmospheric modelers, and investigators from a host of otherdisciplines, for (and on behalf of) generations to come.asee the ozone depletion phenomenon, beyond discovery, the nationalacademies, washington, dc, 1996; http://www.beyonddiscovery.org/.balso see box 32.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20the environmentchemists and chemical engineers have also contributed to the recognition ofthe importance of particulate matter in the atmosphere and the heterogeneousatmospheric chemistry that the particulate matter enables. similarly, chemistsand chemical engineers have provided the basic science that led to an understanding of photochemical smog formation and acid rain. this further helped to establish the role of biogenic emissions in the formation of smog.watermany environmental problems in water result from chemical species that arepresent in only trace quantities. consequently, chemical analysis and detectionhave made major contributions to discovering and understanding these problems.examples include the problems of bioaccumulation of certain chemicals, persistent organic pollutants, pesticide residues, and the health effects of arsenic andlead as well as other trace metals.soilsoil contamination also can be very difficult to detect. new analytical methods have made it possible to detect and analyze dioxins, polyaromatic hydrocarbons (pahs), and polychlorinated biphenyls (pcbs). analytical techniques havemade it possible to detect the presence of these substances, determine whetherremediation is needed, and evaluate the extent to which it has been carried out.chemistry has provided or contributed to the remediation technologies that havebeen developed,chemists and chemical engineers have helped to develop a better understanding of interfacial processes. these govern the behavior of pollutants at thesoilwater interface, and understanding them is essential to any remediation effort. such interfacial processes can be of particular importance for the radioactively contaminated sites that were created over many years in the nationõs nuclearweapons program.interdisciplinary discoverieschemists and chemical engineers do not work in isolation, and much of thework described here has involved collaboration with scientists and engineers inother disciplines. in many cases these collaborations have enabled particularlyimportant advances in environmental science, as illustrated by the examples inthe following list:the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.successes and discoveries in environmental chemical science21biology¥microbial in situ bioremediation and microbial community genomics¥proteomics and metabolomics¥polymerase chain reaction (pcr) and revolutions in molecular biologyphysics and engineering¥tools: new instrumentation; sensors, measurement systems and platformsmaterials science¥new catalystsmathematics and computer science¥multiscale computing (time and space)¥bioinformatics (handling huge databases); analysis of highthroughputdatasets¥development and implementation of efficient molecular modeling software on advanced computersatmospheric science, meteorology, and geology¥biogeochemical cycles (carbon, nitrogen, etc.)¥mechanisms and impact of contaminantsmany additional examples of collaborative work were brought up during theworkshop, and these are summarized in appendix g (interfaces). it is frequentlydifficult to identify the particular scientific accomplishment that have led to environmental improvements or enhanced environmental understanding, in large partbecause environmental studies are inherently multidisciplinary. consequently,cooperation across disciplinesñas described above and in appendix gñwillcontinue to be necessary to fully understand and solve environmental problems,so the list also represents research opportunities for the future.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.223challenges in environmentalchemical sciencechemical scientists and engineers have a particularly strong stake in the future of the environment. many of the most important environmental threats arecausedñor at least perceived to be causedñby release of undesirable chemicalsinto the air, water, or soil. in some cases, the source of such chemicals is natural,as in the highly publicized case of arseniccontaminated groundwater inbangladesh1 and also in some parts of the united states.2 chronic exposure tosmall amounts of arsenic in drinking water increases a personõs risk of cancer andother diseases.3 high concentrations of arsenic found in the aquifers inbangladesh and west bengal pose serious threats to public health; estimates ofpopulation at risk run from 30,000,000 to a high of 80,000,000.4 in other instances, human activity has been the origin of the chemical release. some of themost important cases are also the most ironicñbecause the harmful effects on theenvironment were a direct consequence of a technological innovation that wasintended to enhance environmental quality. two compelling examples are provided by ddt (box 31) and chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs, box 32).1arsenic contamination of groundwater in bangladesh; kinniburgh, d. g.; smedley, p. l., eds.;volume 1: summary, bgs and dphe, british geological survey technical report wc/00/19, british geological survey: keyworth, uk, 2001.2focazio, m. j.; welch, a. h.; watkins, s. a.; helsel, d. r.; horn, m. a., a retrospective analysison the occurrence of arsenic in groundwater resources of the united states and limitations indrinkingwatersupply characterizations: u.s. geological survey waterresources investigationreport 994279, 1999; http://co.water.usgs.gov/trace/pubs/wrir994279/.3arsenic in drinking water: 2001 update, national research council, national academy press,washington, d.c., 2001.4smith, a. h.; lingas, e. o.; rahman, m. bulletin of the world health organization 2000, 78(9),10931103.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science23how can environmental problemsñsuch as those associated with arsenic,ddt, and cfcsñbe solved? more specifically, how can the problems be resolved, how can release of pollutants into the environment be reduced or stopped,and how can harmful materials be removed from the environment? the complexity of the issue is even greater if the question is extended to, should efforts bemade to remove the material from the environment? ultimately, this leads to thequestion, how can such problems be prevented in the future?box 31ddt and malariaamalaria is a serious disease throughout much of the tropical world.in ceylon (now sri lanka), for example, an epidemic in the mid1930sresulted in nearly 50,000 deaths. the discovery by the swiss chemistlargescale use of the compound around the world. the ability to controlthe mosquito population responsible for the spread of malaria led to widespread application of ddt in sri lanka starting in 1958. nearly completeelimination of malaria resulted, with the rate of infection decreasing frommore than a million cases each year to fewer than 20 cases reported in1963. the battle appeared to have been won, and the spraying programwas ended. this seemed to provide ample justification for the award ofery.however, the story does not have a simple and happy ending. evidence was mounting that the mosquito population was becoming resistant to ddt. elsewhere, concerns were developing that ddt might haveharmful effects on other organisms. in the first example of an environmental contaminant that might have significant ecological effects, ddtwas linked to defective eggshells in avian populations.by 1967, a resurgence of malaria in ceylon led to a renewed ddtprogram, but it was ineffective against a resistant mosquito population. inthe late 1990s, the malaria infection rate increased to more than 200,000cases annually.the problems in this example have no easy solution. ddt use began as the apparent solution to a longtime scourge, but the success wasshortlived. the challenge for chemical scientists now is to find new approaches to preventing or curing the diseaseñbut without harmful effects elsewhere in the environment.asee http://plantpath.wisc.edu/ent371/lect11%202002.pdf; http://infopollution.com/ddtban.htm; http://users.rcn.com/jkimball.ma.ultranet/biologypages/i/insecticides. html.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24the environmentbox 32cfcs and the ozone holea,bstratospheric ozone depletion is one of the bestestablished phenomena arising from anthropogenic influence on the global environment.as chlorofluorocarbons and other chlorinated and brominated substancesare emitted into the atmosphere, those that are not subject to attack inthe troposphere may reach the stratosphere where uv radiation breaksthe molecules apart, releasing their halogen atoms. these halogen atoms initiate catalytic cycles that destroy stratospheric ozone; one chlorine atom can destroy as many as 100,000 ozone molecules before finally being removed from the stratosphere.the introduction of these substances in the 1930s was viewed as animpressive step forward for human welfare. as working fluids for refrigeration, cfcs had ideal physical properties, and they were chemicallyinert and nontoxic. by replacing ammonia as the standard working fluid,a tremendous improvement in safety had been achieved. once again,however, the story does not end on this happy note. a halfcentury later,it was found that these materials were the major contributors to ozonedepletion in the stratosphere and the growing ozone hole over antarctica, a phenomenon that threatened the wellbeing of life at the earthõssurface as a consequence of increased exposure to uv radiation.while the inertness of cfcs was initially viewed as an asset, theirlong chemical lifetime enables them to diffuse into the upper atmosphere,where they undergo photochemical reactions when exposed to shortwavelength radiation from the sun. these reactions in turn lead to thedestruction of stratospheric ozone and the weakening of the uv protection that ozone provides to earth. for their work in elucidating thesechemical pathways, the 1995 nobel prize in chemistry was awarded topaul crutzen, mario molina, and sherwood rowland.the ozone hole still exists, but the scientific discovery of the chemistry behind the problem has made a solution possible. cfcs and relatedpersistent chlorinated and brominated organic materials are no longerbeing released in the massive quantities that were previously typical.once again, the original problems remainñcan we develop safe, nontoxic, and environmentally benign replacement materials for such usesas refrigeration, manufacturing, and fire suppression?asee the ozone depletion phenomenon, beyond discovery, the national academies, washington, dc, 1996; http://www.beyonddiscovery.org/.balso see box 22.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science25if science and engineering are to be employed in solving and preventingproblems, then scientists and engineers will need to greatly increase the level ofunderstanding of the relevant issues. society will need to develop a far morecomprehensive knowledge of the environment, from a global scale down to thechemical reactions that take place in air, water, and soil and within living organisms. new and more powerful methods for detecting and analyzing chemicalsubstances will be needed, and it will be essential to develop a systems approachto the complex network of interacting chemical, physical, and biological processes that must be monitored and evaluated. only with this greatly expandedknowledge will it become possible to fully protect, restore, and preserve our environment.fundamental understandinghuman influence on the natural environmentevidence of anthropogenic influence on the natural environment is widespread: examples include pesticide use (see box 31), stratospheric ozone depletion (see box 32), intercontinental transport of windborne dust and air pollutants, drinking water disinfection (see box 33), and increasing levels ofanthropogenic emissions into soils and groundwater.intercontinental transport of windborne dust has been observed for manyyears,5 and satellites have tracked plumes of smoke from forest fires and biomassburning over thousands of kilometers.6 more than two generations ago, it became recognized that lead, principally associated with the use of tetraethyl lead asa motor fuel additive, was being distributed globally. likewise, longrange transport of chemical pesticides, such as ddt and other organic chlorine compounds,and the associated ecological damage have been a subject of study for decades. inthe 1980s, ozone pollution was identified as not just an urban problem, and transport of ozone across national boundaries became an international issue in northamerica, europe, and most recently, asia. surface measurements have shownthat ozone pollution from north america is easily detectable 3000 km downwindfrom the north american source region.7 similar observations have been madeof transport of asian pollution across the pacific.8 longrange transport of polychlorinated biphenyls (pcbs) and dioxins has been extensively documented.recently, polybrominated diphenyl ether (pbde) chemicals used as flame retardants in consumer products appear to be contaminating pristine areas of the arctic5 prospero, j. m.; savoie, d. l. nature 1989, 339, 687689.6 wotawa, g.; trainer, m. science 2000, 288, 324328.7 parrish, d. d.; trainer, m.; holloway, j. s.; yee, j. e.; warshawsky, m. s.; fehsenfeld, f. c.;forbes, g. l.; moody, j. l. j. geophys. res. 1998, 103, 1335713376.8 jacob, d. j.; logan, j. a.; murti, p. p. geophysical research letters 1999, 26, 21752178.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26the environmentbox 33drinking water disinfection and disinfection byproductsawaterborne pathogens were responsible for tens of thousands ofdeaths during the first 150 years of u.s. history, with more than 50,000deaths from typhoid fever as late as 19001904.b worldwide, choleraoutbreaks were eventually traced to contaminated water. disinfection ofwater in the early 1900s with chlorine compounds and then with elemental chlorine nearly eliminated waterborne diseases such as cholera, typhoid, dysentery, and hepatitis in u.s. cities. together with improvementsin sewage treatment, this ranks among the most important contributionsmade by science and engineering to the improvement of human health.cdisinfection with chlorine not only is effective against waterbornebacteria and viruses at the site of treatment but also provides residualprotection by inhibiting microbial growth in the distribution system. whilechlorine has been a true lifesaver, its use to treat drinking water also cangenerate disinfection byproducts (dbps) such as trihlomethanes (thms)that may pose risks to human health. dcps are of particular concernwhen treating surface water (from rivers, lakes, and streams) that is morelikely to contain organic materials that can react with chlorine.under the requirements of the safe drinking water act and subsequent amendments, the environmental protection agency (epa) regulates dbps in drinking water. a research effort has been established tofacilitate decisions on drinking water safety by identifying and reducingamounts of dbps found to be hazardous.d currently, all public watereven more rapidly than either pcbs or dioxins.9 the most comprehensive assessment to date of pbdes in the breast milk of north american women indicatesthat the body burden in americans and canadians is the highest in the world, 40times greater than the highest levels reported for women in sweden.10 fluorinated organic compounds are globally distributed, environmentally persistent,and bioaccumulative.11water and sediment chemistryenvironmental chemistry has progressed significantly over the past four tofive decades from a science that was concerned primarily with measurements oftrends in the distribution of problematic species in the environment to the more9ikonomou, m. g.; rayne, s.; addison, r. f. environ. sci. technol. 2002, 36, 18861892.10betts, k. s. environ. sci. technol. 2002, 36, 50a52a.11giesy, j. p.; kannon, k. environ. sci. technol. 2002, 36, 147a152a.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science27modern approach that seeks to understand processes on a fundamental chemicaland physical basis. accordingly, our ability to understand environmental processes hinges on our ability to recognize the factors responsible for the complexbiogeochemical interactions that are collectively acting to modify the systems.analytical chemistry plays a huge role in providing us access to methodologiesthat will enlighten our abilities to recognize the responsible factors. therein liesthe future in environmental chemistry, especially if one can apply developingmethodologies to solve new problems. there are some critical thrust areas thathave to be developed further. first is the need to understand chemical processesat a molecular level of detail. we need to move from empirical observations thatfeed well into largescale models of transport, circulation, biodegradation, andother processes, to developing a fundamental understanding of the biogeochemical processes at a molecular level. it is only then that we can truly understand thefactors governing such processes. we now have some very powerful analyticaltools to do this, and we should strive to become proficient and knowledgeable intheir application, especially with regard to solving some important environmentalproblems.systems that provide disinfection are required to test for thms and meetthe limits set by epa. water utilities have adjusted the type and amountof chlorinebased disinfectant used as well the site of application. in addition, the treatment process has been expanded to remove the naturallyoccurring organic matter that could react to produce thms.chlorine is not the only means of disinfection available, but othermethods can also produce toxic byproducts. in addition, alternative disinfectants do not provide the residual protection offered by chlorinebaseddisinfectants, so they must be used in combination with chlorine. drinking water treatment must satisfy the competing objectives of maximummicrobial decontamination and minimum production of toxic byproducts.this is a difficult task that will require research by chemists and chemicalengineers in collaboration with a variety of other experts to continuouslyimprove the safety and quality of the worldõs drinking water.aminnesota department of health fact sheet: drinking water disinfection byproducts, january 1998, www.mrwa.com/mdhdrinkingwaterdisinfection.htm.bmctigue, bill, òhard to swallowé the effects of water chlorinationó www.homeenv.com/artchlorination.htmcgreatest engineering achievements of the 20th century, national academy ofengineering, 2000, http://www.greatachievements.org/greatachievements/ga42.html.drichardson, susan òdisinfection byproducts of health concern in drinkingwater: results of a nationwide occurrence study, www.epa.gov/ord/scienceforum/pdfs/water/richardsons.pdf.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28the environmentone problem that requires attention is developing a molecularlevel understanding of how carbon turns over in soils, sediments, and waters. much of ourunderstanding of how our planet will cope with rising co2 levels and globalwarming trends is based on models that describe the behavior of carbonñitslocation, form (e.g., as carbon dioxide, carbonate, or organic plant matter), andrate of conversion through biogeochemical cyclesñamong various environmental compartments. one huge variable in predicting outcomes from models is themolecular manner in which carbon turnover occurs. the input data are based onuptake and evolution of co2 and nitrogenous components that provide only totalrates. we really have little understanding of the factors that control turnover.humic substances and their production from plant materials are important factorsand we need to know more about the relevant biological and chemical processesdown to the molecular level. related to this is the nature of dissolved organicmatter in natural watersña huge reactive and storage reservoir for carbon. wealso need to better understand the biological and physicochemical interactionsthat occur in response to global greenhouse gas augmentations. we also must notfail to consider effects that climate change might have on environmental chemical processes.the major goals of environmental bioinorganic chemistry are to elucidatethe structures, mechanisms, and interactions of important ònaturalómetalloenzymes and metalbinding compounds in the environment and toassess their effects on major biogeochemical cycles such as those of carbonand nitrogen. by providing an understanding of key chemical processes inthe biogeochemical cycles of elements, such a molecular approach to thestudy of global processes should help unravel the interdependence of lifeand geochemistry on planet earth and their coevolution through geological times.[fran“ois morel, appendix d]dissolved organic matter (dom) in water leads to the binding and transportof organic and inorganic contaminants, produces undesirable byproducts throughreaction with disinfection agents, and mediates photochemical processes. domis also a major reactant in and product of biogeochemical processes and controlslevels of dissolved oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur, numerous trace metals,and acidity.12 dom can range in molecular weight from a few hundred to 100,000da, which is in the colloidal size range, and generally has similar characteristicsto humic substances in soil. moreover, contaminants of a bewildering array are12leenheer, j. a.; crou”, j.p. environ. sci. technol. 2002, 36, 19a26a.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science29being found in aquatic environments. these include detergents, disinfectants, insect repellents, fire retardants, plasticizers, reproductive hormone mimics, steroids, antibiotics, and numerous other prescription and nonprescription drugs.13another important area is understanding the fate and transport of anthropogenic chemicals in soils and sediments. organic chemicals, including pharmaceuticals, fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides, are at the top of the list. it isimportant to develop ties among environmental chemists and engineers whomodel processes associated with fate and transport. most models employ empirically derived parameters for the kinds of interactions that accelerate or retardsuch processes. these models are often poorly developed for lack of a betterunderstanding of molecularlevel processes. we need to know how contaminantsare hydrologically transported in a medium where they continually interact at themolecular level with dom and with mineral, biological, and organic phases ofsoils and sediments.the occurrence and mobility of harmful chemical substances, whether ofnatural origin or anthropogenic contaminants, in the subsurface environment pose both an intellectual and fundamental scientific challenge andpractical concerns for the use and management of groundwater resources.the chemical sciences offer powerful approaches toward understandingand mitigating the problems of groundwater contamination. society hasbenefited and will continue to benefit from this important application ofchemistry to environmental problems.[janet hering, appendix d]another area that deserves attention is natural attenuationñthe diminutionof pollutants in soil and groundwater by such natural processes as adsorption,dilution, dispersion, chemical or biological degradation, radioactive decay, andvaporization that take place without human intervention. this work has gainedpopularity in recent years, mainly because it is being used to justify corporate andgovernmental decisions. we need to evaluate the process in depth, again at themolecular level. the earth system may well be capable of remediating itself, butwe need to know the time scale and the outcome associated with such an approach.chemistry plays a monumental role along with biology and environmental engineering in developing the crucial experiments to evaluate the fate of individualcontaminants. once the underlying science is wellunderstood, it may be possibleto develop lowcost enhancements or acceleration of the natural processes.13erickson, b. e., environ. sci. technol. 2002, 36, 141a145a.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30the environmentchemistry has and should continue to play a leading role in developing anunderstanding of the toxicological effects of our industrializationñeffects resulting from petrochemicals, specialty chemicals, nuclear wastes, natural geochemical hazards, and, foremost, from the processing of our drinking water andfoods. developments in analytical methodologies and approaches can significantly extend our knowledge of the harmful effects of anthropogenic chemicalsin the environment. of specific concern and importance is the molecularlevelrelationship between bioavailability and the chemical speciation of variouschemicals of environmental concern. currently, there is great interest in understanding how organisms utilize, in either a beneficial or a deleterious fashion,specific compounds in their surroundings. the specific form of the compound iscrucial to understanding whether it is harmful, beneficial, or benign. the flurryof activity in bioinorganic chemistry is central to this issue, but the importancealso extends to the speciation of organic compounds, including organometalliccompounds. not only does chemistry play an important role in characterizingthe compounds of interest (a challenge for analytical chemists who often mustdo this at subpicomolar concentrations), but it is central to understanding theprocesses by which bioavailable forms become incorporated into cellular structures in organisms.gastoparticle conversion and combustion aerosol formationthe major processes for creating atmospheric fine particles (diameter < 2.5m) are combustion and gastoparticle conversion (gpc). whereas combustionparticles are emitted directly to the atmosphere (primary aerosol), gastoparticleconversion refers to the chemistry that leads to particulate matter by convertingvolatile gases into condensable substances under atmospheric conditions. gastoparticle conversion leads to an increase in the mass of preexisting particles andunder some circumstances may lead to the creation of new particles. particulatematerial produced by gpc is referred to as secondary aerosol.understanding gpc entails identifying precursor gases, elucidating the chemistry that converts them (in the gas phase, on surfaces, or in solution) into condensable species, and determining the processes by which those species are thenconverted into particulate matter (e.g., by nucleation, condensation, or direct production on an existing particle). one can make a distinction between gpc processes that lead to new particles where gasphase chemistry produces supersaturated conditions followed by nucleation into a singlecomponent or, more likely,a multicomponent condensed phase and processes that chemically age a preexisting aerosol by heterogeneous or multiphase reactions and condensation.an understanding of gpc (both nucleation and growth) requires knowledgeof which of the possible species participate in nucleation, their concentrations,and their thermodynamic and nucleation properties. for the atmosphere, one needsthe concentrations not only of precursor gases but also of the oxidants, ozone,the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science31hydroxyl radicals, and nitrate radicals that initiate the process. important gas precursors that have been identified include sulfur species such as sulfur dioxide anddimethyl sulfide, volatile organic compounds (vocs) such as aromatics in urbanareas and monoterpenes in forested regions, and ammonia and nitric acid. reactions of these species lead to lowvolatility products such as sulfuric acid, ammonium sulfate, ammonium nitrate, and multifunctional organic compounds containing acid, carbonyl, hydroxyl, and nitrate groups.formation of combustion particles also involves nucleation and condensation of vapors, although the processes occur at elevated temperatures inside thecombustion source and during cooling of the plume. like secondary aerosols,combustion particles have a major semivolatile component composed of sulfatesfrom sulfur dioxide oxidation and organic oxidation products, and of unburnedfuel and oil as well. furthermore, they contain a large nonvolatile componentconsisting of soot, metals, and metal oxides.the most important problems involving fine particles involve their potentialimpacts on global climate and human health. climate effects can occur throughdirect scattering and absorption of radiation and by altering cloud radiative properties and lifetimes through the action of particles as cloud condensation nuclei.the mechanisms by which particles impact human health, such as respiratory andcardiovascular function, are not yet fully understood, particularly in relation toparticle size. nevertheless, epidemiologic studies have been sufficiently convincing to result in implementation by the epa of new air quality standards for fineparticulate matter.the properties of particles that determine their impacts on both global climate and human health include number, concentration, size, composition, mass,and surface area. an aerosol may be chemically inhomogeneous from particle toparticle, resulting from a mix of processes. consequently, characterization of individual atmospheric particles, rather than of bulk particulate matter, is most desirable for sorting out these details. in addition, there is a need to characterize thechemical structure within particles. whether individual particles are chemicallyhomogeneous or have organic coatings or inorganic incrustations, for example,will affect their radiative properties, atmospheric removal, heterogeneous reactions, and role as nuclei for cloud droplet formation and growth, as well as theirhealth consequences.although environmental chemists have traditionally flourished in the realmof atmospheric processes, some new discoveries have confounded explanation.for example, scientists have begun to recognize the important role of black carbon (small particulate matter formed as a byproduct in combustion of fossil fuels) in greenhouse trend reversal. the absorption of sunlight by aerosols containing black carbon can result in simultaneous warming of the atmosphere andcooling of the earthõs surface. however, evaluating the role of black carbon isdifficult due to the lack of good measurement methodologies. the evolution ofarctic smog during the summer season is an enigma not easily understood, but itthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32the environmentis clear that understanding the molecularlevel chemistry and photochemistry inaerosols is crucial.the utilization of massindependent isotopic measurements of atmospheric,hydrospheric, and geologic species has advanced understanding of a widerange of environmental processes. the future development of the utilization and understanding of this new technique clearly will have numerousapplications that should, and will, be advanced. issues in climate change,health, agriculture, biodiversity, and water quality all may be addressed.simultaneous with the acquisition of new environmental insight will be theenhancement of the understanding of fundamental chemical physics.[mark thiemens, appendix d]finally, there is an important role that environmental chemists can play inhomeland security,14 especially in areas such as radioactive contamination; deliberate contamination of water, food, air, and soil; and detection of potentiallyharmful devices. it is likely that the future of our society depends on our ability torespond to the effects induced by acts of terror. environmental chemists, employing stateoftheart analytical tools, can play a leading role in prevention, mitigation, and prediction of harmful effects. dualuse technologies will have applications in monitoring environmental change, alerting society to homeland securitythreats, and characterizing dangerous agents. the integration of environmentalmeasurements in a network could also identify when and where something unusual occurs.putting it all together: understanding biogeochemical cyclesthe real grand challenge is to understand fully the operation of biogeochemical cycles and the implications of human use of chemical feedstocks. most oftodayõs environmental issues evolved from ignorance or disregard of the fates ofthe chemical byproducts of human endeavors, and a full understanding of thecomplex interrelationships will be a necessary foundation for resolving the issues. this will be a difficult task, because the biogeochemical cycles cross avariety of boundaries. they involve the different scientific disciplines of chemistry, biology, and geology; they cover water, soil, and air; and they include different scales from nanometers to kilometers.14challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century: national security & homeland defense, national research council, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2002.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science33instrumentation and research toolschemists and chemical engineers are uniquely situated to help advance understanding of the environment, largely because of their molecular approach.moreover, tremendous progress has been made in the levels of precision andaccuracy that chemical measurements can provide. this has been made possibleby the development of fundamental theory and a good understanding of the thermodynamics, kinetics, and transport properties that govern the interactions ofmolecules. from a chemical perspective, the fundamental challenges in environmental problems arise from expanding this understanding to enormously greaterscales of time and space while maintaining an accurate representation of bothphysical and chemical processes. a few years ago, even contemplation of such anachievement was hopeless, but recently the combined advances in analytical instrumentation and computational tools have allowed some of the challenges to beaddressed. the value of instrumentation for measurement, coupled with robustcomputational and mathematical tools for modeling, can hardly be overestimated.without measurement and modeling, understanding of environmental phenomena cannot be achieved. without modeling, experiments cannot be designed andtested.chemists and chemical engineers use three basic tools to measure and describe the chemistry that is taking place in our environment:1.laboratory measurements and devices to simulate and characterize thatchemistry;2.theoretical and computational tools to check experimental results, extrapolate, and codify what we know in environmental models; and3.field observations and experiments to make direct environmental measurements and learn the impact of human activities.the components of our environmentñatmosphere, water, and soil, as wellas the biological systems with which they interactñare all critically important toour wellbeing and are markedly undersampled. much remains to be learned aboutthe behavior and effects of aerosols, micrometersize particles, and trace molecules in air and water. understanding such phenomena is important to humanhealth, ecology, and climate. moreover, understanding the chemical basis for theirbiological effects is within our grasp. we are developing the capabilities for measuring the environment on a worldwide basis, and the global migration of pollutants is being documented for the first time. success in these endeavors will depend on rapid advancement in measurement and modeling.in measurement science, the desired signal is often very small and may beembedded in highly variable samples. environmental samples are seldom controlled. they are likely to contain complex mixtures of compounds in a widevariety of matrices that can further complicate the sampling problem. furtherthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34the environmentmore, knowing only the composition is inadequate. to fully comprehend the problem, one must have information on horizontal and vertical fluxes of the speciesbeing studied. the sources, sinks, and fluxes between reservoirs must also beunderstood, including their variation over time in response to atmospheric andterrestrial perturbations.as noted by dellinger (appendix d), combustion sources are responsible fora major fraction of air pollution problems. this understanding began with therecognition that nox and organic materials from combustion sources are the primary source of photochemically induced air pollution, and it was also found thatsox and nox emissions are responsible for acid rain. particulate emissions, initially considered to be mainly a nuisance, are known to be primarily responsiblefor atmospheric hazes. through use of refined analytical measurements, biological assays, and epidemiological studies, it was gradually recognized that particulate matter had human health impacts, first as a lung irritant, then as a source ofpahs, and now a source of other, yet undefined, biologically active pollutantscontained primarily in the carbonaceous fraction. it was also found that pahs arecarcinogens, and combustion is again their principal source in the environment.although combustion and thermal processes are necessary to provide forthe essential needs of our existence, they are intrinsically òdirtyó and emita variety of air pollutants. some of these pollutants are well known, wellunderstood, and subject to significant control.however, combustion is a complex process that results in formation ofmany pollutants that are not well characterized as to their nature or origin.as a responsible society, it is incumbent upon us to examine these issues,determine their importance, and endeavor to eventually resolve and addresseach of them.[barry dellinger, appendix d]it is now generally accepted that combustion is the almost exclusive sourceof the carcinogen and endocrinedisrupting chemical family of polychlorinateddibenzopdioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (pcdd/f or dioxins forshort). dioxins are part of a broader class of chlorinated organic air pollutantsthat are produced by most combustion sources. all that is necessary are a smallsource of chlorine (that may even be in the combustion makeup air), a catalyticmetal, and a hydrocarbon.extensive research, enabled by improved analytical measurements, has beencarried out on the mechanism of formation of dioxins and other chlorinated organics. researchers discovered that many combustiongenerated pollutants actually are formed after the flame zone not only by surface catalyzed reactions butalso in the gas phase by high and mediumtemperature thermal processes. thesethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science35discoveries were highly dependent on improvements in measurement tools andbetter mathematical models.measurement toolsin carefully controlled laboratory environments, it is possible to use suchmethods as mass spectrometry and laser spectroscopy to make sophisticated measurements to reach the ultimate limit of detectionñthe detection and characterization of single molecules. however, these limits are not easily achieved withenvironmental samples, where sampling and separations challenges are as important as detection sensitivity. moreover, laboratory investigations in controlledenvironments by skilled investigators are important, but they cannot approach theneeds for environmental sampling in real time.atmospheric measurements are also challenging because they must dealwith low to extremely low concentrations of trace chemical species. themajor components (>99.999%) of the lowest portions of the atmosphere(the troposphere up to ~10 km in altitude and the stratosphere between ~10and ~50 km) are molecular nitrogen, molecular oxygen, argon, water vapor, and carbon dioxide. chemists will recognize that all of these speciesare very stable, strongly bonded molecules or atoms that are essentiallyinert gases at normal atmospheric temperatures (190310 k). indeed, without solar photons to break up selected molecules, atmospheric chemistrywould be very dull indeed.atmospheric chemistry is dominated by trace species, ranging in mixing ratios (mole fractions) from a few parts per million, for methane in thetroposphere and ozone in the stratosphere, to hundredths of parts per trillion, or less, for highly reactive species such as the hydroxyl radical. it isalso surprising that atmospheric condensedphase material plays very important roles in atmospheric chemistry, since there is relatively so little ofit. atmospheric condensedphase volume to gasphase volume ratios rangefrom about 3 10ð7 for tropospheric clouds to ~3  10ð14 for backgroundstratospheric sulfate aerosol.[charles kolb, appendix d]the challenges in monitoring the environment are enormous. the surfacearea of the earth is about 500 million square kilometers, twothirds of which isocean. the relevant volume of the atmosphereñthe troposphere where we liveand the stratosphere above thatñis 25 billion cubic kilometers, and its composition is constantly changing. many millions of dollars are spent for instruments onplanes, satellites, and ground stations, just to obtain meteorological data forthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36the environmentweather forecasting. to study chemicals in the atmosphereñas gases, mists, andparticles, with their fluxes and phase changesñpresents a monumental challengefor environmental and analytical chemists as well as those who will develop thenecessary instrumentation.how can we meet this challenge with the tools we have or the tools we mightbe able to develop? three strategies are available:1.very fast sensors. by mounting such sensors on mobile platforms andmoving them to sample over a range of space and time, it would be possible tounderstand how a system is actually responding.2.remote sensing. this works well for the atmosphere, sometimes for theoceans, and for the first 10 cm of the soil. the national oceanic and atmosphericadministration (noaa) and national aeronautics and space administration(nasa) have enormously successful, albeit expensive, satellite programs formonitoring and understanding the earthõs environment on an ongoing basis.3.sensor arrays. by linking a large number of sensors in an intelligent way,the value of the information that is gathered can be greatly amplified. however,implementation of such an approach will require that both the sensors and thenecessary communications system be inexpensive.one possible solution to realtime global sampling would be a combinationof widely distributed robust measurement systems; highly mobile sensing platforms; and satellite, shipboard, and aircraftmounted instruments. these remotesampling stations and platforms would have to be backed up by highperformance laboratoryscale instrumentation to verify field results. in addition, theywould have to be connected via information technology networks to central processing computers, and these large data arrays would require extensive processing using chemometric approaches.the information needed from the chemistry community on combustion particles and gpc in order to significantly advance understanding of the impact ofaerosols on global climate and human health, and possibly ameliorate these effects, includes the following:¥thermochemical data from either measurements or computations on organic compounds, including vapor pressures and solubility in organic and aqueous salt solutions. data on cluster properties of organics and the sulfuric acidwaterammonia system are necesary for understanding nucleation.¥heterogeneous reactions. knowledge of atmospherically relevant heterogeneous reactions is far from complete. important reactions probably still remainto be identified and their rates and mechanisms determined. just as ignorance ofheterogeneous chemistry contributed to the failure of stratospheric ozone modelsto anticipate the formation of the antarctic ozone hole, much still is to be discovered and learned about the role of heterogeneous reactions in the troposphere.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science37¥advanced methods for particle analysis. the state of the art in quantitative methods includes semicontinuous analysis of major inorganic cations (nh4+,na+, k+, etc.), anions (so42, no3, cl, etc.), and organic acids using particlecollection and ion chromatography, and realtime particle mass spectrometry using thermal desorptionelectron ionization. these methods do not analyze singleparticles or refractory materials. a number of instrument designs based on laservaporizationðtimeofflight mass spectrometry are now available for analyzingthe size and composition of single aerosol particles (including refractory components) in real time. although these instruments are quite powerful, their limitations include the following: (1) they are generally limited to analysis of particleslarger than ~50 nm in diameter, (2) they measure the composition of an uncontrolled and unknown fraction of a particle, and (3) measurements are not quantitative.for public drinking water, groundwater is a significant resource. in the unitedstates, 46% of drinking water comes from groundwater resources, and 54% comesfrom surface water. groundwater is considerably less vulnerable to pathogens,but its greater opportunity to interact with soil minerals allows various dissolvedspecies to accumulate in the water supply. the problems associated with lead andarsenic are well known, but to fully understand the evolution of groundwatercomposition, it will be necessary to obtain a much greater insight into the biogeochemical processes by which various chemical constituents are partitionedbetween mobile and immobile phases in the aquifer.analytical needs and opportunities in this area are challenging, particularlyfor pollutants of emerging concern such as endocrine disrupting compounds andpharmaceutical derivatives. direct spectroscopic measurements of the sort thancan be used for atmospheric measurements are not usually applicable. samplecollection, preparation, and analysis typically have been carried out in separatesteps. consequently, the development of techniques for in situ measurement capability, remote sensing and detection, and sensors for monitoring in soil andwater would afford significant progress.analytical instrumentationa broad range of developments, generally described as laboratoryonachiptechnologies, have been described and are being explored in several laboratories.15 a variety of labonachip combinations can be used to multiplex a varietyof separations with multiple detectors. techniques such as molecular imprintingoffer considerable promise for reducing the cost of these devices while maintain15ramsey, j. m. nature 1999, 17, 10611062.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38the environmenting high sensitivity in a robust and compact package. more sophisticated versionsof the devices have used microversions of laserinduced fluorescence andmicroscale iontrap mass spectrometers. the latter two detection methods areamong the most versatile and sensitive means for characterizing molecules. laboratory versions are capable of both singlemolecule sensitivity and a very highdegree of specificity. miniaturized versions of such devices lose some but not allof their versatility and sensitivity. soon these approaches will emerge as robust,fielddeployable measurement tools.16a particlesampling mass spectrometer could provide a useful approach tomeasuring inhalation exposure to pollutants in a wide variety of environments.one example17 employs an aerodynamic lens that samples very fine particles andcreates a beam that can be modulated to give a crude timeofflight mass distribution. the particles impinge on a hot surface, causing vaporization of constituentsthat can be ionized (by electron impact or photoionization) and subjected to massanalysis by any of several kinds of mass analyzers.combinations of spectroscopies, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr)and fluorescence or mass spectrometry to obtain visual and time evolution information (nmr) and high specificity and sensitivity (optical and mass spectrometry) are also highly promising new approaches for measurement science. however, it is beyond the scope of this report to list the many other recent advances inmeasurement sciences that are highly promising and clearly applicable to environmental problems. many are at an early stage of development, and progresswill require crossdisciplinary teams of chemists, physicists, engineers, computerscientists, and instrument specialists. since the potential market is undefined andthe number of people with the requisite skills is limited, ways and means must bedevised to bring the best ideas of academia, industry, and federal laboratories tobear on this problem.the cavity ringdown laser (see j. anderson, appendix d) is an exciting newdevelopment with great potential. one method18 uses highly reflective mirrorsmounted about a meter apart; the laser beam transits the cavity more than a million times, giving an effective detector path of about 10 km. such complex andsensitive devices are not yet ready for widespread implementation, but their usein aircraft has been demonstrated. reducing their size, incorporating commercialinfrared lasers, and downsizing them into a shoeboxsize package will be the nextchallenge.16patterson, g. e.; guymon, a. j.; riter, l. s.; everly, m.; griepraming, j.; laughlin, b. c.;ouyang, z.; cooks, r. g. analytical chemistry 2002, 74, 61456153.17jayne, j. t.; leard, d. l.; zhang, x.; davidovits, p.; smith, k. a.; kolb, c. e.; worsnop, d. r.aerosol science and technology 2000, 33, 4970.18oõkeefe, a.; scherer, j. j.; paul, j. b.; saykally, r. j. cavityringdown spectroscopy: anultratraceabsorption measurement technique; busch, k. w.; busch, m. a. editors; acs symposium series 720; american chemical society, washington, d.c., 1999, pp. 7192; provencal, r. a.;paul, j. b.; chapo, c. n.; saykally, r. j. spectroscopy 1999, 14, 24.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science39individual instruments will not be used to solve most environmental problems. it will be necessary to develop suites of instruments that can be crosscalibrated and crosscorrelated to show that the same part of the environment isbeing examined and that the measurements are taking place at the same time. it islikely that in situ and remote sensing will be used concurrently, while the resulting data are evaluated in a model in real time. for example, impressive and expensive mobile measurement systems were used in evaluating the problem ofstratospheric ozone depletion by simultaneously measuring several different radical species (halogen, hydrogenoxygen, and nitrogen oxide) in real time, with 1to 5s resolution.19 similarly, in mexico city a mobile laboratory was used forrealtime measurements of fine particle and gasphase species, looking at emission sources, process studies, mapping, and understanding how one part of thecity differs from another both in emissions and the chemical reactions takingplace in the atmosphere.20additional analytical capabilities needed include the following:¥instruments for remote sensing that are robust, portable, and miniaturized.¥highthroughput instrumentation for sampling and analyzing large numbers of samples.¥instruments and methods that can measure singleparticle composition inreal time down to sizes of fresh nuclei (~1 nm).¥instruments and methods that can in near real time characterize more fullythe speciated organic composition of secondary and combustion aerosols and thatof the gas phase. in conjunction with laboratory studies, one may hope to usethese techniques to elucidate the pathways and connect precursor volatile organiccompounds to the nature of particulate matter.¥instruments and methods that can provide information on the compositionand structure of particle surfaces. these would have to be realtime or nearrealtime measurements because surfaces of collected particles would be prone toalteration.¥improved methods for collection of semivolatile compounds. stateoftheart denuder systems are still prone to adsorptiondesorption artifacts. becauseof the high costs of particle mass spectrometers, most studies of organics willprobably rely on particle collection with offline analyses by gas chromatographymass spectrometry (gcms), so reliable collection methods are important.¥instruments and methods for measuring atmospheric particle water content, which is quite difficult because of the volatile nature of water.19brune, w. h.; anderson, j. g.; chan, k. r j. geophys. res. 1989, 94(d14), 16,64916,663.20jayne, j. t.; leard, d. c.; zhang, x.; davidovits, p.; smith, k. a.; kolb, c. e.; worsnop, d. r.aerosol sci. technol. 2000, 33, 4970.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40the environment¥instruments and methods for measuring particle ph. in light of recentstudies indicating that acidcatalyzed particlephase polymerization reactions maybe important in secondary organic aerosol formation, ambient particle ph mustbe known to evaluate and model such reactions.¥identification of chemical tracers for the wide variety of organic combustion and secondary aerosol sources, which can be used to identify and quantifysource contributions to ambient aerosol. for the health effects community, itwould especially valuable to have simple indicators of sources, which need not behighly accurate but can be easily measured and used to correlate source contributions with health criteria.computing tools and applicationsthe introduction last year of the earth simulator in japan, which leapfroggeddevelopment of highperformance computing in this country, has provoked considerable discussion among academic and federal agencies. this computer is ageneral purpose, vector computer that is applicable to a wide range of problemsin science and engineering, and it is more than a hundred times faster than thefastest computer accessible to nondefense scientists in the united states. daviddixon (appendix d) described a highperformance computer with almost onethird of the computing power of the earth simulator that should be readily adaptable to general environmental applications.with such higherperformance computers, accurate quantum mechanical calculations should be possible with heavy elements for which relativistic corrections are significant, accurate zeropoint energies can be calculated to improvethe accuracy of thermodynamic calculations dramatically, and rate equations canbe used to search more accurately for transition states and to study interfacialreactions (including those at the cellular interfaces of biological systems). theimportance of improving accuracy in these basic calculations can hardly be overestimated. as an example, consider an error of 0.2 kcal/mol in the activationenergy to form the water dimer. when propagated during a calculation of nucleation phenomena the initial error could be expanded by 40 orders of magnitude,leading to an error of 1012 in rate constants for nucleation.progress using this class of computer requires teams of experts in computational science, computational chemistry, applied mathematics, and software engineering to adapt and effectively use these tools. a major role for chemists isdefining the problems to be tackled with such tools. modeling toolsñmany ofwhich require developmentñwill be essential to traverse all relevant length andtime scales, and computation will have to be coupled with measurement to confirm models and make predictions. with success in this realm, modeling increasingly will replace experiments that are too difficult, too dangerous, or too expensive.data storage and integration are major challenges for computer science andthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science41mathematics specialists. these challenges must be addressed before the sophisticated instrumentation described above can be employed with optimal effectiveness. thus, except for demonstration units, few such instruments exist. connection to sophisticated computer networks and informatics processing are criticalrequirements for converting raw data into useful information.modeling, simulation, and computational chemistry21what can theory and simulation accomplish? they greatly enhance our understanding of known systems, providing qualitative and quantitative insightsthat can enable new experiments or new systems. computational chemistry hasthe goal of providing quantitative results that can eliminate the need for experiments that are too difficult, dangerous, or expensive or can extend into temporalor spatial domains where the necessary experimental tools are not available. calculations have become increasingly reliable, providing valuable methods for solving newtonõs laws of motion for molecular dynamics and schroedingerõs equation for electronic motion. extending these capabilities and solving the nuclearmotion problem will be an important challenge in the coming decades. progresswill enable calculation of molecular structures and energetics, reaction equilibria,substitution effects, spectroscopic properties, rates of reactions, and reactionmechanisms.computational chemistry can play a key role in advancing the scientificenterprise. it can provide the data input for many larger, more complexmodels and provide us with unique insights into molecular behavior so thatwe can design and construct new molecules for specific tasks. computational chemistry has become an established tool in the chemistõs toolboxand is being used in broad areas of chemistry to replace experimental measurements and to provide us with improved understanding of molecularbehavior. computation will be the major tool that will enable us to crossthe many temporal and spatial scales that characterize environmental science.[david dixon, appendix d]when applying computational chemistry to complex environmental problems, major challenges are encountered in scaleñboth in time and in space. thisis illustrated in for atmospheric chemistry in figure 31. current methodologies21many of the relevant issues are covered in one of the other reports in this series, challenges forthe chemical sciences in the 21st century: information and communications, national researchcouncil, the national academies press, washington, d.c., 2003.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42the environmentdo not connect the molecular scales with all of the subsequent scales above them.we lack the tools, theories, and methods to make the connections. increasing thescale of the models will require increased computing power, and advances willrely on collaboration with mathematicians and computer scientists. these problems of scale are analogous to those encountered in a chemical plant, where modeling and simulation must span the range from molecular processes and chemicalkinetics through process optimization. applications that range from climate modeling to bioinformatics and genomics also will require new developments in theanalysis and manipulation of increasingly massive datasets.many important environmental questions or problems will necessitate computational study if they are to be solved. such problems include¥the urbantoregional migration of nitrate, sulfate, heavy metals, and organic soot into the broader environmentñand the associated public health issues;¥forecasting climate changeñand testing the forecast in a way that isacceptable to decision makers in science and in public policy;¥ultraviolet dosage and its relationship to ozone depletion;¥structuretoxicity relationships;¥forecasting adaptation to global climate change;¥chemical behavior and trends in oceans and estuaries;¥molecular origins of toxicity (including genetoxicant interactions);figure 31 dimensions of integration and the problem of scale as illustrated for atmospheric chemical calculation.1098765432101234567812111098765432101234567891 ps 1 ns 1 s1 ms 1 s hr day mon yr century time scale103 km1 km1 m1 mm1 m1 nm1 aoclimatechange andclimatemodels gasesnuclei and clustersaerosols and particlesdropletsin cloudsregional climate models precipitation rain drops turbulencemeasurementssynoptic weatherregionalurbanweatherand airqualityparticle + gasmeasurementsclouds andcloud systems length scaletime line for lightvisible lightmean free path in gas at stpthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science43¥integration of massive datasets dealing with many variables;¥systems modeling of the environment, accounting for coupled transportprocesses and reactions in air, water, soil, and their interfaces; and¥extrapolation of laboratory results over orders of magnitude in length andtime.each of these problems, many of which are linked, must be attacked withboth observations and modeling. consider for example the first three entries inthe preceding list. the issue of global warming depends on carbon sources andsinks, and it ties back directly to the questions of nitrate, sulfate, heavymetal,and organicsoot emissionsñfrom regional to global extent. the experimentalrequirements for addressing the three problems require high spatial resolution offluxes, isotopes, and reactive intermediates. the details of molecular fluxesñhow they interact with the boundary layer and how the boundary links into thefree troposphereñhave not yet been addressed properly.an entirely new level of sophisticationñnot only in experiments but also inmodelingñwill be required for particles, aerosols, and the associated radiationfield sets. new midir laserbased instrumentation and use of longduration balloons have helped make major advances in observations. the balloons can sit inthe upper stratosphere and then be lowered to the lower stratosphere with powerfrom fuel cells and solar panels. the modeling elements are equally important: itis necessary to test the model and its validity, and the model must link the measurements. the observations must be linked to trajectories, the trajectories mustbe initialized, and sources of specific chemicals must be identified along with thepositions of those sources. considerable progress has been made on observationsand refinement of models to help explain low ozone loss at the midaltitudes, theincrease in uv dosage, the appearance of water vapor in the stratosphere, andpossibly, of climate changes 50 million years ago.the future in advanced molecular modeling offers the opportunity to solvegrand challenge problems in environmental science:¥fundamental advances in theory and computation will radically changethe way we do science. simulation science will become even more multidisciplinary. simulation and computation will fully come of age as the third branch ofscience, fulfilling the promise of the past 20 years. simulation will be key tocoupling multiple temporal and spatial scales while maintaining accuracy. newmodels will emerge that will completely replace the techniques that have beenused so far. for example, new, fast methods will replace 50 years of traditionalquantum chemistry approaches and we will have new solvation models.¥the challenges will involve quantitative ab initio prediction of molecularlevel chemistry of thermodynamics and kinetics with no empirical scaling, bridging the gap from the molecular scale to the microscopic (nano and biological)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44the environmentlength and time scales. the current deficiencies in theory, computers, and software will require computational chemists to develop radical new approaches.approaches to solutionspollution prevention: green process technologygreen chemistry focuses on the design, at the molecular level, of manufacturing processes and products that are environmentally benignñreducing oreliminating the use of hazardous materials. a common definition of green chemistry is òthe design, development and implementation of chemical processes andproducts to reduce or eliminate substances hazardous to human health and theenvironment.ó22 guided by a set of 12 principles,23 green chemistry offers thepotential to develop technologies that could provide an important new approachto environmental protection through pollution prevention.we believe that the low viscosity of co2, coupled with its excellent wettingproperties, will enable whole new classes of thinfilm coating operationsthat will at the same time be environmentally responsible. these are likelyto be important, not just for microelectronics applications but also for biomedical and nanotechnology formulations. even though there are still manytechnical and economic barriers to the total acceptance of these technologies, we believe that environmental pressures as well as technical requirements for pure component systems with high uniformity will over time helpòdryó co2based processes play an increasingly important role in industrial environments.[ruben carbonell, appendix d]as shown in figure 32, green process technologies build on the input frommultiple scientific disciplines. many of the breakthroughs in green chemistry takeplace at the interfaces among these disciplines. moreover, the contributions arenot limited to the traditional interactions in which chemists, chemical engineers,physicists, and analytical chemists work together to develop a new process. thenecessary collaboration may involve biologists, molecular biologists, and computational scientists as well.for the chemical industry to thrive in the united states we will need im22anastas, p. t.; warner, j. green chemistry theory and practice, oxford university press, oxford, uk, 1998.23poliakoff, m.; fitzpatrick, j. m.; farren, t. r.; anastas,p. t. science 2002, 297, 807810.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science45proved efficiency and better ways of meeting regulatory hurdles. otherwise economic decisions will be made to move our manufacturing offshoreñwhich maynot be a desirable outcome. one approach is to invest in better processes, and inmany cases, in green process technologies. this is beginning to happen, withexamples such as those described in chapter 2.a recent report from the rand science and technology policy institutelists four major barriers to the development and implementation of new greentechnologies.24 finding ways to overcome these barriers will be a significantchallenge to chemists and chemical engineers as they pursue their r&d agendain the environmental arena:¥need for additional research, technology development, or process engineering;figure 32sources of green process technologies. influence diagram showing the information flow from scientific disciplines to green chemistry and engineering and then togreen chemistry process technology and then environmentally benign products and processes.24lempert, r. j.; norling, p.; pernin, c.; resetar, s.; mahnovski, s. next generation environmental technologies: benefits and barriers, rand, arlington, va, 2003; http://www.rand.org/publications/mr/mr1682/.environmentally benignproducts and processesgreen process technologiesgreen engineeringbiocivilchemicalmechanicalelectrical green chemistry sustainable chemistrymodeling & simulationelectrochemistrymathematicsphysicsbiological sciencesbacteriologybiochemistryinorganicchemistrybiotechnologypolymer chemistrymaterials sciencegeneticstoxicologycatalysisinnovation:research/technologymanagementeconomicsphotochemistry12 principles; 7 areasinherently safer processes informationscienceslife cycleanalysesotherdisciplinesthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46the environment¥need to surmount infrastructure and integration barriers;¥need to make the upfront investment; and¥regulatory barriers.the rand report provides detailed analyses for a variety of case studies onnextgeneration technologies that demonstrate significant contributions by chemists and chemical engineers. examples include¥water purification: development of technologies such as new chemicalmethods, membrane technology, and ultraviolet irradiation could greatly reducethe quantities of chlorine from present levels;¥liquid and supercritical co2 as reaction solvent: development of newprocesses could reduce the use of halogenated and other organic solvents;¥depolymerization of polymers to monomers: conversion of polymers tothe corresponding monomers can provide an alternative to recycling of the polymer, reduce landfill burden, and provide a new source of monomer with lowerconsumption of new raw materials;¥biobased processes: the use of renewable feedstocks and biocatalytic processes reduce waste and greenhouse gas emissions while providing greater energy efficiency;¥new routes to hydrogen peroxide: new methods for direct synthesis ofhydrogen peroxide (from hydrogen and oxygen) in a controlled, safe mannercould provide a lower cost oxidant that reduces the use of chlorine. for example,in situ generation of hydrogen peroxide can be used to produce propylene oxidein place of the chlorohydrin route; and¥dimethyl carbonate: new methods for synthesis and use of dimethyl carbonate could greatly reduce the use of highly toxic feedstocks such as phosgene;other waste streams (such as hcl) would be reduced as well.remediationsoil and groundwater contaminated with hazardous materials create specialchallenges for chemists and chemical engineers. determination of the composition and mobility of the contaminants, and the risks they pose to humans and theenvironment, often requires specialized analytical techniques. in some cases thehazardous nature of the contaminants may be reduced by natural attenuation dueto chemical or biological activity in the soil, and a better understanding of themechanism of attenuation can help to predict or accelerate the rate of hazardreduction. when remediation of the site is deemed necessary, cleanup or containment procedures must be tailored to the specific characteristics of the site.the nation has a contamination legacy that results from practices by both thegovernment and the private sector. waste chemicals were dumped into trenchesand waterways, contaminating hundreds of millions of tons of soil and water. itthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science47will also be necessary to dispose of the enormous radioisotope burden in tankwastes in the doe complex. doe is spending billions of dollars annually oncleanup of contaminated nuclear sites, but current methodologies may not beadequate to complete the task, even over a 50year time span.25 extensive research efforts in biogeochemistry and reactive transport will be needed, based onthe best ideas of geologists, chemists, chemical engineers, and microbiologists.catalysis and catalytic processes account for nearly 20% of the u.s. grossdomestic product and nearly 20% of all industrial products. chemicaltransformations in industry take a cheap feedstock (usually some type ofhydrocarbon) and convert it into a highervalue product by rearrangingthe carbon atoms and adding functional groups to the compound. about 5quads per year are used in the production of the top 50 chemicals in theunited states and catalytic routes account for the production of 30 of thesechemicals, consuming 3 quads. improved catalysts can increase efficiencyleading to reduced energy requirements, while increasing product selectivity and concomitantly decreasing wastes and emissions. a process yieldimprovement of only 10% would save 0.23 quad per year! in addition, production of the top 50 chemicals leads to almost 21 billion pounds of co2emitted to the atmosphere per year. improved catalysts can help reducethis carbon burden on the atmosphere. as new products become ever moresophisticated, the need to quickly develop new catalysts grows rapidly inimportance. a fundamental understanding of chemical transformations isneeded to enable scientists to address the grand challenge of the precisecontrol of molecular processes by using catalysts.[david dixon, appendix d]factors that must be considered in developing a remediation strategy includethe chemical nature, quantity, and location of the contaminants; the permeabilityof the soil and how soil interacts with contaminants; and how various cleanup orcontainment methods may impact workers, the community, and remediation costs.for shallow sites, it may be preferred to remove the contaminated soil andincinerate it or wash it ex situ. for deeper sites with porous soils it may be possible to flush out the contaminants with surfactants or solvents and treat the hazardous materials at the surface. if the contaminants are volatile, it may be possible to heat the soil and/or pump air or steam into the soil and capture thevaporized chemicals at the surface. in some cases, treatment chemicals may be25see d. dixon in appendix d.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48the environmentinjected into the soil to react with the contaminants and produce a nonhazardousproduct. in other cases it may be preferable to immobilize the contaminants insitu by injecting a material that tightly binds to them or by heating the soil to forma virtually impermeable glass. in some cases an impermeable cap may be putover the contaminated site to mitigate the problem.innovative methods are under development to reduce remediation costs andto deal with particularly difficult sites. for example, electroosmosis is beingdeveloped to move and treat contaminants in deep, lowporosity soils. bioremediation is being developed to treat soils with microbes, and phytoremediationis being developed to utilize plants to remediate surface contamination. novelchemical treatments are being developed to convert difficult contaminants, suchas chlorinated hydrocarbons, to benign byproducts. permeable reaction barriersare being developed to trap or convert chemicals that pass through the barrier vianatural migration or by electric field or pressure gradients. improved geotextiles,landfill liners, and materials to contain radioactive wastes are being developed toenhance waste containment effectiveness.many challenges still remain to costeffectively treat contaminants such asradioactive materials, and inert, tightly bound chemicals such as pcbs. thechemical community will play a major role in developing solutions to these andother complex contamination problems. in some casesñas with radioactive materialsñit may not be feasible to destroy the waste, so longterm storage must beconsidered as an alternative. for such situations, chemists and chemical engineers will play an important role in developing safe and reliable approaches tocontainment of the waste (e.g., with improved materials for containers or in situbarriers that could limit migration of pollutants).costeffectivenessa major challenge to the chemists and chemical engineers in developingsolutions to environmental problems is that of cost. any solution that is proposedfor a problem ultimately must be both technically and economically feasible. ifcost precludes its implementation, then it is not an actual solution. regulationssometimes require action that is accompanied by increased cost, but voluntaryimplementation of major change is unlikely without an accompanying economicadvantage.interfaces and infrastructuremany examples of collaborative work were discussed up during the workshop (appendix g). these efforts have made substantial contributions to the development of environmental science and to improvements in the environment. inmany ways environmental studies are inherently multidisciplinary as illustratedby table g2 in appendix g. finding ways to facilitate and enable such crossthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges in environmental chemical science49disciplinary work will constitute a significant challenge, but it is one worth addressing because chemistry and chemical engineering will continue to contributeto fully understanding and solving environmental problems.workshop participants enumerated a variety of problems that currently inhibit effective collaborations, ranging from difficulty in communication acrossdisciplines and the need for more crossdisciplinary educational programs to administrative barriers that inhibit research teams. interdisciplinary activity in theacademic environment would be enhanced by a reward structure that better recognizes the value of such collaborative efforts.enhancements in the infrastructure for education and research will be essential to future environmental progress. there was considerable sentiment amongworkshop participants that the current disciplinary structure of academic departments and funding agencies inhibits advances in the environmental arena. communication and collaboration among federal funding agencies will also contribute to future progress. research investment will need to address interdisciplinaryactivities, the need for development of new instruments, improved computationalcapabilities, and shared user facilities that may be too expensive for individualinstitutions.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.504conclusions and key opportunitiesthe challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century workshop onthe environment brought together chemical scientists and engineers fromacademia, government, national laboratories, and industrial laboratories, who provided a broad range of experience and perspective. their discussions and presentations identified a wide variety of opportunities and challenges in chemistry andchemical engineering. these are documented throughout this report (see appendix d and appendix g for specific examples) and led the committee to itsoverarching conclusions:conclusion: chemistry and chemical engineering have made major contributions to solving environmental problems.specific areas of accomplishment include¥major increases in analytical capabilitiesñdetection, monitoring, andmeasurement;¥increased understanding of biogeochemical processes and cycles;¥advances in industrial ecologyñnew attitudes about pollution prevention;¥development of environmentally benign materials (e.g., cfc replacements);¥new methods for waste treatment and pollution prevention;¥green chemistry and new chemical processes;¥discovery of environmental problems and identification of their underlying causes and mechanisms; and¥development of improved modeling and simulation techniques.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and key opportunities51conclusion: collaboration of chemists and chemical engineers with scientists and engineers in other disciplines has led to important discoveries.these contributions have enhanced both basic understanding and the solution of environmental problems through work at the interfaces of the chemicalsciences with biology, physics, engineering, materials science, mathematics, computer science, atmospheric science, meteorology, and geology.conclusion: manifold challenges and opportunities in chemistry andchemical engineering exist at the interface with the environmental sciences.by responding to these opportunities and challenges, the chemical sciencescommunity will be able to make substantial contributions to¥fundamental understanding of the environment,¥remediation of environmental problems that currently exist,¥prevention of environmental problems in the future, and¥protection of the environment.the stakes for responding to these challenges are high because regulatorydecisions might cost or preserve billions of dollars, impact millions of humanlives, or even determine the fate of entire species.much of the discussion at the workshop emphasized the interrelated natureof the many parts of the environment. typically, it is not possible to take action inone area without creating at least the possibility of impacting other areas as well.in order to avoid such undesired consequences, a systems approach will be neededfor the discovery and management of problems of the atmosphere, water, andsoil. this will be necessary not only for understanding the complexity of eachmedium but for avoiding regulatorydriven tendencies to simply shift impactsfrom one medium to another.a lifecycle systems approach, similar to what has been developed to evaluate energy impacts, will facilitate sound management of environmental impacts.this will provide a clear understanding of both where and when environmentalimpacts occur in the life of a product, process, or service. it also will make itpossible to appreciate all impacts, and to see how interactions and alternatives ateach point in a life cycle can influence other parts of the life cycle. for chemicalprocessing and manufacturing, significant impact can occur at various stages,including extraction and preparation of raw materials, conversion of raw materials into products, separation and purification of materials, product distribution,end use of products, and final disposition after the useful life of products.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52the environmentconclusion: a systems approach is essential for solution of environmental problems.the systems approach will be needed in several areas, including¥actions that affect any of the three principal environmental sinks (air, water, and soil) and the biological systems with which they interact, where attemptsto manage each of them separately will surely transfer impacts from one mediumto another;¥spatial management of environmental impact sourcesñwhere the impactsare generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence; and¥temporal management of environmental impact sourcesñwhen the impacts are generated in a processing and manufacturing sequence.the use of systems approaches will necessitate simulation and modeling ofenormously large and complex systems. this will require significant computational resources, intensive efforts in complex optimization, and formulation ofmathematical models. input and expertise from a broad array of scientific, engineering, and social disciplines will be an essential part of developing the necessary tools.conclusion: solving environmental problems will require intensivemathematical modeling, complex optimization, and computational resources.systems approaches will necessitate extensive collaborations among a widerange of scientific, engineering, and social disciplines.workshop participants identified a broad array of research challenges, bothin areas of fundamental understanding and for specific environmental problems.conclusion: important opportunities exist for chemists and chemical engineers to contribute to a better understanding of the environment.many of these research opportunities will involve work at the interfaces withother disciplines or interdisciplinary collaborations with scientists and engineersfrom those disciplines. just as these collaborations have led to significant progressin the past, they should be expected to play an important role in future efforts tofully understand and solve environmental problems. examples include the needto understand (or better understand)¥structuretoxicity relations;¥chemical processes at the molecular level;the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and key opportunities53¥biological and physicochemical interactions in response to environmentalstresses;¥fate and transport of anthropogenic chemicals;¥biogeochemical cycles;¥gastoparticle conversion in the atmosphere;¥functional genomics and the chemical processes that govern organismenvironment relationships; and¥chemicalgene interactions in the real environment.as we continue to better understand the underlying science of the environment, further advances will require new tools and instruments.conclusion: chemists and chemical engineers will need to develop newanalytical instruments and tools.these tools and instruments will have to function effectively in an increasingly complex research arena that involves measurements of vanishingly smallquantities of substances in the presence of contamination from other chemicals,under circumstances that make sample acquisition difficult. they will have toaddress three principal areas of measurement:1.laboratory analyses2.field measurements3.theoretical tools for modeling and comparison with experimentconclusion: improved methods for sampling and monitoring must bedeveloped.chemists and chemical engineers will have to address the challenges of sampling and monitoringñair, water, and soilñmore extensively and more frequently than can be done now. this will require improvements in instrumentation, in sampling methodology, and in techniques for remote measurements.conclusion: the new approaches of green chemistry and sustainablechemistry offer the potential for developing chemical and manufacturing processes that are environmentally beneficial.we are still in the early stages, but successful examples already have beenreported. if the necessary investment is made in these new directions, chemistsand chemical engineers will be able to make major strides in improving environmental quality.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54the environmentconclusion: strong and continued support of the chemical sciences willbe an essential part of the federal research investment for understanding, improving, and protecting the environment.chemists and chemical engineers will be able to respond effectively to thechallenges described here only if they have the resources needed to carry out thenecessary research. this impact of support will be enhanced if it facilitates interdisciplinary research and encourages industrial partnerships. the scientificprogress resulting from such support will inform and enable the policymakingand decision process that is essential to future environmental improvement.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.57 astatement of taskthe workshop on the environment is one of six workshops held as part ofòchallenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st century.ó the workshop topics reflect areas of societal needñmaterials and manufacturing, energy and transportation, national security and homeland defense, health and medicine, information and communications, and environment. the charge for each workshop wasto address the four themes of discovery, interfaces, challenges, and infrastructureas they relate to the workshop topic:¥discoveryñmajor discoveries or advances in the chemical sciences during the last several decades¥interfacesñinterfaces that exist between chemistryðchemical engineering and such areas as biology, environmental science, materials science, medicine, and physics¥challengesñthe grand challenges that exist in the chemical sciences today¥infrastructureñinfrastructure that will be required to allow the potentialof future advances in the chemical sciences to be realizedthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.bbiographies of the organizingcommittee membersmario j. molina (cochair) is institute professor at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit). he holds a chemical engineering degree from theuniversidad nacional autonoma de mexico; a postgraduate degree from theuniversity of freiburg, germany; and a ph.d. in physical chemistry from theuniversity of california, berkeley. he joined mit in 1989 with appointments inboth the department of earth, atmospheric, and planetary sciences and the department of chemistry and was named mit institute professor in 1997. prior tojoining mit, he held teaching and research positions at the universidad nacionalautonoma de mexico; the university of california, irvine; and the jet propulsionlaboratory at the california institute of technology. he is a member of the pontifical academy of sciences. he has served on the u.s. presidentõs committee ofadvisors in science and technology, the secretary of energyõs advisory board,the national research council (nrc) board on environmental studies and toxicology, and boards of the u.s.mexico foundation of science and other nonprofit environmental organizations. he is a member of the national academy ofsciences and the institute of medicine. he has received several awards for hisscientific work including the 1995 nobel prize in chemistry.john h. seinfeld (cochair) is the louis e. nohl professor in the divisionsof chemistry and chemical engineering and engineering and applied science atthe california institute of technology. he is a graduate of the university of rochester, where he received a b.s. degree in chemical engineering, and princetonuniversity, where he received a ph.d. in chemical engineering. in 1967, he joinedthe faculty of the california institute of technology. through both experimentaland theoretical studies, seinfeld has made numerous contributions to our knowledge of the chemistry of the urban atmosphere; the formation, growth, and dynamics of atmospheric aerosols; and the role of aerosols in climate. his founding58the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b59work in the field of mathematical modeling of the atmosphere eventually becamewritten into the u.s. clean air act. seinfeld has received numerous honors andawards including the american chemical society award for creative advancesin environmental science and technology, the 2001 nevada medal, and thefuchs award of the international aerosol research assembly in 1998. he is afellow of the american association for the advancement of science and theamerican academy of arts and sciences, and was president of the americanassociation for aerosol research. he was chairman of the nrc panel on tropospheric ozone and the nrc panel on aerosols and climate. seinfeld is the author of more than 400 scientific papers and several books. he is a member of thenational academy of engineering.mark a. barteau (steering committee liason) is robert l. pigford professor and chair of the department of chemical engineering at the university ofdelaware. he received his b.s. degree from washington university in 1976 andhis m.s. (1977) and ph.d. (1981) from stanford university. his research area ischemical engineering with specialized interests in application of surface techniques to reactions on nonmetals, hydrocarbon and oxygenate chemistry on metals and metal oxides, scanning probe microscopies, and catalysis by metal oxides.philip h. brodsky retired from pharmacia in 2002 as vice president responsible for corporate research and environmental technology, a position he held atmonsanto prior to its merger with pharmacia and upjohn. he received a ph.d. inchemical engineering from cornell university and has held various positions inresearch and research management at monsanto. he serves as chair of the american chemical societyõs committee on chemistry and public affairs and on theindustrial advisory boards of the department of chemical and environmentalengineering at the university of arizona and the department of chemical engineering at washington university. he has served on numerous advisory and review committees for the department of defense, department of energy, environmental protection agency, and nrc and was a member of the boards ofdirectors of the industrial research institute, inroads st. louis, and metaphorepharmaceuticals.a. welford castleman, jr. (bcst liaison) is evan pugh professor ofchemistry and physics and eberly distinguished chair in science at the pennsylvania state university and holds a joint appointment as professor in the department of physics. he has been a member and on the advisory board for the particulate materials center at the pennsylvania state university, currently serves inthat capacity for the consortium for nanostructured materials (vcu), and is amember of the penn state center for materials physics. he received a b.ch.e.from rensselaer polytechnic institute and his ph.d. degree at the polytechnicinstitute of new york. he has been on the staff of the brookhaven nationallaboratory (19581975), adjunct professor in the departments of mechanics andearth and space sciences, state university of new york, stony brook (19731975), and professor of chemistry and fellow of the cooperative institute forthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60appendix bresearch in environmental sciences, university of colorado, boulder (19751982). castleman is a fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences andwas a fulbright senior scholar in 1989. he received the 1988 american chemicalsociety award for creative advances in environmental science and technologyand was awarded a doktors honoris causa from the university of innsbruck,austria, in 1987. he is a member of the national academy of sciences.joseph m. desimone (bcst liaison) is william r. kenan, jr., distinguished professor of chemistry and chemical engineering at north carolinastate university and the university of north carolina. he is also director of thenational science foundation science and technology center for environmentally responsible solvents and processes. he received his b.s. in chemistry formursinus college and his ph.d. in chemistry from virginia polytechnic instituteand state university. his areas of interest include polymer synthesis insupercritical fluids, surfactant design for applications in interfacial chemistry,and polymer synthesis and processingñfrom fundamental aspects of chemicalsystems to the most efficient and environmentally friendly ways to manufacturepolymers and polymer products.jean h. futrell is senior battelle fellow and chief science officer at pacific northwest national laboratory. previously he was willis f. harrington professor of chemistry and biochemistry at the university of delaware. he receiveda b.s. from louisiana polytechnic institute and a ph.d. from university of california at berkeley. futrellõs research program focuses on the application of reaction dynamics methodsñparticularly the use of crossed molecular beamsñtoinvestigate the detailed mechanism of ion activation in tandem mass spectrometry. he has served on the nrcõs chemical sciences roundtable and was chairof the council for chemical research in 1999.parry m. norling is american association for the advancement of science(aaas) fellow at the rand corporation. he retired in december 1998 after 33years with the dupont company, where he held a number of r&d and manufacturing management positions and spent two years as corporate director of healthand safety. from 1999 to 2001 he served parttime as corporate technologyadviser at dupont supporting the chief science and technology officer. he ischairman of the union of pure and applied chemistryõs chemrawn(chemical research applied to world needs) committee and a member of theiupac bureau; he was chairman of the industrial research institute (iri) 19992000 and is currently a member of the board of directors of the american creativity association. he received an a.b. from harvard university in physicalsciences and a ph.d. from princeton university in polymer chemistry. his fieldsof expertise include r&d management, the functioning of human networks orcommunities of practices, improving the quality and effectiveness of innovationprocesses, assessing environmental technologies for sustainable development,understanding nearterm nanotechnologies, and developing icephobic coatings.jeffrey j. siirola (steering committee liason) is a research fellow in thethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b61chemical process research laboratory at eastman chemical company inkingsport, tennessee. he received his b.s. in chemical engineering from theuniversity of utah in 1967 and his ph.d. in chemical engineering from the university of wisconsinmadison in 1970. his research centers on chemical processing, including chemical process synthesis, computeraided conceptual processengineering, engineering design theory and methodology, chemical technologyassessment, resource conservation and recovery, artificial intelligence,nonnumeric (symbolic) computer programming, and chemical engineering education. he is a member of the national academy of engineering.christine s. sloane is director of freedomcar and advanced technologystrategy at general motors (gm) corporation where she is responsible for technical strategy in advanced technology development programs and for the development and demonstration of technologies for energy efficiency and reducedemissions under the freedomcar program. prior to 2002, sloane served as director, technology strategy for advanced technology vehicles, focused on electric drive and hybrid drive systems. earlier she served as director, environmentalpolicy and programs, responsible for global climate issues and for mobile emission issues involving advanced technology vehicles. from 1994 to 1999, sloaneserved as chief technologist for the development and demonstration team for precept, gmõs 80 milepergallon 5passenger demonstration vehicle. she alsoserved as gmõs technical director for the partnership for a new generation ofvehicles (pngv) where she was responsible for guiding and implementing thedevelopment of energy conversion and materials technologies through researchand development at national laboratories, universities, and automotive suppliers.her earlier research interests included aerosol chemistry and physics, air qualityand visibility, manufacturing and vehicle emissions, and environmental policy.sloane has authored more than 80 technical papers and coedited one book. shehas served as department head of atmospheric sciences at battelle pacific northwest laboratories. she received her ph.d. from mit in chemical physics.isiah m. warner is boyd professor and philip w. west professor of analytical and environmental chemistry at louisiana state university (lsu). hereceived his b.s. from southern university in 1968 and worked as a researchchemist with battelle northwest for five years before receiving his ph.d. fromthe university of washington in 1977. he served on the faculties of texas a&muniversity and emory university before joining lsu in 1992. warnerõs researchfocuses on the areas of molecular spectroscopy and separation science. he haspublished more than 200 peerreviewed manuscripts and several book chapters,and has coedited two books. he has won numerous awards for his research, teaching, and mentoring, including the year 2000 eastern analytical symposiumaward for outstanding achievements in the fields of analytical chemistry; the1997 presidential award for excellence in science, mathematics, and engineering mentoring; the year 2000 aaas lifetime mentor award; and the year 2000council for advancement and support of education (case) louisiana professorof the year award from the carnegie foundation.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.cworkshop agendaagendaworkshop on the environmentchallenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurynational academy of sciencesarnold and mabel beckman centerirvine, californiasunday, november 177:30breakfast and registrationsession 1:the chemistry of the environment8:10introductory remarks by organizersñbackground of project8:15douglas j. raber, national research council8:20matthew v. tirrell, cochair, steering committee, challengesfor the chemical sciences in the 21st century8:25mario j. molina, john h. seinfeld, cochairs, organizingcommittee, workshop on the environment8:30barry dellinger, louisiana state universityorigin and control of toxic combustion byproducts9:05discussion9:25charles e. kolb, aerodyne research, inc.measurement challenges and strategies in atmospheric andenvironmental chemistry10:00discussion10:20break62the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c6310:50janet g. hering, california institute of technologybiogeochemical controls on the occurrence and mobility of tracemetals in groundwater11:25discussion11:45lunchsession 2: the chemistry of the environment (part 2)1:00mark thiemens, university of california, san diegomeasurements of stable isotopes in atmospheric species1:30discussion1:50fran‡ois m. m. morel, princeton universitychemistry of trace elements in natural waters2:20discussion2:40breakout session: discoverywhat major discoveries or advances related to the environmenthave been made in the chemical sciences during the last severaldecades?3:45break4:00reports from breakout sessions (and discussion)5:00reception6:00banquetspeaker: william f. farland, acting deputy assistantadministrator for science, u.s. environmental protection agencymonday, november 187:30breakfastsession 3: manufacturing and green chemistry8:00uma chowdhry, dupontsustainable growth in the chemical industry8:30discussion8:50ruben g. carbonell, north carolina state universityco2based technologies9:20discussionthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64appendix c9:40breakout session: interfaceswhat are the major environmentrelated discoveries andchallenges at the interfaces between chemistryðchemicalengineering and other disciplines, including biology, informationscience, materials science, and physics?10:45break11:00reports from breakout sessions (and discussion)12:00lunchsession 4: manufacturing and green chemistry (part 2)1:00thomas w. asmus, daimlerchrysler corporationdiesel engines for a clean car?1:30discussion1:50michael k. stern, monsanto companyenvironmentally sound agricultural chemistry: from processtechnology to biotechnology2:20discussion2:40breakout session: challengeswhat are the environmentrelated grand challenges in thechemical sciences and engineering?3:45break4:00reports from breakout sessions and discussion5:00adjourn for daytuesday, november 197:30breakfastsession 5: environmental remediation and modeling8:00james g. anderson, harvard universitya developing generation of observation and modeling strategies8:30discussion8:50david a. dixon, pacific northwest national laboratorymodeling and simulation for environmental science9:20discussionthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c659:40breakout session: infrastructurewhat are the issues at the intersection of environmental studiesand the chemical sciences for which there are structuralchallenges and opportunitiesñin teaching, research, equipmentand instrumentation, facilities, and personnel?10:45break11:00reports from breakout sessions (and discussion)12:00wrapup and closing remarksmario j. molina, john h. seinfeld, cochairs, workshoporganizing committee12:15adjournthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66dworkshop presentationsa developing generation of observation andmodeling strategiesjames g. andersonharvard universityin the next few decades, several problems of considerable societal interestwill emerge with a central theme of the balance between societal objectives andscientific curiositydriven research, both of which are very important for the future. three problems of key importance in the area of observations and modelingare:¥migration of nitrate, sulfate, heavy metals, and organic soot from urban orregional areas into the broader environment and associated public health issues;¥forecasting climate change and testing the forecast in a way that is acceptable to a much broader range of individuals involved both in science and inpublic policy; and¥ultraviolet dosage, which is in many ways a statement of what it is thatsociety really cares about, particularly in connection with the ozone question.the way in which we attack these problemsñthe observations, the modeling, and the way public understanding evolvesñare crucial issues. for example,charles kolbõs presentation provides a beautiful introduction to the issue ofundersampling and the requirement for significant advances in core technologythat must underpin the scientific case leading to effective public policy.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.james g. anderson67the issue of carbon sources and sinks is strategically tied back to the question of nitrate, sulfate, heavy metal, and organic soot emission. if we can attackone problem and solve it, we will be attacking both. the question of how nitratewill affect human health is closely tied to carbon sources and sinks, which in turnare linked to climate. consequently, answering the carbonnitratesulfate questionrequires very high spatial resolution of fluxes, isotopes, and reactive intermediates.there are particular problems with regionspecific studies (box 1). for example, the indian subcontinentñas it links into the tropical region during themonsoon seasonñis as different from the other seasons as any two regions onearth. in addition, the way in which these systems couple from the regional to theglobal scale are extremely important for the issue of prediction. describing asystem and understanding it well enough to predict really separate the strategiesof observations and modeling.in addition to seasonal signatures, we want to understand vertical fluxes andurban regional source sinks driven by human activity. we understand chemicaltransformations very well as illustrated by the los angeles basin. we know exactly what reactions are taking place, but the lack of specificity on the locationand strength of sources and the way those couple into the chemical transformation serves to prevent a link between science and public policy on that question.box 1experimental requirements¥high spatial resolution observation of fluxes, isotopes, reactive intermediates, tracers, particles, aerosol, radiation field, etc.¥regional and national budgets of carbon, photochemical oxidants, particulates¥regionspecific studies:us and its boundaries, inner tropicsðintertropical convergencezone (itcz)indian oceanðindian subcontinent, asia¥seasonal signature:wintersummer monsoons, wetdry tropicalwintersummer temperate and high latitudes¥scientific objectives:vertical fluxes from biogenic sources and sinksurban and regional sources and sinks driven by human activity;gastoparticle conversion mechanismsconvective redistribution of water vapor, sulfates, nitrates, soot,carbon, heavy metals; freeradical catalysis and associatedphotochemical mechanisms¥structure: extremely sharp gradients, localized fluxes, discontinuitiesacross specific trajectoriesthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68appendix dthe strategy for analyzing nox across the globe by comparing satellite observations, models, and in situ aircraft observations hinges on the fact that the noto no2 ratio goes up dramatically with increasing height in the troposphere. forexample, no2 measurements from the european space agencyõs global ozonemonitoring experiment (gome) satellite provide a way of analyzing no2 in theboundary layer and just above the boundary layer. therefore it possible to test thedifferences between the gome satellite measurements and global chemical models. those differences tell us where we have to attack the problem with a moresophisticated set of measurements. in particular, the large differences betweenthe modeled and satelliteobserved concentration fields establish the priorities foraircraft field campaigns that are the only means by which we can adjudicate thesedifferences.now consider the third questionñthat of uv dosage. here we have anemerging marriage between the atmospheric dynamics, chemistry, and medicalcommunities because malignant melanoma, as weõll see in a moment, is a hugeand increasing health issue. in fact, skin cancers are the only cancers worldwidethat are increasing in a statistically important way in the face of developing medical methods. so itõs this union between the dynamics and the loss of ozone atmidlatitudes (figure 1) that provides the fundamental information that most ofthe ozone loss is taking place in the very lower part of the stratosphere. this leadsto several questions:¥which mechanisms are responsible for the continuing erosion of ozoneover mid latitudes of the northern hemisphere?¥will rapid loss of ozone over the arctic in late winter worsen? are theselarge losses coupled to midlatitudes?¥how will the catalytic loss of ozone respond to changes in boundary conditions on water and temperature forced by increasing co2, ch4, and so forth?how we respond in the future requires an understanding of the mechanismsthat control the longterm erosion of ozone at midlatitudes. we know why ozoneis destroyed over the antarctic and over the arctic, but there is also a seasonallydependent midlatitude ozone loss. the months of march, april, and may define akey periodñwhen schools let out, final exams are over, and the younger population gets a large episodic dose of ultraviolet radiation. this marchaprilmayperiod shows the largest longterm erosion over the past 20 years, approaching10% ozone loss per decade. however, the strategy one takes depends, to an extent, on whether this is a societal or a scientific issue.letõs take the position that we donõt know the mechanisms that control ozoneerosion over midlatitudes (which at this juncture is true) and assume that theerosion of ozone will continue as it has in the past decades. then weõre going tolook at the coupling with the large ozone losses in the arctic triggered by conversion of inorganic chlorine to freeradical form on ice particles or cold liquid aerothe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.james g. anderson69sols each winter in the polar vortex. we come to the conclusion, in such an analysis, that itõs the dynamical structure of the atmosphere that underlies the fundamental cause of this midlatitude ozone loss, not chemistry directly.from the societal perspective, the raw numbers are large and important forbasal cell carcinoma: 800,000 cases per year. until we understand the mechanismof midlatitude ozone loss, a simple extrapolation may be inaccurate, but it provides an important reference for discussion (figure 2). by simple extrapolationthere would be an increase from 800,000 cases of basal cell carcinoma in theunited states annually to nearly 1.9 million by 2060. the logarithmic dependence of the cross section results in a 2% increase in uv at these optical depthsfor a 1% decrease in ozone. the biological amplification factor emerges from themedical community, and itõs a change in human morbidity. for malignant melanoma, the numbers are very much smaller, but the fractional death rate, as opposed to morbidity, is much greater.consider the pattern of ozone over the northern hemisphere, and ask if thissimply results from large ozone concentrations over the arctic migrating backinto midlatitudes. that would correspond to chlorine and brominecatalyzedfigure 1midlatitude ozone loss.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70appendix dozone destruction over the winter arctic merging back into midlatitudes. itõs acompletely reasonable, simple, understandable hypothesis, and it emerges fromthe fact that in the early 1970s we had this dome of ozone that represented thesequestration of ozone moving from the low latitudes into the high latitudes. asthe ozone moves northward and downward, itõs sequestered in this dome, andthatõs the way the world has worked for millions and millions of years. until thelate 1990s, as the ozone layer began to thin in many winters, it was emulating theantarctic in a dramatic way. does this lowozone air created in the winter vortexflow back into midlatitudes, causing the observed minimum in the marchaprilmay period? an analysis of data from the last national aeronautics and spaceadministration (nasa) arctic mission indicates clearly that this does not occur.there are indeed large ozone losses in the vortex, but all of the largescaleflow is from the tropics northward and downward. also, because we know theseasonal phase of co2 and water over the tropical tropopause, we know that thereis no communication backward from the polar regions to midlatitudes in thesekey months of ozone loss. therefore, it isnõt simply ozonedepleted arctic airmoving back into midlatitudes.does longterm ozone erosion result from chemical loss of ozone atmidlatitudes in the lower stratosphere? susan solomon made the very reasonablesuggestion that the penetration of cirrus clouds and cold aerosols into the lowerstratosphere initiates the conversion of inorganic chlorine to freeradical form,figure 2hypothetical trend for basal cell carcinoma if the trends in midlatitude ozoneerosion continue unchanged.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.james g. anderson71and she carried out a number of modeling studies that support this.1 however,evidence garnered from hundreds of crossings of the tropopause by the er2aircraftñwhich provides very highresolution simultaneous measurements oftropopause position, water vapor and temperature, percentage of observationswith ice saturation, and clo concentrationsñdemonstrates that cirrus clouds andcold aerosols capable of providing the heterogeneous site for inorganic chlorineto freeradical conversion do not exist. the absence of observed clo is the mostcompelling point. it would take about a 50200 parts per trillion (ppt) of clo todrive the ozone loss thatõs observed, but the experimental measurements showedless than 24 ppt of clo, all the way up to 4 km above the tropopause.consequently, we do not believe that in situ loss of ozone is responsible forthe long term trend in midlatitude ozone erosion, even though that would be themost reasonable explanation. this brings us back to the fundamental unsolvedquestion of the coupling between the tropics and high latitude. as the temperatureof the ocean surface warms in response to increasing co2 forcing, how does itaffect the boundary condition on the entrance of water vapor into the stratosphere?the tropical tropopause constitutes a valve that desiccates the stratosphere andstrictly controls water vapor entering the stratosphere from the troposphere.largescale ascent operating above the tropical tropopause delivers this mixing ratio of water vapor into the high latitudes. for temperatures running from192 to 200 k and a given water vapor curve of 6 parts per million (ppm), thetrigger point for formation of high clo is about 195 k. we have verified thisexperimentally using er2 observations with trajectory calculations demonstrating the temperature history of air parcels moving within the vortex.consequently, the amount of water vapor, as it increases in the stratospherein response to increasing temperatures at the tropical tropopause, would instigatea shift in the threshold temperature required to instigate clo formation to temperatures above 195 k, thereby aiding the dramatic loss of ozone in the arcticwinter vortex. at the same time, the increase in water vapor in the vortex inducesradiative cooling that drops the temperature of the wintertime lower stratosphereat high latitudes, thus exacerbating the destruction of ozone by chlorine radicals.the water vapor is the crucial quantity, and the structure of the tropics turns out tobe the centerpiece for understanding all of these issues linking climate and trendsin uv dosage.what is needed is to couple the boundary layer in the tropics all the way upthrough the tropical transition layer into the stratosphere (figure 3). the geographic coverage is crucial. the eastern tropical pacific over central america isdramatically different from the western tropical pacific. it is the structure of con1solomon, s.; borrmann, s.; garcia, r.r.; portmann, r.; thomason, l.; poole, l.r.; winker, d.;mccormick, m.p. j. geophys. res. 1997, 102(d17), 2141121429.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72appendix dvection in the tropics, the control of water vapor in the middleupper troposphere,and the formation of highaltitude cirrus in the region between 13 and 18kmaltitude that must be understood before predictions of the impact of climate changecan be made.there are important suggestions in the paleorecord. consider the eocene 50million years ago. in central wyoming, there were turtles, alligators, and palmtrees, a combination of plant and animal life that extended into central northerncanada. it was an era defined by deep ocean temperatures, running 10 k abovefigure 3.deep convection in the tropics.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.james g. anderson73present and warm polar sea surface temperatures. the northern hemisphere continental interiors were warm throughout the year. there was no glaciation. howthis occurred is an important question that carries crucial messages for todayñincluding how we attack the problem scientifically.the mechanisms responsible for eocene climate have been suggested to beenhanced meridional heat fluxes. the ocean is always involved here, with reorganization of the atmospheric circulation, enhanced greenhouse warming due tohigh carbon dioxide, and reductions in global topography. yet none of the modelshave been able to capture the gentle difference in temperature between the tropicsand high latitudes. this was explained by sloan and pollard in 1998, when theyintroduced polar stratospheric clouds into the model.2 these are the site for heterogeneous reaction, but they also are profoundly important for trapping infraredradiation. they introduced methane in our favorite reaction to produce the oxidation leading to the formation of water. they proposed that the methane camefrom swamps and wetlands.the eocene went on uninterrupted for 10 million years, but the chemicallifetime of methane is about 7 years. consequently, we donõt believe that this isthe explanation. we believe that polar stratospheric clouds are trapping highlatitude radiation in the infrared, but we believe the mechanism comes from thefollowing: if co2 enters the system or heat moves northward, the gradient between the tropics and the poles begins to soften, leading to reduced excitation ofgravity waves and planetary waves driving from the troposphere up into the stratosphere. as the flux of upwelling gravity waves and planetaryscale waves is reduced, so is the wave drag effect, which is the dominant pump that lifts materialup in the tropics and pushes it down at high latitudes. if the effectiveness of thatpump is reduced, the system relaxes back over the tropics so that the boundarycondition on water vapor increases, allowing significantly more water to get intothe system. we believe that this is the crucial climate state, and it is at the heart ofour understanding of the current climate and also of uv dosage.this brings us back to analyzing the meridional cross section in three dimensions from the equator to the pole. a longduration balloon that could remain inthe lower stratosphere would allow us to sample vertically by lowering a package. this is similar to stratospheric experiments from the 1980s, but the subtletyof the connection of the dynamics with the radiative and chemical propertiesdemands an entirely different look.we know that we can scan 10 km back and forth, but now we have sometremendous help from fuel cells. the technology of fuel cells allows us to usesolar energy for balloon flights lasting several months. solar energy drives a veryefficient propeller to position the balloon at whatever latitude we want to scan.this energy technology has produced major breakthroughs. even though otherapproaches are important, we think that the subtlety of this connected system will2sloan, l.c.; pollard, d. geophys. res. lett. 1998, 25(18), 35173520.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74appendix dfigure 4atmospheric radiative forcing trends.emerge only out of observations of tracers, particles, and the velocity componentsassociated with this when done in a very sensitive way from an immobile platform.we must still address the question of testing climate forecasts. atmosphericco2 levels are rapidly increasing, as documented in the intergovernmental panelon climate change (ipcc) report.3 a number of different scenarios have been 3intergovernmental panel on climate change (ipcc), climate change 2001: the scientific basis,houghton, j.t.; ding, y.; griggs, d.j.; noguer, m.; van der linden, p.j.; xiaosu, d., eds., cambridge university press: cambridge, new york, 2001 (http://www.grida.no/climate/ipcctar/).the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thomas w. asmus75developed, and it is clear that weõre hugging the upper boundary on the release ofco2 that drives the forcing. we are projecting nearly 4 w/m3 by the middle of thetwentyfirst century (figure 4). this is emerging out of the natural variability,and it will be extremely important.the final point is the question of societal objectives. if you look at the question of climate forecast from societal objectives, what we need is an operationalforecast that is tested and trusted. yet this nation has no operational climate forecast. we have no test of the veracity of that forecast; and until we do, we cannotdeliver what is needed to the public.the backbone of the climate forecast, of course, is the operational model thatlinks the shortterm el niœo scale to the longer term. the observing system is thekey challenge for testing the veracity of calculations. carbon sources and sinkshave been discussed. i believe that upper ocean observations, climate data recordsat the surface, and benchmark observation that establish the longterm evolutionof the climate in an absolute sense constitute the centerpiece of what must bedone.diesel engines for clean cars?thomas w. asmusdaimlerchrysler corporationwhile the diesel engine has been growing in popularity in the lightdutyvehicle segments in many parts of the world, it has essentially stalled in the unitedstates in these segments. in large part this results from the absence of financialincentives given the low levels of fuel taxation in the united states, plus an imageproblem based largely on experiences of two decades ago. since that time, dieselengine technology has improved in many ways, and this manifests itself as increased performance and fuel economy accompanied by reduced emissions, odor,and noise. in large part this has been made possible, not by any scientific breakthroughs, but rather by machine design and manufacturing technology advancements particularly in fuelinjection system components. in the lightduty vehiclesegments today the typical fuel economy expectation of a diesel engine is 40%greater than that of the gasoline engine at equal vehicle performance on a fuelvolumenormalized basis. because diesel fuel has roughly 15% more energy pergallon than gasoline, the benefit is roughly 25% on an energynormalized basis.the u.s. regulatory mandates on criteria emissions have been within reachfor gasoline and dieselpowered vehicles to the present, but in 2007 the mandateswill be beyond reach for the diesel with any kind of sensible emissions abatement scheme. this, combined with a very weak business case based on low fueltaxation, effectively discourages u.s. industry investment in dieselñthe onlypractical highfueleconomy alternative to the more conventional and wellknownthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76appendix dgasoline engine technology. while the cost of a modern, high speed diesel engine is substantially more than its gasoline counterpart, it is the most cost attractive alternative to conventional gasoline.evolution of the diesel enginediesel engine combustion is a highly mixinglimited, stratifiedcharge process, and herein lies its formidable efficiency advantage over homogeneouscharge gasoline as well as its challenges with respect to nox and particulate matter (pm). whereas the homogeneouscharge relies on inlet throttling for loadcontrol, the diesel relies only on injected fuel quantity for this. early attempts atmanaging this mixinglimited process often involved using an outside source ofcompressed air to assist the fuel atomization process. later, much attention focused on manipulating incylinder air flows to hasten the mixing process. meanwhile, machine design and manufacturing specialists found practical means toincrease fuelinjection pressures and to better manage machining process for better control of fuelinjection precision. ultimately there was less reliance on incylinder air flow manipulation to support the mixing process; hence higher engine speeds were enabled by faster combustion, while nox and pm emissionswere reduced. with this, the precombustion chamber diesel became obsolete,and direct injection (open combustion chamber design) became the standard fordiesel engines of most all sizes and duty cycles. with this came reductions incombustion chamber surface area and also incylinder turbulence, both of whichcontribute to reduced heat losses. typically a 15% increase in thermal efficiencyaccompanied this shift. highpressure commonrail fuel systems are state of theart, they provide substantially improved combustion manipulation ability compared to all progenitors, and turbocharging has become standard on all smallhighspeed, automotive diesel engines. (turbocharging diesel engines is highlybeneficial to vehicle fuel efficiency since smaller engines with lower friction canbe used. any fuel efficiency benefit derived from turbocharging gasoline enginesis somewhat more conditional.) relative to conventional gasoline engines, theseproduce significantly higher torque density and nearcompetitive power density.at least a portion of europeansõ enthusiasm for diesel power is their highly desirable drivability and performance characteristics.engineout emissionsthe fuel efficiency advantage of the diesel over conventional gasoline isbased primarily on the means of load control via injected fuel quantity while theair flow is essentially unrestricted (i.e., there is no inlet throttling); therefore thegas exchange (or pumping) loss is minimal. at light loads, therefore, the overallairfuel ratio is sufficiently high that homogeneouscharge flame propagation isnot possible. hence, stratified charge, diffusionlimited combustion is the princithe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thomas w. asmus77pal heat release mechanism. therefore, combustion and postflame chemistryoccur over a wide range of airfuel ratios. the fraction of heat release that occursin the range of stoichiometric yields very high temperatures and produces highlevels of nox. the portion of heat release that occurs in fuelrich zones (equivalence ratio = 2 or greater; temperatures = 1400 k or higher) tends to produce pmor soot. manipulation of local airfuel ratios is the goal of fuelinjection and incylinder airmotion strategies.as described above, recent improvements in fuelinjection equipment haveproduced remarkable reductions in both of the principal emittants. this has beenachieved mainly via higher injection pressures and precision control of the instantaneous rates of injection (with techniques described as rate shaping, splitinjections, pilot injection, post injection, etc.). these advanced fuelinjection techniques enable a measure of control over the local mixing processes and thus thelocal airfuel ratios. trends toward increased levels of premixed burning tend tobe beneficial in terms of reducing both of the principal emittants. these injectionmixing strategies, while very desirable, are limited by the need for timing precision of the thermal autoignition process (i.e., timing of thermal autoignition iscompromised when temporal proximity between injection and ignition is increased). while the emissions reductions resulting from these advancements areimpressive, attainment of the socalled tier 2, bin 5 legislated limits to be enforced in 2007 is not possible by these means alone.at the far end of this spectrum is homogeneouscharge compression ignition(hcci), which has been the subject of considerable research effort over the pastseveral decades. this scheme strives to produce a truly (or nearly) homogeneouscharge, which under lightload conditions, corresponds to airfuel ratios too leanto support either flame propagation or diffusionlimited combustion. hence,multisite thermal autoignition will occur, provided that a particular temperaturethreshold is attained. this process is capable of producing very low emissions,but timing control of the thermal autoignition process is severely compromised,since the injection event is no longer capable of precisely triggering heat release.hence, this scheme is readily demonstrable on a laboratory scale but is generallyincapable of sustained operation upon load changes due to perturbations in thermal equilibria.diesel engine aftertreatmensignificant publicly and privately funded r&d activities have been in placein this area for the past decade, and while incremental improvements have beenrealized, they all fall short of what is necessary to achieve legislated requirementsfor 2007 with respect to both nox and pm. complicating matters are low exhausttemperatures at light loads characteristic of automotivetype duty cycles and thepresence of significant quantities of oxygen in the exhaust stream. in addition,chemical reduction of nox in a strongly oxidizing exhaust environment presentsthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78appendix dadditional and formidable challenges. obviously, chemical reduction of nox requires that reductant chemicals be added to the exhaust in a manner compatiblewith the particular aftertreatment scheme. the socalled ureascr (selective catalytic reduction) scheme is perhaps the most effective means of reducing tailpipenox emissions. aqueous urea is metered as precisely as possible and stoichiometrically with respect to nox into the exhaust just upstream of the scr catalyst,the first stage of which hydrolyzes urea to ammonia. the final stage of the scrsystem is an oxidation catalyst that oxidizes any excess of ammonia that may nothave been consumed in the scr catalyst itself. despite functional attributes ofthe scr approach, it comes with two formidable drawbacks: (1) a urea infrastructure would be needed, and (2) the u.s. environmental protection agency(epa) has virtually ruled out this option.the socalled nox absorber (or trap) is generally seen as the most attractiveoption for the united states although generally less effective than the urea scrapproach, this uses diesel fuel as a source of chemical reductant. the catalyst istypically barium and platinum on an alumina substrate, where nitric oxide is catalytically oxidized to nitrogen dioxide and then reacts with the barium to formbarium nitrate. when the barium becomes completely nitrated, the trap is regenerated by the addition of diesel fuel somewhere upstream of the catalyst. thetwofold role of the secondary fuel addition is (1) to consume all excess oxygenand (2) to produce cracked products (h2, co, and hydrocarbons in decreasingorder of effectiveness) to effect chemical reduction of the trapped nox. noxabsorbers are extremely sulfur sensitive and are rendered inactive when fuelbound sulfur, which leaves the engine as so2, becomes catalytically oxidized toso3 whereupon it reacts òirreversiblyó with barium to form the comparativelymore stable barium sulfate. desulfation of nox absorbers requires temperaturessufficiently high as to degrade the catalyst. fuel sulfur levels will directly impactdesulfation frequency and hence catalyst life expectancy. this along with thedenitration frequency will determine the fuel economy penalty associated withthis form of nox aftertreatment.pm traps are typically ceramic wallflow filters that trap pm rather effectively. pm trap regeneration, on the other hand, has proven to be rather morechallenging. typically an additional source of heat must be added to effect theinitiation of oxidative regeneration. once regeneration is initiated, the exothermicity of the process can (and often does) overheat the filter, causing irreversibledamage. various means may be employed to reduce the required regenerationtemperature.these basic aftertreatment elements have been demonstrated in a wide variety of different configurations. all are very sensitive to dutycycle diversity, fuelquality, packageability, and control approaches. highmileage durability has notbeen thoroughly established for any of these systems. some demonstrations havethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thomas w. asmus79been reported for limited dutycycle testing typically with òtailored,ó openloopregeneration control.overall conclusionsto date there has been no demonstration of system compatibility with thelegislated emissions limits to be enforced under tier 2, bin 5 (70 mg nox per mileand 10 mg pm per mile) in 2007. (it is typically necessary to target 50% of theseemissions limits to ensure highmileage conformance.) in addition to the aforementioned technical obstacles, at current levels of fuel taxation in the unitedstates and customer indifference to matters of fuel economy, privatesector investment in diesel system technologies is discouraged. in the automotive industry, lead times are such that without proven emissions capabilities as of this date,it is highly unlikely that this technology will be available in the united states by2007 based on the worldõs most stringent emissions regulations. it is also noteworthy that diesel technology is the most promising and costeffective amongthe major fueleconomy enabling technologies.opportunities through the chemical sciencesin the interest of mitigating some of the risks that could deprive the u.s.market of this high fuelefficiency technology in lightduty segments, severalareas in which the chemical sciences could play a role are listed below.while the chemical kinetics of the thermal autoignition process are relativelywell understood, means of controlling the ignition timing in the engine cyclewhen operating in the hcci mode are still elusive. chemists and chemical engineers will need to help overcome this obstacle if hcci is to be executable inautomotive practice.the most practical means of aftertreatment control of nox in the u.s. environment is the socalled nox trap, and these are highly susceptible to sulfur poisoning. even with the reduced, legislated levels of sulfur in diesel fuel, the longterm effects of sulfur on nox trap performance is a major concern. any means toreduce this sulfur sensitivity would contribute to the longterm success of dieseltechnology.the health effects of diesel pm are contentious, and there are strongly heldopinions on both sides of the issue. what is clear is that with the aforementionedadvances in diesel fuelinjection technology, pm mass has indeed decreased, butthe pm number has become relatively greater. more decisive scientific conclusions on pm toxicity in general could contribute to moving this debate toward theestablishment of realistic positions on the issue.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80appendix dthe co2 technology platformruben g. carbonellnorth carolina state universitythe billions of pounds of organic and halogenated solvents used each year inchemical and materials manufacturing contribute significantly to the total discharge of volatile organic carbon (voc) to the atmosphere and to the contamination of water and soil. in addition, drying operations utilize huge amounts ofenergy that is generated mostly by the burning of fossil fuels. as a result, there isgreat interest in finding novel alternative solvents that would result in cleaner,more efficient processes to enable a sustainable chemical and industrial manufacturing base.1highpressure carbon dioxide is one of the leading alternative solvents formany applications because of its unique physical and chemical properties.2,3 ithas a very accessible critical temperature and pressure (31c and 73.8 bar) thatenable its use in the liquid, supercritical, or gaseous state near room temperature.it is also highly compressible, so that its density and other physical properties canbe varied over a wide range in order to control its solubility properties. because itis generated as a byproduct in the production of hydrogen, ammonia, and ethanoland because it is present in large quantities in many underground reservoirsthroughout the world, it is relatively inexpensive compared to organic or halogenated solvents. so much carbon dioxide is currently generated by power plantsand ends up in the environment, that even if all chemical and materials processesused co2 instead of organic or aqueous solvents there would still be no need togenerate co2 from burning fossil fuels. however, the subsequent reduction invoc and organic solvent emissions into the soil and aquifers would be quitesignificant.in the supercritical state, co2 has a liquidlike density but a gaslikediffusivity, so masstransfer and diffusion processes are greatly enhanced in thisregion. in its supercritical state it is also highly compressible, so that the densityrises from approximately 0.5 g/ml at the critical temperature to about 0.9 g/mlat 10 c. in that same range, the viscosity and surface tension remain at least anorder of magnitude lower than those of water and most organic solvents. at theselow temperatures the increased density enhances the solubility properties for organic compounds while the vapor pressure drops significantly from the critical1taylor, d. k.; carbonell, r. g.; desimone, j.m. annual reviews of energy and the environment2000, 25, 115146.2mchugh, m. a.; krukonis, v. j. supercritical fluid extraction, principles and practice;butterworthheinemann, oxford, uk; 1993; 2nd edition.3hyatt, j. a., j. org. chem. 1984, 49, 50975101.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ruben g. carbonell81pressure, thus decreasing the potential cost of processes utilizing liquid instead ofsupercritical co2.when considered as a solvent for chemical reactions, carbon dioxide offers amajor advantage because it is essentially inert over wide ranges of temperaturesand pressures. this prevents co2 from participating in any chemical reactionsthat can contaminate the product or terminate important elementary steps in areaction that may control molecular structure or molecular weights. in addition, ifused as a solvent or as a plasticizer, its high diffusivity and high volatility allow itto evaporate quickly and completely, eliminating all chances of contaminatingthe desired product. the high volatility also decreases the costs associated withsolvent removal from a solid substrate when compared to water and organic solvents.many of these properties of co2 have been known for years,2 but aside fromsome small specialty applications such as the extraction of caffeine from coffeebeans and the fractionation of some polymeric compounds, co2based processeshave not made major inroads in industry. over the last decade, interest in the useof co2 as a solvent has seen a great resurgence as a result of the discovery ofsome unique solubility properties associated with co2 that have enabled the synthesis of fluoropolymers in carbon dioxide as well as the rational design of surfaceactive materials that are soluble in co2.polymerization reactions are carried out industrially by a number of variousmethods, many of which involve organic solvents and water in the form of emulsions. these solvents often participate in the reaction, leading to unwanted sidereactions. the polymer must then be dried, resulting in the expenditure of largeamounts of energy, often leaving the product with significant amounts ofunreacted monomer, and residual solvent. there are tremendous advantages inusing co2 as a solvent in these types of reactions because the product ends upcompletely dry at the end of the process and any residual monomer could beextracted prior to product recovery. desimone and coworkers4,5,6showed thatliquid and supercritical co2 could be used as a solvent for the solution polymerization of fluorooctyl acrylate and the precipitation polymerization offluoroolefins such as tetrafluoroethylene with extremely high conversions, highmolecular weights, narrow molecular weight distributions, and high purities.these discoveries led to the commercial development by dupont of a novel, continuous polymerization process for teflon based on this technology.7 a pilotplant is currently operating in bladen county, north carolina, the first of what islikely to be a longterm investment by the company in co2based polymerizationprocesses.4desimone, j. m.; guan, z.; elsbernd, c. s. science 1992, 257, 945947.5romack, t. j.; combes, j. r.; desimone, j. m. macromolecules 1995, 28, 17241726.6romack, t. j.; desimone, j. m.; treat, t. a. macromolecules 1995, 28, 84298431.7mccoy, m. chem. & eng. news 1999, 77(4), 1113.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82appendix dbecause of the high solubility of fluorocarbons (and siloxanes) in co2, it isnot surprising that the first commercial direct synthesis of polymers in co2 wasachieved with fluorinated materials. siloxanes are also fairly soluble in carbondioxide, but most other polymeric materials are not. co2 is an excellent solventfor highvaporpressure materials, but it is not a good solvent for highmolecularweight, polar, or inorganic materials. to enhance the capability of co2 to dissolve these types of materials, it is necessary to use cosolvents or to design surfactants that are soluble in co2. the recognition that highmolecular weightfluoropolymers and siloxanes are soluble in co2 enabled the design of such surfactants via the covalent coupling of highly co2philic moieties such aspoly(fluorooctyl acrylates) with oleophilic or hydrophilic moieties. desimoneand others1,8,9,10 have demonstrated that these co2soluble surfactants are able toform micellar aggregates in co2, and that these aggregates are able to enhancesignificantly the solubility of high molecular weight, oleophilic, and hydrophilicspecies. these co2soluble surfactants are also able to stabilize latex particles inco2, and they can be used to form waterinco2 and co2inwater emulsions. itis interesting that the micellization process in compressed co2 is reversible.11,12at low co2 pressures, the surfactants dissolve in micellar form. however, as thepressure is increased, the micelle size (aggregation number) decreases until thesurfactant solubility is so high that the micelles break up. reduction of the pressure leads to reaggregation and recovery of the micellar structure. the solubilityand functionality of these surfactants depend strongly on the ratio of co2philicto co2phobic groups, their chemical structure, and the morphology of the molecule (block or random copolymers). as a result, there are many ways of controlling system properties by careful control of the chemistry as well as the processconditions. one of the more natural applications for the use of these surfactants isin cleaning applications with co2 as the solvent. at least one commercial liquidco2based drycleaning process1 is currently in the marketplace, providing anoutstanding alternative to perchloroethylene, in both cleaning quality and compatibility with garments, as well as in environmental and human health considerations.the ability to synthesize co2soluble bifunctional materials based onfluoropolymers or siloxanes has enabled many other potential applications forthese novel material.1 one of the more exciting opportunities is in the area of8maury, e. e.; batten, h. j.; killian, s. k.; menceloglu, y. z.; comes, j. r.; desimone, j. m. am.chem. soc. div. polym. chem. 1993, 34(2), 664665.9desimone, j. m.; maury, e. e.; menceloglu, y. z.; mcclain and, j. b.; romack, t. j. science1994, 265, 356359.10mcclain, j. b.; betts, d. e.; canelas, d. a.; samulski, e. t.; desimone, j. m. science 1996, 274,20492052.11fulton, j. l; pfund, d. m.; capel, m.; mcclain, j. b.; romack, t. j.; maury, e. e.; combes, j.r.; samulski, e. t.; desimone, j. m; capel, m. langmuir 1996, 11, 42414249.12buhler, e.; desimone, j. m.; rubinstein, m. macromolecules 1998, 31, 73477355.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ruben g. carbonell83coatings, with particular emphasis on microelectronics fabrication. this is an areain which the unique properties of co2 can lead to both process and environmentaladvantages.for decades, photolithography has utilized a variety of organic and aqueoussolvents to deposit, develop, and strip photoresists on silicon wafers. currently,commercial photolithographic processes utilize chemically amplified photoresistsand photoacid generators (pags) that are deposited from organic solvents using aspin coating technique. the patterns are then developed using an aqueous alkaline solution of tetramethylammonium hydroxide. once the resist patterns havebeen etched into the underlying substrate, the photoresist is removed using a solvent or waterbased stripping step. although these wet processes have served theindustry well for years, as feature sizes continue to be reduced there are compelling reasons to reevaluate the use of conventional solvents and aqueous solutionsand to implement a new òdryó technology.to enable the manufacture of feature sizes with dimensions of 130 nm andless, the microelectronics industry uses photolithographic exposure tools operating at very short wavelengths of light (365 nm, 248 nm, 193 nm, and soon 157nm). lithography at 157 nm is particularly challenging since only a few classesof polymers have the requisite transparency at this wavelength. thus most conventional polymeric materials are ill suited as 157nm resists because the radiation cannot penetrate through films of the required thickness. although most polymeric materials have a high optical absorbance at 157nm, highly fluorinatedpolymers are relatively transparent, thus establishing that future generations of157nm resists will need to be highly fluorinated to be useful. fortunately, thesesame glassy fluoropolymers are very soluble in liquid and supercritical co2.we are attempting to design novel polymers and processes so that we candeposit the photoresist from liquid co2, develop the image after exposure withsupercritical co2, and strip the postetched material with supercritical co2 athigher pressures. preliminary results have been obtained with a random copolymer of 1,1dihydroperfluorooctyl methacrylate (foma) and 2tetrahydropyranylmethacrylate (thpma). with less than 30 mol % of the thpma monomer, thisphotoresist in its fully protected form was found to be soluble in compressedliquid co2 at moderate conditions. in order to spincoat films using liquid co2,the photoresist had to be soluble in liquid co2 at liquidvapor equilibrium conditions where there is a meniscus that can allow the co2 liquid phase to spread andwet the wafer and to evaporate in a controlled manner leaving a uniform film ofthe photoresist on the wafer substrate. to achieve the desired solubility, all spincoating was performed under subambient temperatures (610 c) that increasethe density and solvating strength of co2 nearly 40% relative to room temperature. this was adequate to dissolve the photoresist at the desired liquidvaporequilibrium conditions. two fluorinated analogs of conventional pags were alsodesigned to provide suitable solubility in liquid co2.polymer solutions for spin casting were prepared by dissolving 20 wt % ofthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84appendix dpfomarthpma in liquid co2. this liquid co2photoresistpag solution wasmaintained in a highpressure view cell equipped with sapphire windows so thatcomplete dissolution could be confirmed visually. the spin coating was carriedout in a specially designed and built highpressure spin coating tool.13,14 thepressure in the spinning chamber was maintained at precise values ranging from5 to 15 psi below the equilibrium vapor pressure of the co2photoresist solution.control of this chamber pressure was a key parameter in the determination of filmquality and thickness, as the pressure differential was what governed the evaporation rate of the liquid co2. precision control of the evaporation rate, spinningspeed, and system temperature were required to ensure consistent, uniform coatings. extensive work was conducted to determine the ideal range of rotationalspeeds, pressures, and concentrations to be used to produce uniform, lithographicquality films, resulting in films with 3% variation in film thickness over the entirewafer and a root mean square (rms) roughness of 0.40.5 nm. the photoresist andpag formulations were exposed and imaged at 248 and 193 nm, resulting inhighly encouraging feature sizes of 0.8 m. even though this technology is notyet ready for full commercial implementation, it does point the way toward thedevelopment of a new lithographic process that is totally òdryó and compatiblewith existing cluster tools in the industry to couple to vacuum operations. all ofthis is accomplished with a single environmentally friendly solvent.in other related areas of microelectronics fabrication we have also succeededin developing a highpressure free meniscus coating apparatus capable of depositing monolayer to 300 † thin films of perfluoropolyethers with great uniformityand roughness characteristics.14 we believe that the low viscosity of co2, coupledwith its excellent wetting properties, will enable whole new classes of thinfilmcoating operations that will at the same time be environmentally responsible.these are likely to be important, not just for microelectronics applications butalso for biomedical and nanotechnology formulations. even though there are stillmany technical and economic barriers to the total acceptance of these technologies, we believe that environmental pressures as well as technical requirementsfor pure component systems with high uniformity will over time help òdryó co2based processes play an increasingly important role in industrial environments.13desimone, j. m.; carbonell, r. g. u.s. patent 6,001,418; 2001.14hoggan, e. n.; novick, b. j.; carbonell, r. g.; desimone, j. m. semicon. fabtech 2002, 16,169.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uma chowdhry85box 1smart, sustainable growthdupontõs commitment:creating shareholder and societal value while decreasing ourenvironmental footprint along our value chains.òenvironmental footprintó = injuries, illnesses, incidents, waste &emissions, and depletable forms of raw materials and energysmart, sustainable growthuma chowdhrythe dupont companythis paper describes dupontõs approach to addressing the dual challenge ofachieving business growth through new products that create a high standard ofliving while also protecting the environment for future generations. we have madeenvironmentally sustainable growth (box 1) through technical innovation ourprimary challenge, and this ideology serves as a great motivator for our peopleand our businesses.dupontõs bold and uncompromising commitment to sustainable growth withthe intent of integrating economic, environmental, and social factors forms thefoundation for our future. this simple statement represents an enormous challenge. it requires that we focus our efforts and also track our environmental impact. at dupont we are measuring the way we òcreate shareholder value whiledecreasing our environmental footprint along our value chains.ó the term òfootprintó includes raw materials, energy, emissions and waste, as well as injuries,illnesses, and environmental incidents. we are integrating this concept into allbusiness decisions, into all local actions at the community level, and into helpinglawmakers make factbased decisions in enacting new pieces of legislation. thisis a tall order, but if we are to protect the environment for future generations, wemust take on this challenge.our core values (box 2), which have stood the test of time, provide us withthe organizational culture to take on this enormous challenge of sustainablegrowth. with strong leadership, we believe we can stay the course. since the daysof our companyõs founders, we have had a mindset of òzero injuriesó to ourpeople. we are extending that same mindset to environmental excellence andthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86appendix dhave set demanding stretch goals for ourselves to remain at the forefront, leadingthe challenge for the chemical industry, and influencing our customers and competitors to adopt the same goals of zero injuries to people or to the environment.as dupont enters its third century and we reflect on the chemical industryover the last 200 years (box 3), it is clear that we have contributed very significantly to improved standards of living and to material prosperity for people aroundthe world through better housing, apparel, transportation, and food. the industryhas created both economic and societal value over the last two centuries. thecommitment to continue this pursuit now has to be accompanied by a commitment to protect our environment.the chemical industryõs challenge lies in cleaning up contaminated water,reducing toxic air emissions, and reducing energy consumption and waste thatleads to soil contamination (box 4). today the most pressing issues for watercontamination are heavy metals, nondegradable biologically active substances,and persistent bioaccumulative toxins. emissions from the chemical industry havecontributed to ozonedepleting materials and greenhouse gases, causing globalclimate change. our land is contaminated in certain areas with toxic compounds,box 2dupontõs core values¥safety, health: goal is ò0ó¥environmental excellence¥business ethics: highest standards¥people: treat with dignity and respectcore values define who we are and are ònonnegotiable.óbox 3over the last 200 years:chemical industry has contributed to material prosperity in housing,apparel, transportation, and food, by utilizing our knowledge of chemistryto providebetter things for better livingbut it came at a price.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uma chowdhry87heavy metals, and biological waste. all of these harmful consequences of thematerial prosperity we have enjoyed are compromising the health of present andfuture generations.looking broadly at the spectrum of industries that generate 95% of water,air, or soil emissions, we see that they range from chemicals, metals and mining,food, and paper to petroleum, utilities, and equipment manufacturers. the chemical industry ranks first, second, and fifth in the generation of water contaminants(figure 1), air toxics (figure 2), and soil contaminants (figure 3). it is thereforeincumbent upon the chemical industry to take a strong stand on reducing theenvironmental footprint that it has generated and could potentially create in thefuture.we must progress from an attitude of just complying with federal regulationsto one where we earn the publicõs trust and move on to sustainable development.this corresponds to a journey: from compliance, to earning the publicõs trust, tosustainable development.a quick review of the results over the past decade at dupont demonstratesour commitment to sustainability (box 5). while production volume grew 35%,we kept energy consumption flat through innovation in our manufacturing processes. impressive reductions were made in air carcinogens (86%) and toxics(73%), in greenhouse gas emissions (63%), and in hazardous waste generated(40%) as well as reduction in deep well disposal (82%). conservatively theseenvironmental improvements have also led to over $1 billion in savings fordupont. what is good for the environment can also be good for business.dupont is transforming itself as it enters its third century. using a threepronged strategy of integrated science, knowledge intensity and òsix sigmaó productivity (see below), we are focused on sustainable growth (box 6).box 4chemical industry¥water contaminationheavy metalsbiologically active, nondegradable substancespersistent bioaccumulative toxins¥air emissionsgreenhouse gasesozonedepleting materials¥soil contaminationtoxic metal compoundsheavy metalsbiological wastethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88appendix d645036231919540204060chemicalsmetalsfoodminingpaperpetroleumelectricgeneratingfacilitieselectrical equip.millions ofpoundstreatment,storage, disposal& solventrecovery facilitiesfigure 1chemical water emissions by industry. these industries contribute 95% ofthe total emissions (1999 data). source: dupont consulting solutions analysis of epatoxics release inventory, 1999.28818610792926057483433050100150200250300millions ofpoundschemicalselectricgeneratingfacilitiespaperprimary metalstransportationequipplasticsfoodfabricatedmetalspetroleumlumberstone/clay/glassfigure 2chemical air emissions by industry. these industries contribute 95% of thetotal emissions (1999 data). source: dupont consulting solutions analysis of epa toxicsrelease inventory, 1999.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uma chowdhry89figure 3chemical soil contamination by industry. these industries contribute 99.6%of the total emissions (1999 data). source: dupont consulting solutions analysis of epatoxics release inventory, 1999.258230220491510641050100150200250metalselectricgeneratingfacilitiesprimary metalstreatment,storage,disposal &solvent recoveryfacilitieschemicalspapercoal miningfoodstone/clay/glasselectricalequip.4,000 3,935millions of poundsbox 5dupontõs environmental footprint reductionperformance over last 10 yearssafety & healthworld leaderair carcinogens 86%air toxics 73%hazardous waste 37%co2 equiv greenhouse gases 63%total emissions76%total waste generated 38%production increase 35%hazardous waste 40%deep well disposal 82%volume increased 35%, while energy use was flat!!the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90appendix ddupontõs heritage is its ability to create value with science and technology.in the twentieth century, we combined chemistry and engineering to create newmaterials such as nylon, teflon, lycra, and kevlar that are household words today and have brought the world fashion, comfort, and protection. we are transforming ourselves by building on our heritage of innovation to begin integratingbiology and chemistry into creating value. we are investing in building our capability in biotechnology because we see enormous potential in using this platformof new technologies to ensure sustainable development.another pathway to sustainability is to generate more business value butwith fewer pounds of material. we have a metric called shareholder value addedper pound of product produced (sva/lb). sva is the value created above the costof capital. by selling highvalue services coupled with our products, we can enhance progress toward high sva/lb. when coupled with other financial metrics,sva/lb provides an indicator of future sustainability for different growth strategies.the focus on asset productivity at dupont is relentless. improving yields,uptime, and throughput helps us delay capital expenses and reduce raw materialusage and waste. we have adopted the six sigma methodology that uses statistically significant, databased understanding to reduce defects in our manufacturing processes. this methodology, coupled with process innovation, has led tolower raw material usage, lower energy consumption, lower emissions, and lowerwaste with annual pretax savings of over $1 billion over the past three years.thus, through technological innovation, we have made significant progress toward creating economic and societal value while reducing our environmental footprint (box 7).several examples will illustrate the use of technical innovation to provideògreeneró products and processes. these are elimination of ccl4 waste duringphosgene production; production of tyvek envelopes from waste; smart automobox 6dupontõs strategy for smart, sustainable growth¥integration of science and technology platforms for new products andprocessesless environmental impact¥knowledge intensive services combined with productsincreased shareholder value added per pound (sva/lb)¥focus on asset productivityless wastethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uma chowdhry91tive finishes; biobased routes to chemicals, polymers, and fibers; and a biomassrefinery.the first example deals with reduction of carbon tetrachloride formation inthe production of a hazardous chemical, phosgene (figure 4). phosgene serves asan intermediate for some of our specialty fibers and agricultural intermediates.the state of new jersey required us to reduce carcinogenic ccl4, which forms asa byproduct when chlorine and carbon monoxide are heated at high pressure.our goal was to reduce ccl4 formation from 500 to 100 ppm. our approach wasbox 7towards greener products & processes¥eliminate waste at source vs end of pipe treatment¥recycle waste to useful products¥reduce emissions in our plants and for our customers¥develop alternate forms of energy¥use renewable resources for chemical production¥increase use of biobased solutions¥increase bioefficiencyfigure 4reduction of ccl4 through improved catalyst.actual after 1 yearlaboratory resultsrequired bystate regulations% ccl4 reduction0102030405060708090100ccl4 reduction withdupont commercialcatalyst (>250,000x)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92appendix dto find superior catalysts that, in fact, reduced ccl4 formation from 500 to lessthan 10 ppm, exceeding regulatory requirements. we are licensing this technology to other phosgene manufacturers to ensure that this development is availablenot only for dupont but for other manufacturers as well.another example shows the ingenuity of our technical community in beingable to use recycled water and milk jugs made of highdensity polyethylene intotyvek envelopes that are lighter than conventional tyvek used for housewrapduring construction (figure 5). the added benefit to the airlines of lowerweightcargo is the lower use of fuel and lower emission of greenhouse gases. polyethylenebased tyvek is a nonwoven material used to wrap houses under constructionto improve insulation. this use of tyvek reduces energy consumption by tenfoldeach year for the homeowner.in our automotive coatings business, we lowered waste by developing a coating with very highsolids content. the advanced analytical tools available todayallowed us to measure and control the distribution of low molecular weight material in the coating. this, combined with hybrid crosslinking, provided a thinnercoating with superior durability and scratch resistance coupled with smoothnessand higher gloss. not only did we reduce waste at our manufacturing site bydecreasing the use of solvents, but we were able to help our customer daimlerchrysler reduce its volatile organic compounds by 1.5 pounds per vehicle, hazardous air pollutants by 0.45 lbs per vehicle, odor emissions by 86%, and totalraw material usage by 20%. sustainable development should allow all partiesalong a producerõs value chain to benefit from product and process improvements.switching to examples of biobased solutions (figure 5), we demonstratedthe use of an enzymeña renewable resourceñin the production of 5ccnnccnh2no 5cvamadnchemical¥25% conversion¥20% yield¥organic solvent; heatbiobased¥97% conversion¥93% yield¥aqueous solvent; mild¥reduced catalyst cost by$0.20/lb of 5cvam¥reduced catalyst waste by200xfigure 5chemical vs. biobased route to an agricultural intermediate.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uma chowdhry93cyanovaleramide, an agricultural intermediate important for citrus growers andsome vegetable farmers. the results using a biobased catalyst vs. a conventionaloxide catalyst show dramatic improvements. the chemical process operated at25% conversion and 20% yield and used an organic solvent in a typical chemicalreaction. the use of a specific enzyme allows 97% conversion and 98% yield andemploys an aqueous solvent under mild conditions. the biobased operation alsoallows reduction of catalyst cost by $0.25 per pound and results in twentyfoldwaste reduction. this impressive example confirms that it is possible to use renewable resources to create economic value while creating societal value andreducing our dependence on petroleumbased feedstocks.we embarked on a large program five years ago to demonstrate that we canuse our technical innovation power, coupled with a partnerõs capability in engineering enzymes, to make bulk chemicals and fibers cost effectively. our goalwas to produce a specialty fiber we call òsoronaó (figure 6), which incorporatesthe attractive properties of nylon, dacron and lycra, resulting in superior softness, vibrant color, uv and chlorine resistance, and stain resistance coupled withstretch and recovery. market test development shows that consumers find thiscombination of functionalities very attractive.chemical routes to polypropylene terephthalatebased fibers, which we havebranded sorona, use hazardous chemicals such as ethylene oxide and carbonmonoxide and are subject to the environmental problems of a typical chemicalprocess (figure 7). we undertook the enormous challenge of producing 1,3propanediol (3g) from glucose in one step as shown in figure 8.first attempts resulted in very low yield. working with genencor, our teamof scientists and engineers has genetically modified an enzyme to gain a 120foldimprovement in yield over five years (figure 9). this òtour de forceó of modifying an e. coli host to achieve high conversion and selectivity has demonstrated tous and to the world what biocatalysis can do for the chemical industry. we havescaled up the process and are currently operating a pilot plant.the impressive results we have demonstrated with bio3g prompted the department of energy (doe) to award a multimillion dollar grant over four years todupont, diversa, and the national renewable energy laboratory (nrel) to usethe biomass from our 3g process as fuel. our target is to demonstrate the use ofrenewable resources (corn sugar) and simultaneous production of fuel from thebiomassña òbiorefineryó as an economically viable concept (box 8).occcoocococccoocoocccoocococccoocohocccohhocccohcoohchoocoohchoo+1,3propanediol(3g)polypropylene terephthalate (3gt)terephthalatic acid3gt (sorona)figure 6sorona (polypropylene terephthalate), an advanced polymerfiber.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94appendix dyeastbacteriumglucoseglycerol3gin nature: two microorganisms convert sugar to 3g stepwise.for an industrial process: a single microorganism is desired ohohfigure 7traditional chemical routes to 3g.hooho+ co + h2cho+ h2o + h2hoohshell:degussa:figure 8nature combined with metabolic engineering to produce 3g.figure 9bio3g titer history.02040608010012014016018019941995199619971998199920003g titer (g/l)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.uma chowdhry95dupontõs commitment to sustainable development begins with a strong leadership commitment to stay the course through economic cycles, to set stretchgoals for each decade and to drive innovation. specific 2010 goals for energy areto¥derive 25% (up from 10% today) of corporate revenue from renewableresources;¥source 10% of our energy needs from renewable resources;¥reduce greenhouse gases by 65% vs. 1990; and¥keep total energy use flat vs. 1990.our commitment to use our powerful technology base coupled with complementary skills from universities, government labs, and/or other companies to ensure sustainable development is steadfast. further examples of technical programsto illustrate this commitment include fuel cells, sensors, and catalysts for controlling auto emissions, waterborne coatings, supercritical solvents, and recyclablepolymers.major environmental trends that we see for land, air, water, and transportation of environmentally hazardous materials are shown in box 9. these trendsrequire that we get ahead of these issues and lead the chemical industry in thereduction of toxic metal (e.g., sb, sn, as) compounds, greenhouse gases, mercury emissions, and sulfur from gasoline and diesel, and find ways to control andsequester co2. reduction of arsenic, as well as nitrates and ammonia, in drinkingwater is necessary. it is also imperative in these days of terrorism that we reducetransportation and storage of hazardous materials and continue our drive to develop inherently safer processes.dupont has prospered in the last two centuries. as we enter our third century(figure 10), we are committed to use the power of biology coupled with ourbox 8integrated cornbased biorefinery (icbr)corn + stover fermentable sugars  pdo (3g) + ethanolmeasures of success:¥petroleum usage down 90%¥(equiv $1mm barrels of oil/yr per icbr)¥climate change gases down 90%¥reduced investment by $120mm per plant¥returns on investment > 10% after tax incomethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96appendix dbox 9major environmental trendsland¥growing regulations for toxic metal compounds (sb, sn, as, etc.)¥increasing volume of biological wasteair¥nox, sox reduction (75% below 1997 level by 2007)¥hg emissions reduction (90% from 1997 level by 2007)¥sulfur in gasoline reduction (30 ppm by 2005)¥sulfur in diesel reduction (15 ppm by 2007)¥co2 control and sequestration¥phaseout of brominated organicswater¥phaseout of methyl tertiarybutyl ether (mtbe)¥arsenic reduction in drinking water¥nh3, no3 limits in waste watersecurity¥movement away from storage of hazardous substances¥embed security code into responsible care¥introduce inherently safer processesfigure 10the transition to smart, sustainable growth.1802 1900 2000 2100birthgrowthmaturitybirthgrowthmaturitybirthgrowthmaturityexplosiveschemistryenergychemistry,biology. . .knowledge intensivesolutionsthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barry dellinger97traditional strengths in chemistry and engineering to what we hope will becomethe òcentury of sustainability.ó the ultimate goal of sustainability has to be conservation of global ecosystems for the future of our planet and of humanity. wecannot settle for anything less.the origin and nature of toxiccombustion byproductsbarry dellingerlouisiana state universityintroductionalthough combustion and thermal processes are necessary to provide for theessential needs of our existence, they are intrinsically òdirtyó and emit a varietyof air pollutants. some of these pollutants are well known, well understood, andsubject to significant control.however, combustion is a complex process that results in formation of manypollutants that are not well characterized as to their nature or origin. as a responsible society, it is incumbent upon us to examine these issues, determine theirimportance, and endeavor to eventually resolve and address each of them.combustionrelated air pollution can be classified in many ways. table 1presents one such classification that may assist in identifying and prioritizingresearch needs.we actually have a pretty good idea of the identity of most of the emissionsfrom combustion on a mass basis; on the order of 99.9% of emissions from areasonably controlled combustion source are carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide,and simple hydrocarbons such as methane and ethane. however, the remainingfraction is a complex myriad of pollutants that is not fully characterized and cancontain toxic species.table 1categorization of combustiongenerated air pollutants.categoryexamplessmog precursorscoacute toxicsnox, volatile organic compounds (vocs)toxic air pollutantsbutadiene, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (pahs)endocrine disrupting chemicalsdioxins, oxypahshalocarbonschlorinated hydrocarbons (chcs), brominatedhydrocarbons (bhcs)fine particlesmetals and organic constituentspersistent radicalssemiquinonesthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98appendix dan analytical chemist would be interested primarily in characterizing theseemissions by developing new analytical techniques and continuous monitoringapparatus. a combustion scientist might be most interested in identifying theorigin and mechanism of their formation. a combustion engineer might focus ondeveloping methods for their mitigation through design of control technology orcombustion modification to prevent their formation.table 2 presents a combustion system from the viewpoint of a combustionscientist. it identifies reaction zones, the conditions that exist within these zones,and classifications of reactions that can occur under these conditions.the vast majority of these pollutantforming pathways involve free radicals.it is generally assumed that these radicals are formed in the hightemperatureflame zone of combustion systems. however, reactions occurring in the postflame, thermal zone (zone 3) and the gasquench and surfacecatalysis zones(zones 4 and 5), may also form radicals responsible for pollutant formation. insome cases, the radicals may be stable and act as pollutants themselves.small reactive radicals (e.g., ho¥, h¥, o¥) have lifetimes of less than a microtable 2chemical reactions zones in combustion systems.reactiondecompositionformationzoneconditionsmechanismsmechanisms1 preflamet = 2001000cmolecular eliminations,molecular eliminations,tr << 1 sbond fission, bimolecularcomplex radicalmolecule[o2]~50% earadical attackpathways, recombinationassociation reactions2 flamet = 10001800cbimolecular radical attack,complex radicaltr ~ 0.01sbond fission, molecularmolecule pathways,[o2] ~ 50% eaeliminationsmolecular eliminations,recombinationassociationreactions3 hightemperaturet = 6001100cmolecular eliminations,recombinationthermaltr = 110sbond fission, bimolecularassociation reactions,[o2] = 50100% earadical attackcomplex radicalmoleculepathways, molecularelimination4 gas quencht = 80600cmolecular eliminations,recombinationtr ~ 10sbond fissionassociation reactions[o2] = 39% ea5 surface catalysist = 10001800csurfacecatalyzedsurfacecatalyzedtr = 10s to 10 mindecompositionsynthesis[o2] = 39% eathe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barry dellinger99second. organic radicals are less reactive and may have lifetimes of several microseconds. resonancestabilized organic radicals, such as cyclopentadienyl andpropargyl, can be even more stable and less reactive, with lifetimes in the millisecond range. catalytic cycles similar to those well studied by the troposphericchemistry community can result in measurable steadystate concentrations of radicals that exist for several seconds after the combustion event that initiated theirformation. finally, recent evidence suggests that semiquinonetype radicals contained in some types of particles may persist indefinitely.combustion chemistry research opportunitieswhile some sources and mechanisms of combustiongenerated air pollutionhave been the subject of considerable study, other sources are poorly characterized and not very well understood. examples are:1.flares and plumes,2.soot and pah formation by resonancestabilized radicals,3.endocrine disrupting chemicals (edcs) and oxypah,4.gas phase reactions of halogenated hydrocarbons,5.surfacemediated pollutant formation, and6.particulatestabilized free radicals.flares and plumesindustrial flares and plumes represent a potentially significant source of airpollution that are poorly characterized and controlled. conditions are ideal forpostflame thermal reactions and photolytic reactions at elevated temperatures(photothermal reactions). the elevated temperatures in flares and plumes (~50 to600 c outside of the visible flame) can result in accelerated rates of formation ofoxypah and nitropah. at higher temperatures within the flame zone of combustors, oxypah and nitropah are likely to be destroyed, but under the relatively mild conditions of flares and plumes, the rates of formation can be accelerated without their subsequent destruction. the elevated temperatures and exposureto solar radiation can result in fast photothermal reactions that lead to the formation of both combustiontype pollutants and photochemical pollutants. researchhas shown that at elevated temperatures, the rate of absorption of solar radiationand photochemical quantum yield can increase up to tenfold.soot and pah formation by resonance stabilized radicalsfor many years, the reactions of small organic radicals, containing even numbers of carbons, such as vinyl, ethynyl, and butadienyl, have dominated the theoryof molecular growth to form soot and pah. however, it has been recognizedrecently that oddcarbon radicals such as propargyl and cyclopentadienyl are stathe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100appendix dbilized and play a significant, possibly dominant role. the properties and elementary reactions of these resonancestabilized species are poorly characterized fromthe chemical viewpoint. they can undergo a variety of isomerization, recombination, and addition reactions for which rates have not been determined, and theirimpacts on pah formation pathways have not been assessed.edcs and oxypahit is now known that endocrine disrupting chemicals are emitted from combustion sources. interest has focused on the emissions of polychlorinated dibenzopdioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (pcdd/f), which are also knowncarcinogens. however, oxypah, epoxides, and other oxygenated species areknown edcs. these can also be emitted from combustion sources, although theyare not well characterized. they are semipolar compounds that are difficult toanalyze. thus, improved methods of analysis are needed in conjunction with biological testing to determine the nature and quantity of edc emissions from combustion sources.gasphase reactions of halogenated hydrocarbonschlorinated and brominated materials are burned or thermally treated in avariety of combustion sources including hazardous and municipal waste incinerators, industrial processes, backyard trash burning, and accidental fires. chlorinated materials are used in a wide range of applications and brominated compounds are fire retardants used in many devices including electronic circuits.although there has been some research on the reactions of chcs and bhcs inthe past 20 years, too little is known about their reactions considering the magnitude of the environmental impact. elementary reaction studies of gasphase reactions of c1 and c2, chcs, and bhcs are needed to understand their most fundamental reaction properties. reactions of the chlorinated and brominated benzenesand phenols are important intermediate steps in the formation of pcdd/f. recentkinetic models indicate that the gasphase reactions may be quite important andelementary gasphase reaction studies have been overlooked by researchers.surfacemediated pollutant formationresearch has shown that the presence of catalytic surfaces and particles increases the yields and rates of formation of pcdd/f in combustion systems overthe reaction temperature range of 200600 c. transition metals such as coppercan increase the rate of chlorination, molecular growth, and aromatic condensation reactions to form pcdd/f. also, reactive species can attack a carbon matrixto chlorinate and fragment the carbon latticeforming pcdd/f as well as otherchlorinated hydrocarbons. although research to date has focused on surfacemethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.barry dellinger101diated pcdd/f and chlorinated hydrocarbon formation, this same research suggests that many types of pollutants can be formed by similar processes. postcombustion coolzone formation of pollutants may explain an important combustion dilemma, which is how seemingly thermally fragile compounds can beemitted from combustion systems.particlestabilized free radicalsrecent research has shown that combustion sources can generate radicalsthat are stabilized by associated with particulate matter. this same particulatematter becomes a component of airborne pm2.5. (fine particulate matter (smallerthan 2.5 microns in diameter). pm2.5 is known to initiate lung cancer and cardiopulmonary disease; however, the mechanism has not been identified. dnaand cellular assay results indicate that combustion and pm2.5 can cause radicalinduced damage to dna. based on electron paramagnetic resonance (epr) studies, the responsible species appear to be semiquinonetype radicals. these studiesreveal that radicals, heretofore thought to be too unstable to survive in the atmosphere, can be stabilized by association with particles and initiate biologicaldamage.conclusions and recommendationsresearch on the environmental aspects of combustion is inherentlymultidisciplinary. fundamental research is needed within specific areas; instrument development is needed to facilitate this research; and interdisciplinary collaborations are needed to evaluate the health impacts of combustiongeneratedpollution.research recommendations¥research on photothermal and thermal reactions in flares and plumes including photothermal chemistry and spectroscopy as well as destruction and formation of toxic air pollutants¥elementary reaction kinetic studies of resonance stabilized radicals andhow they impact formation of pah and pah radicals¥mechanistic studies of the partial oxidation of pahs by thermal, photolytic, and photothermal pathways¥elementary reaction kinetic studies of chcs and bhcs with specific emphasis on the reactions of chlorinated phenol and other dioxin precursors; chemically activated displacement reactions; cl¥, br¥, h¥, o¥, and ho¥ reactions; and abinitio molecular orbital calculations¥research on surfacecatalyzed pollutant formation including transitionthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102appendix dmetal catalyzed dioxin formation, surfacecatalyzed formation of chc and toxicair pollutants, and catalytic destruction¥efforts to characterize fine particles including speciation of toxic metalsand organometallic surface binding¥research on persistent radicals in the environment including characterization of their structure, mechanisms of formation, mechanisms of stabilization,and pathways of biological redox cyclinginstrument development needs¥methods for study of fast surface reactions¥surface analysis techniques for organometallic binding and radical characterization¥dependable methods for studying elementary gasphase reactions of organic radicals at elevated temperature¥methods for studying the spectroscopic properties of hightemperaturesystems¥techniques for metal speciationrecommendations for support of research¥development of microarrays for rapid screening of biological end pointsof complex mixtures¥risk assessment methods for multiple pollutants from multiple sources¥biochemical reactions of environmentally persistent free radicalscomputation and environmental sciencedavid a. dixonpacific northwest national laboratoryenvironmental chemical science deals with issues of scale as much as anyarea of chemistry and the issues of scaling in space and time dominate environmental science. the goal of environmental science is to understand the currentstate of the environment based on our knowledge of the past and to use this information to be able to predict the future state. for example, given current practicesfor manufacturing, what will be their longterm environmental impact? givenpotential environmental remediation strategies, what will these lead to? one doesnot want to use a remediation strategy that will have unforeseen consequencesand introduce new environmental issues. no one wants to repeat the mistakes ofthe past, for example, the wide release of chlorofluorocarbons (cfcs) into theatmosphere that led to stratospheric ozone depletion. although, we are interestedthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.david a. dixon103in the results at large spatial and temporal scales, detailed insight into behavior atthe molecular scale is key to understanding (1) how humans have impacted theenvironment, (2) how to remediate anthropogenic impacts on the environment,and (3) how to minimize future anthropogenic impacts on the environment.computing has revolutionized the way that we live and the way that wepractice science. the entire research enterprise has been undergoing a revolutionover the past two decades as it exploits the advances that are occurring in computer hardware and software and in new mathematical and theoretical approaches.this revolution is based on the utilization of highperformance computers (nowmassively parallel) to solve the complex equations that describe natural phenomena (e.g., the schrıdinger equation for electronic motion in molecules; newtonõsequations of motion for the classical motion of hundreds of thousands of particlessuch as those in a protein). modeling and simulation is now considered to be thethird branch of science, bridging experiment and analytical theory. the role ofsimulation in the modern scientific and technical endeavor cannot be underestimated, and the use of effective modeling and simulation plays a critical role inmodern scientific advances. there are a number of important roles that modelingand simulation play in the scientific enterprise. first, modeling, theory and simulation can enhance our understanding of known systems. second, they can provide qualitative and quantitative insights into experimental work and guide thechoice of which experimental system to study or enable the design of new systems. this is most useful if the simulation has been benchmarked on wellestablished systems to validate the approach. third and finally, simulations can provide quantitative results to replace experiments that are too difficult, dangerous,or expensive and can extend limited experimental data into new domains of parameter space. for example, accurate thermochemical and kinetic calculationsfor the design of nuclear waste processing facilities and green chemical processesor for predicting tropospheric oxidation processes relevant to aerosol formationare needed due to missing experimental data. in addition, simulation allows oneto explore temporal and/or spatial domains that are not accessible by presentexperimental methods. for example, it is now possible to explore different chemical reaction pathways not directly accessible by experiment to learn why they arenot favorable or to find missing steps in a mechanism.high accuracy from a simulation is important. a factor of 2 to 4 in catalystefficiency may determine whether a chemical process is economically feasible ornot, and a factor of 4 in a rate constant at room temperature (25 c) correspondsto a change in the activation energy on the order of just less than 1 kcal/mol. fora 50:50 starting mixture of two components, a change in the free energy, g, ofless than 1.5 kcal/mol leads to a change in the equilibrium constant by a factor of10, leading to a 90:10 mixture at 25 c. the requirement for such accuracy meansthat we must be able to predict thermodynamic quantities such as bond dissociation energies (de or d00) and heats of formation (hf) to better than 1 kcal/moland activation energies to within a few tenths of a kilocalorie per moleña dauntthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104appendix ding computational task. rapid advances in hardware, algorithm development,theory, and software are enabling computational scientists to attack larger andmore complex problems with higheraccuracy and higherfidelity models. basedon advances in computational science over the past two decades, we often knowhow to dramatically improve the quality of the simulation given sufficient computing resources. if we are to gain the maximum impact from simulations, onemust aim for the highest possible accuracy in the simulations given the availableresources, and one must continue to develop methods that can take advantage ofthe significantly increased computational resources to be available in the future.this latter point is critical due to the rapid evolution of computer hardware, drivenmostly by the consumer industry.it has recently been shown that computational chemistry methods can provide the accuracy required to reliably solve complex environmental problems butaccuracy significantly increases the computational demands. examples of howcomputational chemistry is being used to impact environmental science includethe following:¥accurate properties prediction for radionuclides, including actinides andlanthanides, to understand their migration in the vadose zone (e.g., the hanfordsite), and their chemical behavior in waste tanks (e.g., hanford and savannahriver)ñsuch chemical reactivity information is needed for detailed subsurfaceand groundwater reactive transport models.¥reliable prediction of thermodynamic and kinetic properties for chemicalprocesses (e.g., reactions of chlorinated hydrocarbons on surfaces and in aqueoussystems, atmospheric oxidation of organic precursors to ozone and aerosols) aswell as for designing green chemical manufacturing processes.¥molecularlevel studies of chemistry in solution and at interfaces, including mineral interfaces (e.g., the behavior of metal ions in aqueous solution and onmetal oxide or clay surfaces for vadose zone, tank, and groundwater remediationand catalysis)ña detailed understanding of redox (electron transfer chemistry) isbroadly needed; studies of the interactions of biological molecules with surfacesfor bioremediation are also needed and being pursued.¥reliable prediction of spectroscopic properties to aid in the interpretationof experiments for determining speciation in the environment (e.g., surface, subsurface, groundwater) and in tanks, as well as for chemical process control.¥reliable prediction of chemical processes for carbon management including aerosol formation (organic oxidations, inorganic nh3h2so4h2o chemistry,and nucleation processes) and sequestration and capture of co2 (e.g., in geologicformations and in the ocean).¥fundamental molecular processes relevant to cell signaling pathways forbiological remediation and risk assessment including proteinprotein interactionsand enzymatic reactions.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.david a. dixon105¥structural biology and functional genomics for assessing the health impact of environmental contaminants and for bioremediation.¥chemical processing, includingñtank waste processing and separation systems for tank wastes as wellas sensor design,ñgreen chemical processing strategies for waste remediation, and chemical and petroleum production to minimize waste streams and energy consumption,ñhomogeneous and heterogeneous catalyst design (e.g., controlled oxidation of organics to produce intermediates for the chemical process industryor nox or sox emission reduction from combustion systems), andñmodels of the behavior of waste storage systems (e.g., glasses for radionuclide storage in waste isolation pilot plant or yucca mountain) over longtime periods (hundreds of thousands of years).¥developing a thorough understanding of combustion chemistry to reduceunwanted emissions (e.g., nox abatement strategies for leanburn engines) and toimprove system performanceña large number of chemical species and reactionsare involved in the combustion of hydrocarbon fuels, and little is known about thehighly reactive intermediates and many of the reactions.computational design of catalysts:the control of chemical transformationthe u.s. petroleum, chemical, biochemical, and pharmaceutical industriesare the worldõs largest producer of chemicals, ranging from òwonderó drugs topaints to cosmetics to plastics to new more efficient energy sources. the u.s.chemical industry represents 10% of all u.s. manufacturing, employing morethan one million americans. it also is one of the few industries that has possesseda favorable balance of trade. the petroleum and chemical industries contribute~$500 billion to the gross national product of the united states these industriesrely for their financial wellbeing on their ability to produce new products byusing energyefficient, lowcost, environmentally clean processes, with a minimal number of undesirable side products. key ingredients in 90% of chemicalmanufacturing processes are catalysts. a catalystõs role is to make a chemicalreaction that produces a desired product proceed much more efficiently than itotherwise would by changing the kinetics of the process. catalysis and catalyticprocesses account for nearly 20% of the u.s. gross domestic product and nearly20% of all industrial products. chemical transformations in industry take a cheapfeedstock (usually some type of hydrocarbon) and convert it into a highervalueproduct by rearranging the carbon atoms and adding functional groups to thecompound. about 5 quads per year are used in the production of the top 50 chemicals in the united states and catalytic routes account for the production of 30 ofthese chemicals, consuming 3 quads. improved catalysts can increase efficiencythe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106appendix dleading to reduced energy requirements, while increasing product selectivity andconcomitantly decreasing wastes and emissions. a process yield improvement ofonly 10% would save 0.23 quad per year! in addition, production of the top 50chemicals leads to almost 21 billion pounds of co2 emitted to the atmosphere peryear.1 improved catalysts can help reduce this carbon burden on the atmosphere.as new products become ever more sophisticated, the need to quickly developnew catalysts grows rapidly in importance. a fundamental understanding ofchemical transformations is needed to enable scientists to address the grand challenge of the precise control of molecular processes by using catalysts.whereas mother nature is very effective at designing catalysts such asenzymes, we are decidedly less so. the most common approach to catalyst designused to be edisonian. try something; if it works, try to improve on the design bysystematically changing the chemical nature of the catalyst; if it doesnõt work, trysomething else. this approach is highly intensive, in terms of both time and expense, and most of the time, it did not work well. in addition, catalysts developedusing this approach often produced undesirable byproducts, and the catalyst itself may pose an environmental hazard. for many catalytic processes it is stillunclear just how the catalyst works. a more desirable approach to catalyst designis to analyze at the molecular level exactly how catalysts function and to use thisinformation to lead to the discovery of new systems and to optimize the design ofothers. without this information, it is impossible to òtuneó the catalyst to have thedesired effect. for example, even the most sophisticated experimental techniquesare unable to provide the details of the chemical reactions occurring at the surfaceof a heterogeneous catalyst or information about how to tune a homogeneouscatalyst to gain a factor of 2 to 4 in performance.the coupling of theory and experiment provides the most profound insights into catalyst behavior enabling the design of new catalysts. a combinedtheoryexperiment approach was used to design a new alloy catalyst for ammoniasynthesis leading to the first new ammonia catalyst since haber and boschõswork in the early 1900s that is better than iron. the development of a lewisacidity scale based on highlevel computations led directly to the design of amixed metal catalyst for the liquid phase production of the hydrofluorocarbonrefrigerant hfc134a, the only such available liquid phase process.the computational design of practical catalysts for industrial and commercial applications requires the ability to predict, at the molecular level, the detailedbehavior of large, complex molecules as well as solidstate materials. althoughintermediatelevel computations can often provide insight into how a catalystworks, the true computational design of practical catalysts for industrial and commercial applications will require the ability to predict accurate thermodynamic1tonkovich, a. l.y.; gerber, m. a. the top 50 commodity chemicals: impact of catalytic process limitations on energy, environment and economics, pnl10684, pacific northwest nationallaboratory, richland wa, 1995, 99352.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.david a. dixon107and kinetic results. there are enormous technical challenges in the computationaldesign of catalysts. these include the number of different scales that must beconsidered, the size of the active domain, the need to treat heterogeneous structures, the need to consider the effective environment in which the catalyst acts(gas phase, solid phase, solution phase, at interfaces), and the need to treat complex metal interactions as most catalysts involve transition or lanthanide metals.another set of challenges is that catalysts must be designed for use in real environments such as chemical reactors. the goals for computational catalysis onnextgeneration computer architectures are:50 teraflops (109 floatingpoint operations per second): accurate calculations for realistic, isolated homogeneous catalyst model systems (<1.0 kcal/molthermodynamics, <50% error in reaction rates).250 teraflops: accurate calculations for realistic homogeneous catalyst modelsystems in solution and heterogeneous catalysts in vacuum (<1.0 kcal/mol thermodynamics, <50% error in reaction rates).1000 teraflops: accurate calculations for realistic homogeneous catalystmodel systems in solution and heterogeneous catalysts in solution (<1.0 kcal/molthermodynamics, <50% error in reaction rates).success in these computational approaches will enable the longsought goal incatalyst research of the design of efficient catalysts from first principles. suchnew catalytic systems will revolutionize how we manufacture the chemicals thatare such a part of everyday life, from efficient automotive fuels to polymers tocancerfighting drugs, as well as the design of catalysts to minimize troposphericenvironmental pollution from combustion energy systems. the ability tocomputationally design efficient new catalyst systems would lead to a revolutionin the design of green chemical manufacturing processes that minimize (1) theusage of raw materials, (2) energy utilization, and (3) the environmental impactof the process and waste stream. improved catalytic converters for combustionsystems would enable the use of different fuel types as well as the development ofleanburn engines that minimize the impact of engine emissions such as nox onthe formation of tropospheric pollutants such as ozone and harmful aerosols. furthermore, the development of leanburn engines with low emissions would havea large impact on reducing co2 emissions to the atmosphere because these engines burn the fuel much more efficiently.computational environmental molecular science for doe site cleanupcomputational molecular science is a key technology for addressing the complex environmental cleanup problems facing the department of energyõs nuclearproduction sites as well as other polluted sites in the nation. production of nuclearweapons at u.s. doe facilities across the nation over four decades has resulted inthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108appendix dthe interim storage of millions of gallons of highly radioactive mixed wastes inhundreds of underground tanks, extensive contamination of the soil and groundwater at thousands of sites, and hundreds of buildings that must be decontaminated and decommissioned. the single most challenging environmental issueconfronting the doe, and perhaps the nation, is the safe and costeffective management and remediation of these wastes. environmental impacts at these sitesrange from minimal (e.g., nearsurface contamination with uncontaminatedgroundwater aquifers) to extensive (e.g., surface, vadose zone, and groundwatercontamination that extends offsite). the doe invests approximately $6 billionper year in environmental cleanup activities at its former and present productionsites. even with this large expenditure expected over a 50year time frame, it isdifficult to see how remediation of the sites will be accomplished by using currently available technology. the sole use of conventional approaches toremediation and control (e.g., excavation, treatment, recovery, and disposal ofresidual waste for contaminated soils; pump and treat for contaminated aquifers)is cost prohibitive. remediation strategies for doe sites will require the combination of conventional remediation approaches with the increasing effectivenessand decreased cost of emerging technologies (e.g., in situ techniques such asnatural bioremediation), to meet future remediation goals within budget constraints. incorporation of in situ remediation technologies into overall remediationstrategies has the potential for significant cost savings by leveraging physical,chemical, and biological subsurface processes to enhance the natural recovery ofvadose zone and groundwater systems. however, a key ingredient in the successas well as the costeffectiveness of remediation efforts is fundamental knowledgeabout the chemical properties and interactions of the wastes with their environment. this information is needed in order to develop and use in situ processes asunlike ex situ processes, there is usually no easy way to effectively halt an in situprocess once it has begun. computational molecular science in combination withexperimental investigations provides this fundamental understanding of the complex interactions of (manmade) materials with the environment.to support the development of innovative technologies for remediatingvarious doe sites, we need to develop reliable models to investigate the impactof the technology and the appropriate level of risk of using the technology or ofdoing nothing. these models of contaminant fate and transport in the subsurfacehave to be built on a detailed understanding of the binding and reaction of contaminants on soil particles as well as transport and reaction in groundwater. inaddition, reliable models of the direct impact of mobile contaminants on humansand the risk of proposed remediation technologies will be critical for developingthe safest and most costeffective approaches to site cleanup and for public acceptance of the cleanup process and results. it is clear that such research spans theinterfacial regime from bare solid surfaces to complex, solutionphase surfacechemistry, and covers a range of time and length scales. thus, one importantfocus of such a computational science effort is an understanding of the linkagesthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.david a. dixon109between different temporal and spatial scales. no matter how many details of thephysics are included in the transport models, if the critical underlying physical,chemical, and biological data describing the various reactions are missing or unreliable, the accurate predictive capability of such models will be significantlylessened. computational molecular science can provide the thermodynamic, kinetic, and structural properties data needed for the models and can provide datathat is difficult, or at times even impossible, to obtain in the laboratory or in thefield due to the cost or danger of the experiment. the calculation of interactionsof chemicals, including those containing radioactive elements, with environmental matrices such as soils is incredibly complex and will require tens to hundredsof sustained teraflops to begin to reliably predict the molecular interactions ofchemicals with environmental systems and to provide the underlying data neededfor reactive transport models. highquality data are needed, and great care mustbe taken to minimize the errors in the calculated underlying data used in a sophisticated environmental or chemical process model so that errors in the data do notaccumulate, propagate, and ultimately invalidate the macroscopicscale model.there is a timecriticality in the need for the data that this computational molecular science effort will provide. contaminants have been released into the environment over the past 50 years, and their mobility has led, and is continuing to lead,to broadscale soil and groundwater contamination of the doe sites.some of the most hazardous materials in the underground tanks, in the soilsand groundwater, and in the buildings contain radioactive isotopes of the actinides and lanthanides. these materials pose significant radiation and other healthhazards. a basic understanding of actinide and lanthanide chemistry is requiredto develop the new technologies needed for remediating the sites. because of thedifficulty and expense involved in conducting experiments with radioactive materials, it is important to employ computational methodologies that include theeffects of einsteinõs theory of relativity to support accurate calculations on molecular systems containing the actinides and lanthanides in order to guide thechoice of experiments and to reliably extend the available experimental data intoall of the regimes of interest. such a capability would minimize the need forexperimental work on radioactive materials. this capability would support manyother research programs of importance to doe, including the development ofhighly efficient and selective catalysts for new industrial processes. in addition,such a computational capability is needed to help offset the nationõs loss of expertise in the area of actinide chemistry that is so critical to the multiple missionsof the doe. computational molecular science also can be used to aid in thedesign of new processes, for example, the design of new compounds for efficientseparation of radionuclides, such as technetium, or the rational design of enzymesto enhance the biodegradation of organic wastes or to immobilize radionuclides.computational molecular science not only provides needed data but also can beused to provide new insights and answer òwhat if?ó questions raised by scientistsand engineers. improving the response time to answer such questions will drathe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110appendix dmatically shorten the design and development time for new remediation strategies. in summary, theory can, at enormous but feasible computational expense,reliably and safely predict the chemical and physical properties of radioactivesubstances, often more costeffectively than performing an experiment. the science goals in this area for nextgeneration computer architectures are:50 tflops: accurate calculations for realistic models of lanthanides and actinides on complex mineral surfaces (<1.0 kcal/mol thermodynamics) to developparameters for reactive transport models of the vadose zone250 tflops: accurate calculations for realistic models of lanthanides andactinides on complex mineral surfaces interacting with aqueous solutions (<1.0kcal/mol thermodynamics) to develop parameters for reactive transport modelsof the vadose zone1000 tflops: accurate calculations for realistic models of lanthanides andactinides on complex mineral surfaces interacting with aqueous solutions (<50%error in reaction rates) to develop parameters for reactive transport models of thevadose zonenot surprisingly, the ability to predict the transport of wastes and associatedcontaminants within the earthõs shallow crust has become one of the most important challenges facing the doe and is one of the most daunting scientific andcomputational challenges. reliable prediction of the disposition of contaminantsis critical for decisions on virtually every waste disposal option, from remediationtechnologies such as in situ bioremediation to evaluations of the safety of nuclearwaste repositories. nuclear waste repository designs, for both highlevel and lowlevel wastes, require knowledge of transport of fluids in the vadose and saturatedzones. such predictive capabilities also will impact the responsible utilization ofour nationõs energy resources, particularly with respect to oil and gas. any suchpredictions must be based on a comprehensive understanding of processes in theearthõs shallow crust. the accurate computation of the transport and dispositionover long spatial and temporal scales of fluidborne contaminants in complexnatural systems is well beyond current capabilities. we currently lack the scientific understanding and the computational resources necessary to address theseissues with the desired accuracy. however, with future generations of computational resources, it will be possible to address scientific and technical issues thatare fundamental for quantitative analysis of fluid transport in terrestrial systemsand essential for improving predictive capabilities.computation is essential for predicting the intricate web of species, reactions, and interconnections of transport in the natural system. the few naturalexamples of the integrated record of these processes constitute experiments thatcannot be offered as an alternative to computational approaches. in addition, computational simulations are the only means that we have for predicting how contaminants will move over a long time period to predict the future state and thethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.david a. dixon111potential longterm impact of proposed remediation strategies. computationalmodeling is the essential tool for translating scientific breakthroughs into practical applications in the area of subsurface transport. there are two key challengesfor predictive modeling of subsurface transport. first, the present generation ofhardware and software is insufficient to address the comprehensive treatment offlow and transport of multiple fluid and solid phases in heterogeneous, threedimensional, nonequilibrium, interactive systems such as those found in the natural state. second, as discussed above, accurate theoretical descriptions of themechanisms of interaction are not yet fully developed. overarching issues concern the ability to scale processes over many orders of magnitude in length andtime, the ability to handle coupled complex relationships of processes at multiplescales, and the ability to predict and evaluate the results of processes over longtime scales using data available only for narrow windows of observation. overthe next 10 years, simulation will play a major role in the development of newtheory for fieldscale simulations. a hierarchy of models designed for differentscales is necessary to identify key features and processes at fundamental scalesthat have to be propagated to the field scale. key scales where integration isneeded include1,the microbial membrane and surface where molecularlevel structure andbinding reactions are important to the biogeochemistry;2.the mineral surface in solution to provide the setting for the interaction ofminerals, aqueous components, surfacecomplexed metals, and attached microbial populations;3.a network of pores to put multiple mineral surfaces in contact with transporting fluids that move nonuniformly, allowing for varying rates of exposure tonutrients and reacting components;4.at the darcy scale (macroscopic scaleñfor fluid volumes on the order ofmilliliters), similar degrees of process interaction are necessary, but the processmodels are based on bulk parameterizations to account for behaviors that cannotbe resolved by the continuum approach; and5.at the field scale (megascopic scale) process integration is similar in approach to the darcy scale but generally considers more range in the parameterspace (e.g., heterogeneity) but less detail in spatial and temporal resolution.subsurface simulations have actually begun to impact geochemistry, geophysics, and environmental chemistry by encouraging holistic and mechanistically detailed investigations where multiple processes and multiple reactive components are considered and monitored in complex subsurface materials. over thenext 10 years, these simulations are expected to be indispensable to the advancement of subsurface science through the systematic upscaling of processes at fundamental scales to representative parameterizations useful to fieldscale models.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112appendix datmospheric chemistryproblems in atmospheric chemistry are extremely challenging computationally. they are highly nonlinear, require the ability to simulate processesoccurring on a vast range of spatial and temporal scales, and require coupledsimulation of complex systems (the ocean and atmosphere) involving dynamics,thermodynamics (including condensable gases), chemistry, and thermal radiation. they are computeintensive, dataintensive, memoryintensive, and analysisintensive. one area in which computational chemistry has played an important role in atmospheric chemistry is in the development of alternatives to thechlorofluorocarbons involved in stratospheric ozone depletion. computationalchemistry was essential for calculating missing thermodynamic data as well ascorrecting older experimental data on the cfcs, hydrochlorofluorocarbon(hcfcs), and hydrofluorocarbons (hfcs). indeed, there are now far more calculated values being used than experimental ones. calculations were critical to understanding the stability of an alternative in the environment and to the design ofproduction processes and the actual refrigeration system. the calculated thermodynamic and kinetic properties have been used extensively in the design of chemical plants for producing cfc alternatives as well as by researchers who are developing new catalysts and alternatives. from calculations, it is now possible toreliably predict the thermodynamics and kinetics of the atmospheric degradationprocesses for the cfc replacements that are so critical to the design of environmentally safe alternatives. the ability to reliably predict rate constants for theinitial reaction of an hfc or hcfc with a hydroxyl radical and the ability to thendevelop reliable degradation mechanism parameters was important in understanding and predicting the behavior of the alternatives in the troposphere and stratosphere in terms of ozone depletion potential, and together with calculated infrared intensities, a compoundõs global warming potential could be calculated. thecomputational chemistry results could then be used in much largerscale atmospheric models involving fluid flow. dupont used the results from computationalchemistry to improve its process design for the manufacture of new fluorochemicals. by using thermodynamic and kinetic parameters calculated from first principles, the behavior of a pilot plant for the production of a cfc alternative wasmodeled correctly before actual operation began. computational work was critical to getting the cfcs replacements to market as soon as possible, helping tosave the stratospheric ozone layer. computational chemistry is continuing to beused in many areas of atmospheric chemistry as we improve our knowledge ofhow the atmosphere behaves. modeling aerosol formation, attachment of chemicals to aerosols, and reactions on aerosols are very difficult computational problems that are just beginning to be addressed. atmospheric models are extremelycomplex especially when the correct physics (e.g., radiative transport and improved cloud parameterizations) is included, and they represent another computational grand challenge crossing many scales in space and time.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.william h. farland113summaryas discussed above, computational chemistry can play a key role in advancing the scientific enterprise. it can provide the data input for many larger, morecomplex models and provide us with unique insights into molecular behavior sothat we can design and construct new molecules for specific tasks. computationalchemistry has become an established tool in the chemistõs toolbox and is beingused in broad areas of chemistry to replace experimental measurements and toprovide us with improved understanding of molecular behavior. computationwill be the major tool that enables us to cross the many temporal and spatialscales that characterize environmental science.chemically related r&d at the epaõs office ofresearch and developmentwilliam h. farlandu.s. environmental protection agencythis presentation will provide background information on programs at theoffice of research and development (ord) at the u.s. environmental protection agency. epaõs mission is broadly designed around protecting human healthand safeguarding the natural environmentñaims that require the application ofchemistry, biology, epidemiology, physical sciences, and engineering in an integrated fashion. the role of ord is to provide scientific foundations to assist theepaõs work by:¥conducting research and development to identify, understand, and solvecurrent and future environmental problems;¥providing responsive technical support to epaõs programs and regions;¥collaborating with our scientific partners in academia and other agencies,state and tribal governments, private sector organizations, and nations; and¥exercising leadership in addressing emerging environmental issues andadvancing the science and technology of risk assessment and risk management.ord is a relatively large organization, with three national laboratories andthree national centers. in early november 2002, we announced a new center forhomeland security research in cincinnati, and epa has the lead on drinking waterinfrastructure issues for the security of the nationõs drinking water system. wealso played a significant role in the decontamination of congressional buildingsthat suffered anthrax exposure in 2001. overall, ord has about 1900 employeesin r&d, about 1200 of whom have graduate degrees in science.in addition to its role in both health and ecological research, epa also hasresponsibility for research in pollution prevention and new technology activities.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114appendix dalthough there are other national institutes and centers that work in this area,only epa has a fully integrated, multidisciplinary, problemdirected research program. we rely on the peer review process and the scientific community to focusour program as we push the envelope for being state of the art. at the same timewe have a responsibility to evaluate the broader scientific literature and collectadditional information to ensure that science is credibly used in epaõs decisions.this is accomplished through a combination of our inhouse research programand an external grants program. sound science is essential for epa decisions:¥science is a critical component of credible decisions and actions that protect human health and the environment.¥making epa decisions with sound science requires relevant, highquality, cuttingedge research in human health, ecology, pollution control and prevention, and socioeconomics; proper characterization of scientific findings; and appropriate use of science in the decision process.¥ord is a leader in environmental research, focusing its efforts and resources on those areas in which epa can add the most value to reducing uncertainty in risk assessments and enhancing environmental risk management.i appreciated the discussion during the workshop session on the mtbe issue. a decade ago at epa, we were laying out research needs for oxygenates, andwe were concerned . we strongly suspected that mtbe would be a problem ingroundwater. the discussion at this workshop shows that the concern is still withus. this clearly illustrates the importance of lifecycle analysis when we evaluatesubstances that are introduced widely into the environment.many of the decisions made by epa are risk based and have significantuncertainties associated with them. the only way we can make better decisions isto fill the knowledge gaps that lead to the uncertainties. for the scientific basisthat we provide for regulatory decision making, the research falls into two general categories, problemdriven research and core research, where the former includes topics such as¥fine particulates in air,¥drinking water contaminants,¥diesel engine emissions, and¥mercury in air and water.the core research includes topics such as¥ecological monitoring and assessment of ecological resources,¥health risks to sensitive populations,¥pollution prevention and green chemistry, and¥environmental economics.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.william h. farland115these topics illustrate the need to bring a multidisciplinary approach to problemdriven research. the core research program is closer to what might be calledbasic research, and it provides a forwardlooking approach to dealing with ecological issues, health risks, pollution prevention, and support for environmentaleconomics that eventually will allow us to anticipate new problems at an earlystage. the interaction between problemdriven and core research is reciprocaland iterative.chemistry will play a large role in the research areas of our own strategicplan. for example, work on particulate matter will allow us to understand thenature of the particles and their behavior in the atmosphere, develop the modelingthat will predict their fate and transport along with the resulting human exposure,and understand the transition from exposure to dose that will enable health assessment work.drinking water provides another example in which the byproducts of disinfection illustrate ways that environmental chemistry is part of our everyday activities. we have also been looking at the nature of the toxin associated withpfiesteria in order to understand the chemistry by which pfiesteria produces lesions in fish and potentially has the ability to poison humans. this is a verydifficult chemistry problem. similarly, endocrine disrupters have been discussedin this workshop, and we need to understand their mechanism of action and thestructureactivity relationships that would allow us to make a judgment aboutinteraction with specific types of cellular receptors. clearly, research in pollutionprevention and new technologies are heavily based in the chemical sciences.a more focused list of ord research interests includes a large number oftopics that came up in todayõs workshop discussions:¥particulate matter¥drinking water¥global change¥endocrine disruptors¥ecological risk¥human health¥pollution prevention and new technologiesas one example of endocrine disrupter work, epa has been involved in dioxin reassessment for the last 11 years. this is an incredibly complex issue, witha huge amount of available informationñfrom the chemistry of toxicity equivalents and understanding how dioxinlike congeners can play into the total load inthe environment to an understanding of how dioxin works to affect cells essentially as an environmental hormone.persistent biocumulative toxic chemicals were discussed in the workshop asone of the top opportunities for advances in chemistryñunderstanding that thesehydrophobic chemicals have the ability to persist and move around in the envithe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116appendix dronment and are particularly difficult for us to control and remediate. this isanother of the areas in which we work on a daytoday basis, and again chemistryplays a large role.in atmospheric chemistry, a particular focus of our r&d activities is thedevelopment of air quality models and scaling to models that can predict local,regional, and global impacts on air qualityñfrom sources that we have the abilityto control. a new generation of airquality models looks at community modelingof air quality (cmaq), and this has provided a real advance for some of theregulatory activities that go on in epaõsprogram. mercury has recently beenadded to the model, and certainly the biggest improvement will be addition of thenox module, which is currently under development. this will be particularlyimportant if we move forward with a multipollutant approach to air pollutionusing the clear skies initiative.1 understanding the interactions among mercury,nox, sox, and other chemicals will be particularly important for us. ord hassupported work in riverside, california to build chambers in which chemicalreactivity studies will provide input into these models and advance our understanding of this issue.our programs include several areas that have a focus on analytical chemistry. for example, the clean air act requires us to publish federal referencemethods for how one measures particulate matter. we have the responsibility forlooking at methods that are functionally equivalent to the federal reference methods so we have to be in a position to look at new analytical approaches. as another example, genomics has become an important way to look at molds as indoor air pollutants or microbial contamination on beaches. we need to developmarkers that can be used for rapid detection and characterization of beach contaminationñrather than growing cultures that might tell you tomorrow whereyou shouldnõt have gone swimming yesterday. these applications combinegenomics and chemistry, and they have important implications for childrenõshealth, and for determining the ability to inhabit residences after flooding or water damage from fires. this approach will allow us to identify the organisms,understand the remediation techniques that must be used, and evaluate the extentof cleanup. it is an important contribution from our laboratories.another analytical topic of concern to us is continuous monitoring. weõreinterested in finding ways of continuous monitoring for dioxins, mercury, andcombustion byproducts. some of this work is also taking place in our laboratoryin las vegas using pattern recognition from a continuous gas chromatographyðmass spectrometry (gcms) analysis of water sources to discover changes, characterize the materials responsible for the change, and ultimately, respond quicklyby diverting them from drinking water.we have several hundred chemists on our research and development staff in1http://www.epa.gov/clearskies/the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.william h. farland117house primarily in our national exposure research laboratory and our nationalrisk management laboratory. these individuals are, for the most part, researchchemists who work on the kinds of problems i have described.in 1995 we developed an approach to reaching out to the scientific community and investing funds in particularly important problems where we can engagesome of the top scientists in the country. about a quarter of the academic facultyinvolved in this meeting are currently funded by our science to achieve results(star) program, which provides about $100 million a year in support of basicresearch directed toward specific problems. starfunded research supports abroad range of issues that will have important payoffs for our future approachesto dealing with environmental problems. some of the star solicitations thathave a chemistry emphasis include:¥measurement, modeling and analysis methods for airborne carbonaceous fine pm (2003)¥development of highthroughput screening approaches for prioritizingchemical for the edc screening program (2003)¥technology for a sustainable environment (national science foundation) (2001, 2003)¥assessing the consequences of global change for air quality: sensitivity of u.s. air quality to climate change and future global impacts (2002)¥nutrient science for improved watershed management program (2002)¥environmental futures research in nanoscale science, engineering andtechnology (2001, 2002)¥mercury: transport, transformation, and fate in the atmosphere (2001)in a collaborative program called technologies for a sustainable environment, the national science foundation (nsf) and epa have awarded approximately $46 million for 164 projects addressing¥environmentally benign solvents,¥biotechnology for pollution prevention,¥green chemistryreaction modifications,¥green engineeringprocess modifications, and¥industrial ecologyenvironmentally benign manufacturing.pollutionprevention research is an overarching activity for which we want acombined inhouse and extramural program that is focused on finding ways toeliminate or minimize hazardous solvents, emissions, and waste. in other words,we want to clean up processes to reduce impacts on the environment; to examinerenewable feedstocks as a process improvement; and to minimize water, energy,and materials use in industrial processes. the work that epa and nsf havefunded on pollution prevention has been dominated by the chemical engineeringthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118appendix dand chemistry community (figure 1). we hope that there will be a continuedcommitment in the areas of pollution prevention, greener chemistry, and greenertechnologies. i think this is a success story that illustrates how problemdirectedresearch in these disciplines will be important to us for the future.i agree with many of the workshop participants that we have an opportunityin terms of nanotechnology. certainly there are indications that we can improveenvironmental sensing, treatment, and remediation if we can improve manufacturing processing efficiency, reduce waste production and toxicity, and reducematerials consumption. what are the effects of nanomaterials on the environment?¥currently, little is known about the potential effects of manufacturednanoparticles on human health and the environment.¥nanomaterials may enter the food chain and human body when releasedinto the air or water or discarded on the land.¥nanomaterials could affect human health and the environment throughñexposure to skin,ñadsorption by the lungs, andñbiouptake and bioaccumulation.¥the toxicity of nanomaterials is largely unknown.all of this is chemistry and chemical engineering at its finest if we can find away to make it work at a nanoscale level. this is the real challenge for us. we51%22%3%6%6%8%4%chemical engchemistrycivil & env engmechanical/ industrial/ biological engother scienceother engfigure 1chemical sciences dominate pollutionprevention grants portfolio.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.janet g. hering119participated in an interagency national nanotechnology initiative that will investabout $710 million in this particular area this year. the vast majority of this workcomes out of nsf, the department of defense (dod), and doe. but epa invests about $5 million a year right now in this area. we are making an importantcontribution in understanding what needs to be done in integrating the issues withenvironmental problems.in summary, ord has a dynamic program of research and development thatreally is based on integration of disciplines. we are dealing with problems forwhich solutions necessitate an integration of various science and engineering disciplines. we have a balance between problemdriven and core or basic researchthat requires us to really build a strong relationship with our partners, both insidethe agency and out in the general scientific community, to meet the agencyõsneeds, and we hope to be able to continue to enhance that partnership. we are ina position to anticipate some of the emerging scientific issues and, hopefully, bepoised to meet the challenges of the twentyfirst century.biogeochemical controls on the occurrence andmobility of trace metals in groundwaterjanet g. heringcalifornia institute of technologyintroductionclean water has been called the òoil of twentyfirst century,ó a phrase thatreflects both the growing demand for water resources and the recognition that thequality of many water resources has been degraded by human activities. theimportance of groundwater as a water supply in developed countries, such as theunited states, is often overlooked, yet in 1995, 46% of the domestic water supplywas provided by groundwater and 54% by surface water (table 1). althoughgroundwater is particularly important for selfsupply in rural areas, it is also animportant resource for public water systems. demand for and dependence ongroundwater supplies are expected to increase with increasing population in theunited states, particularly in the west.there are some important differences between groundwater and surface water with respect to water quality. surface water is considerably more vulnerable topathogens; groundwater provides some level of ònatural protectionó against bacteria and viruses that can cause outbreaks of human disease. the composition ofgroundwater, however, is more influenced than that of surface water by contactwith soil and aquifer minerals, which generally leads to the accumulation ingroundwater of constituents derived from geologic materials.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120appendix dthe natural occurrence of arsenic at elevated concentrations in groundwaterin west bengal, india, bangladesh, and other parts of south asia provides anunfortunate example of the potentially devastating effects of groundwater qualityon human health.1 in these areas, huge shifts in water resource utilization, fromsurface water to groundwater, have occurred over the past 30 years. now tens ofmillions of tubewells providing drinking water for individual families and largerwells are used for groundwaterbased irrigation. arsenic occurs in the groundwater in these regions at concentrations up to the milligramperliter range, andconcentrations between 200 and 800 g/l are common. the human health effectsof consuming this arseniccontaminated water range from skin lesions to fatalcancers. at the same time, it must be recognized that groundwater offers protection from pathogensñdiarrheal diseases are a major cause of death in infants inthe developing world. furthermore, groundwaterbased irrigation has allowedsubstantial expansion of agricultural activities and has drastically improved thenutritional status of people in these areas. nonetheless, the lack of attention togroundwater quality has had profound human health consequences, and theseexperiences illustrate the importance of evaluating the quality as well as the quantity of groundwater resources.properties of aquifers influencing groundwater qualityif we are to consider how the chemical composition of water withdrawn froma specific well has evolved, a key issue is the origin of the water and the contacttable 1use of surface water vs. groundwater for u.s. domestic supply in1995million gallonsmillion cubic metersper day (mgd)per day (m3/d)surface waterselfsupply380.14public supply14,10053.4total14,10053.4groundwaterselfsupply3,35012.7public supply8,46032.0total11,80044.7source: data from http://water.usgs.gov/watuse/pdf1995/html.1smith, a. h.; lingas, e. o.; rahman. m. contamination of drinkingwater by arsenic inbangladesh: a public health emergency. bull. world health organ. 2000, 78(9):10931103.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.janet g. hering121it has had with soil and aquifer minerals between the sites of recharge and withdrawal.2 a distinction should therefore be made between wells drilled into unconfined and confined aquifers. in unconfined aquifers, the water table is in contact with the unsaturated zone and is subject to local recharge; groundwater agescan be less than decades. in confined aquifers, however, a confining layer (usually clay) prevents local recharge, which must therefore occur in upland areas thatcan be distant from the withdrawal site. residence times can vary greatly andgroundwaters can be tens of thousands of years old.within an aquifer, water flows in response to the hydraulic gradient (i.e.,from locations of higher to lower hydraulic head). however, flow velocities arealso determined by properties of the aquifer materials, specifically hydraulic conductivity and porosity, as shown in the following equation:average linear velocity = ddkhlwhere k = hydraulic conductivity, ddhl= hydraulic gradient, and  = porosity.for various aquifer minerals, porosity varies over a fairly narrow range (ca.0.3 to 0.5) but hydraulic conductivity varies over many orders of magnitude.2even for a specific type of aquifer material, ranges of 14 orders of magnitude arecommon (e.g., 10ð8.5 to 10ð4 m/s for fractured rock, 10ð5 to 10ð3 m/s for wellsorted sand). the lowest hydraulic conductivities are found for crystalline rock(10ð14 to 10ð10 m/s) and the highest for wellsorted gravel (102 to 1 m/s) andclean sand or cavernous limestone (10ð6 to 10ð2 m/s).the prediction of groundwater flow is complicated by the heterogeneities ofthe subsurface environment, which occur on multiple scales. to understand theevolution of groundwater composition, it is also important to distinguish betweenflow through porous media and flow through channels (caused by dissolution ofthe rock matrix) or fractures (resulting from tectonic activity). such differencesin texture can result in differences in the contact between the fluid and mineralsurfaces.biogeochemical processes affecting groundwater compositionin the physical context of water movement in subsurface and waterrockcontact, we may then consider the biogeochemical processes that can affect thedistribution of a constituent x between the immobile and mobile phases in thesubsurface (table 2). obviously, mobile constituents are of the most direct concern because of the potential for human exposure. constituents in the mobile2langmuir, d. aqueous environmental geochemistry; prentice hall: upper saddle river, nj 1997.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122appendix dphase (i.e., as dissolved or colloidal species) can migrate from their source regionto a drinking water well. however, it must be remembered that immobile constituents may have the potential to be mobilized if conditions in the subsurfaceenvironment change.as indicated in table 2, the type of process by which constituent x may bemobilized (or sequestered) depends on speciation of x in the solid phase. thus, ifx is an integral constituent of an aquifer mineral, dissolution of the mineral willbe required to release x into solution, whereas mineral dissolution would not berequired to mobilize x if it is sorbed onto a mineral surface. environmental conditions (including both chemical composition of pore fluids and microbial activity) will influence the extent of mobilization or sequestration of x. for metals, inparticular, both the solubility and the affinity for surfaces can be strongly influenced by redox conditions and the presence of (biogenic) complexing agents.in order to gain insight into the evolution of groundwater composition, thesebiogeochemical processes must be examined, and subsurface materials characterized, over multiple scales ranging from nanometers to kilometers (figure 1). eachlevel of investigation in figure 1 corresponds to different types of process investigation or material characterization. for example, at the nanoscale, xray absorption spectroscopy (xas) has been a powerful tool to characterize the local (i.e.,coordination) environments of a range of elements in association with solid surfaces.3 at the laboratory scale, macroscopic experiments have determined dissotable 2partitioning of constituent x between immobile and mobile phasesimmobile phaseprocessamobile phasex as component ofdissolution dissolved xaquifer mineral matrix precipitationx sorbed on surfaces ofdesorption dissolved xaquifer materials adsorptionx dissolved in immobile diffusiondissolved xwater trapped in microporesx sorbedprecipitated indetachmentpeptization x sorbedprecipitated in mobileattached colloids attachmentfiltrationcolloidsaboth precipitationdissolution and sorptiondesorption can be strongly influenced by microbial processes. microbial redox transformations of constituent x may (especially for metals) significantlyalter solubility, and microbial production of ligands can promote the release of x from immobilephases by dissolution and desorption and stabilize x in solution.3 brown, g. e.; parks, g. a. int. geol. rev. 1992, 43(11), 9631073.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.janet g. hering123lution rates for a wide variety of minerals as well as their properties as sorbentsfor both inorganic and organic chemical species.4 the effects of factors such assolution composition, the type and surface area of the solid, and biological activity on both dissolution and sorption processes have been studied at this scale.field or mesoscale experiments include investigations conducted at the u.s.geological survey (usgs) cape cod toxic substances hydrology research site,which is intensively instrumented with multilevel samplers and where subsurfaceconditions can be manipulated by injection of hundreds of liters of water withmodified composition.5 similar manipulations have been performed as a òpushpulló experiment at an individual well.6 in field observations, evolution offieldobservationsfield or òmesocosmóexperimentslaboratoryexperimentsnanoscalecharacterizationfigure 1interrogation of multiscale subsurfacebiogeochemical processes.4stumm, w. chemistry of the solidwater interface; wileyinterscience: new york, 1992.5usgs. cape cod toxic substances hydrology research site. u.s. geological survey, 2002;http://ma.water.usgs.gov/capecodtoxics/.6 harvey, c. f.; swartz, c. h.; badruzzaman, a. b. m.; keonblute, n.; yu, w.; ali, m. a.; jay,j.; beckie, r.; niedan, v.; brabander, d.; oates, p. m.; ashfaque, k. n.; islam, s.; hemond, h. f.;ahmed. m. f. science 2002, 298(5598), 16021606.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124appendix dgroundwater quality can be related to aquifer characteristics and attributed toprocesses occurring within the aquifer.7linking these different scales presents a substantial challenge. a critical issue is to determine how information acquired at the nano or molecular scale canbe applied to elucidate macroscale processes in the environment. modeling andsimulation provide an avenue for the linkage of biogeochemical processes acrossmultiple scales. ab initio calculations and molecular dynamics simulations arepowerful tools for linking nano and molecularscale observations to macroscopicbehavior on the laboratory scale.8 a variety of transport codes have been developed to model flow in the subsurface. although the level of biogeochemical sophistication incorporated in these codes varies widely, a few do incorporate biogeochemical kinetics as well as equilibrium reactions. the usgs codephreeqc9 combines reaction kinetics with onedimensional transport, and thecode hydrobiogeochem 123d includes both threedimensional flow and transport in the vadose (i.e., unsaturated) zone.10 a key issue is to understand whatinformation about the subsurface environment and the operative biogeochemicalprocesses is needed to constrain calculations made using these codes so that theyhave real predictive value.case study: arsenic mobilization in sedimentsas already mentioned, the mobilization of arsenic provides an example ofthe enormous impact that biogeochemical processes can have on groundwaterquality and human health. in the gangesbrahmaputra delta (i.e., bangladesh andwest bengal, india), arsenic mobilization has been attributed to the reductivedissolution of iron oxides and the release of arsenic associated with these carrierphases.11 recent manipulation experiments have shown enhanced release of arsenic with the injection of molasses (as an organic substrate for microbial ironreduction) and arsenic sequestration with the injection of nitrate (as an electronacceptor for microbial iron oxidation).6 possible sources of organic matter whoseoxidation supports iron reduction and the elevated arsenic concentrations ob7plummer, l. n.; busby, j. f.; lee, r. w.; hanshaw, b. b. water resour. res. 1990, 26(9), 19812014.8molecular modeling theory : applications in the geosciences; cygan, r. t.; kubicki, j. d., eds.;reviews in mineralogy and geochemistry, vol. 42; mineralogical society of america: washington,dc, 2001.9usgs. phreeqc (version 2): a computer program for speciation, batchreaction, onedimensional transport, and inverse geochemical calculations. u.s. geological survey, 2002; http://wwwbrr.cr.usgs.gov/projects/gwccoupled/phreeqc/index.html.10gwo, j. p.; frenzel, h.; dõazevedo, e.; hoffman, f. m. hydrobiogeochem. 1999, 123d, v. 1.1,oak ridge national laboratory.11nickson, r.; mcarthur, j.; burgess, w.; ahmed, k. m.; ravenscroft, p.; rahman, m. nature1998, 395, 338.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.janet g. hering125served in these aquifers include buried peat deposits12,13 and newly infiltratedorganic carbon derived from agricultural activities.6the coupled biogeochemical cycling of iron and arsenic has also recentlybeen studied in a system dominated by the addition of iron as an engineeringpractice.14 since 1996, ferric chloride has been added as a coagulant to the losangeles aqueduct in order to control the levels of naturally occurring arsenic thatreach the water distribution system for the city of los angeles. the iron andarsenicrich floc formed by this process is deposited in north haiwee reservoir.sediments and porewaters from this reservoir were examined to determine theextent to which arsenic and iron are remobilized in the sediments and to probe thespeciation of arsenic in the solid phase and its possible effects on arsenicremobilization.arsenic and iron concentrations in the sediment porewaters were found to beclosely correlated. although these concentrations are considerably elevated atdepth in the sediment columnñreaching 17 m (1.3 mg/l) for arsenic and 1.6mm (90 mg/l) for ironñonly a small fraction of the iron and arsenic deposited tothe sediments needs to be remobilized to support these concentrations. xas analysis of the sediments indicated that arsenic in the solid phase is reduced fromas(v) to as(iii) above the depth at which arsenic is released into the porewater.iron in solid phase remains as fe(iii). xas analysis showed no evidence of conversion to magnetite (though conversion of ferrihydrite to goethite could not beexcluded). sequential extractions indicated that most of the arsenic can be released from sediment by treatment with magnesium chloride or phosphate solutions; this treatment does not release iron, behavior that is consistent with sorption as a mode of association for the majority of the arsenic with the sediment.the remainder of the arsenic is released, along with almost all the iron, by treatment with hydrochloric acid.15these observations indicate that reduction of as(v) to as(iii) does not, initself, result in the mobilization of arsenic. this conclusion is supported by laboratory adsorption studies showing similar affinities of as(iii) and as(v) for hydrous ferric oxide, goethite, and magnetite.16 however, outstanding questionsremain regarding the factors that control the rate and extent of the reductive dissolution of iron in these sediments and whether the arsenic (and iron) that isreleased into the porewater is (re)sorbed onto the residual iron oxyhydroxides in12nickson, r. t.; mcarthur, j. m.; ravenscroft, p.; burgess, w. g.; ahmed, k. m. appl. geochem.2000, 15, 403413.13mcarthur, j. m.; ravenscroft, p.; safiulla, s.; thirlwall, m. f. water resour. res. 2001, 37(1),109117.14kneebone, p. e.; oõday, p. a.; jones, n.; hering j. g. environ. sci. technol. 2002, 36, 381386.15dempsey, d. arsenic cycling in natural sediments: effects of aging, surf report: californiainstitute of technology; pasadena, ca, 2002.16dixit, s.; hering, j. g. environ. sci. technol., 2003, submitted.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126appendix dthe sediment. these are the types of questions that must be answered in order topredict the concentration of arsenic in the porewater and its response to possiblechanges in environmental conditions.opportunities, challenges, and needsgroundwater is an important resource and one that will be critical in meetingfuture needs for water for human consumption, irrigation, and industrial uses.groundwater quality is an important (though sometimes underappreciated) issuebecause naturally occurring groundwater constituents can adversely affect humanhealth. although arsenic has been highlighted here, other trace constituents ofgeologic materials, such as uranium and radon, also occur naturally in groundwater and have known adverse health effects. chromium(vi) has recently been identified as a natural constituent of groundwater in california though its health effects are less well understood. aesthetic problems are posed by some commongroundwater constituents such as iron, manganese, and sulfide.in addition, groundwater quality can be degraded by introduction of contaminants from a wide range of human activities. these include increased salinity, nitrate, pesticides, and pathogens from agriculture; pathogens from septicsystems; fuel hydrocarbons and oxygenates (e.g., mtbe) from underground storage tanks; chlorinated solvents, metals, and perchlorate from industrial manufacturing; metals from mining, ore processing, and refining; and radionuclides fromnuclear weapons and energy production. because of the long residence time ofgroundwater and the inaccessibility and/or physical extent of sources of contamination in the subsurface, groundwater remediation is often a slow and difficultprocess.in order to use and manage groundwater resources productively and safely, itis necessary to understand the occurrence and mobility of naturally occurringgroundwater constituents and the fate and transport of contaminants in the subsurface environment. insight into the biogeochemical processes by which chemical species are mobilized from or sequestered into immobile phases in the subsurface is crucial to this understanding.the chemical sciences offer insight into the molecular mechanisms of biogeochemical processes, links between nano, laboratory, and field scales throughmodeling and simulation, sensors for the detection and quantification of chemicalconstituents of groundwater, and chemical reagents and chemistrybased technologies for in situ remediation of contaminated aquifers.yet, various needs must be addressed if the challenge of providing safe andadequate water supplies is to be met. the interrogation of biogeochemical processes and subsurface materials at a fundamental level requires continued supportthat recognizes both the value of studying wellcontrolled model systems and theneed to work directly in complex, environmental systems. multidisciplinary collaborations that examine complex systems must be supported and complementedthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles e. kolb127by focused, disciplinary research. priority should be given to the developmentand application of sensors for use in the subsurface environment and of tools forthe characterization of subsurface materials at the nano and atomic scale. theselatter efforts should support activities at shared or user facilities such as the stanfordsynchrotron radiation laboratory (http://wwwssrl.slac.stanford.edu/) and theenvironmental molecular sciences laboratory (http://www.emsl.pnl.gov:2080/).finally, a crucial resource is provided by facilities, such as the usgs cape codtoxic substances hydrology research site,5 that allow fieldscale experimentsto be conducted. support should be provided for activities at this and additionalfacilities, such as the vadose zone research park and the proposed subsurfacegeosciences laboratory at the idaho national engineering and environmentallaboratory (http://www.inel.gov/envenergyscience/geo/).the occurrence and mobility of harmful chemical substances, whether ofnatural origin or anthropogenic contaminants, in the subsurface environment poseboth an intellectual and fundamental scientific challenge and practical concernsfor the use and management of groundwater resources. the chemical sciencesoffer powerful approaches toward understanding and mitigating the problems ofgroundwater contamination. society has benefited and will continue to benefitfrom this important application of chemistry to environmental problems.acknowledgmentsthe collaboration of p. oõday, s. dixit, p. kneebone, and d. dempsey andthe cooperation of the los angeles department of water and power in projectsdescribed in this paper are gratefully acknowledged.measurement challenges and strategies inatmospheric and environmental chemistrycharles e. kolbaerodyne research, inc.atmospheric and environmental chemistry are rapidly evolving disciplinesthat play a critical role in a wide variety of current environmental issues spanninglocal, regional, continental, and global scales. effective management of theseissues generally requires knowledge of chemical and physical properties over awide range of spatial and temporal scales, with processes involving fluid media(atmospheric, oceanic, surface, and groundwater) usually demanding frequentupdating (seconds to months, depending on chemical lifetimes and/or transportrates). chemical characterization methods that rely on traditional sample collection and subsequent analysis are generally slow, labor intensive, time consuming,and costly. alternatively, environmental systems may be monitored pseudothe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128appendix dcontinuously at fixedsite instrumented stations, reporting ambient chemicalspecies concentrations with time resolutions ranging from minutes to months.however, cost restraints usually severely limit the number of fixedsite monitoring stations deployed so that impacted environments are sparsely sampled spatially. the constraints imposed by traditional environmental measurementmethods generally lead to environmental systems being badly undersampled inthe spatial and/or temporal domains.the undersampling of environmental systems often has several unfortunateconsequences. first, it can lead to misdiagnosis of both the nature and extent ofenvironmental problems, leading to either an over or underestimation of the seriousness or extent of the problem. second, environmental process models developed to assess the effectiveness of regulatory or other environmental management challenges are often òvalidatedó with insufficient experimental data to trulyconstrain the model, resulting in potentially unproductive or even counterproductive management strategies. third, misunderstanding the nature and/or extent ofan environmental problem can obscure its interconnections with other environmental problems, creating the possibility that management strategies may helpeliminate or mitigate the target issue but exacerbate connected problems.environmental measurements are challenging for a number of reasons thatare summarized in the following section. after presenting measurement challenges, some promising strategies for addressing environmental managementchallenges are advanced. atmospheric chemistry measurement challenges andstrategies are emphasized, but many of the lessons learned there can be applied toenvironmental problems with water, soil, and ecological components.environmental measurement challengesthe world is a pretty large place. the earthõs surface area is ~500 millionsquare kilometers, approximately twothirds ocean and onethird land. for atmospheric issues we are typically concerned with the two lowest atmospheric regions, the troposphere and the stratosphere, which compose the first 50 km of theatmosphere, with a volume of ~25 billion cubic kilometers. so atmosphericchemical issues that are global in scope pose a real measurement challenge. furthermore, as noted above, the atmosphere is dynamic, so chemical and physicalcharacterization measurements must be repeated, sometime quite frequently, towell describe and predict the evolution of processes of interest. also, because theatmosphere is highly dynamic, quantification of fluxesñsurfaceatmosphereemissions and depositions, stratospherictropospheric exchange, boundary layerdetrainment, transport across the intertropical convergence zone (itcz)ñareoften as or more important than ambient concentration measurements.atmospheric measurements are also challenging because they must deal withlow to extremely low concentrations of trace chemical species. the major components (>99.999%) of the lowest portions of the atmosphere (the troposphere upthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles e. kolb129to ~10 km in altitude and the stratosphere between ~10 and ~50 km) are molecular nitrogen, molecular oxygen, argon, water vapor, and carbon dioxide. chemists will recognize that all of these species are very stable, strongly bonded molecules or atoms that are essentially inert gases at normal atmospheric temperatures(190310 k). indeed, without solar photons to break up selected molecules, atmospheric chemistry would be very dull indeed. atmospheric chemistry is dominated by trace species, ranging in mixing ratios (mole fractions) from a few partsper million, for methane in the troposphere and ozone in the stratosphere, to hundredths of parts per trillion, or less, for highly reactive species such as the hydroxyl radical. it is also surprising that atmospheric condensedphase materialplays very important roles in atmospheric chemistry, since there is relatively solittle of it. atmospheric condensedphase volume to gasphase volume ratiosrange from about 3 10ð7 for tropospheric clouds to ~3 10ð14 for backgroundstratospheric sulfate aerosol.progress in understanding key atmospheric environmental issues well enoughto identify and test effective management strategies is very dependent on ourability to measure the required range of chemical and physical parameters overadequate spatial scales and appropriate time scales. it has been recognized formore than a decade that the inability of available instrumentation to meet theseneeds is a serious issue in both atmospheric chemistry research1 and assessmentsof the effectiveness of air quality regulations.2environmental measurement strategiesit is important to recognize that environmental scientists make measurementsfor a variety of reasons, each of which imposes its own requirements and constraints on the instrumentation and measurement systems to be used. generalenvironmental measurement modes include exploratory mapping and surveying,process investigations, baseline establishment and trend monitoring, and emissiondeposition and other flux measurements. table 1 lists some of the goals thatdrive each mode of measurement and some of the measurement system capabilities that they require.while the various environmental measurement modes have a range of requirements, the undersampling problem discussed above is endemic. we are frequently unable to make enough measurements under an adequate range of environmental conditions over a sufficient range of spatial dimensions and time scalesto understand and describe the issue being investigated. three general strategieshave been identified that can address the environmental undersampling issue.1 albrittton, d. l.; fehsenfeld, f. c. tuck, a. f. science 1990, 258, 7581.2rethinking the ozone problem in urban and regional air pollution, national research council,national academy press, washington, dc, 1991.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130appendix dthey are: (1) fast sensors on mobile platforms; (2) remote sensors; and (3) distributed sensor networks. these strategies are listed in box 1, which includessome descriptors of their current or potential implementations. of course, thesestrategies are not mutually exclusive, remote sensing instruments can be mountedon mobile platforms, with airborne and spacebased passive (radiometers, spectrometers) and active (lidar, radar) remote sensing instruments playing a largerole in our understanding of globalscale environmental issues such as stratospheric ozone destruction and climate change. further discussion of these threeapproaches, their application to a variety of environmental problems, and theinstrument challenges they pose can be found in the report of a recent workshopon environmental instrumentation sponsored by the national science foundation.3 the environmental science community has made enormous advances intable 1environmental measurement modesmodegoal(s)typical requirementsexploratoryestablish ranges ofeasy samplinganalysis,mappingsurveyingenvironmental variablesmobilityinvestigate spatialtemporalvariabilitycheck for surprisesprocess investigationquantitative understandingmultispeciesmultiparameterpredictive modelmeasurements, high temporaland spatial resolution, fluxmeasurementsbaselinetrend monitoringquantify current state andhigh precision, regularrate of changerepetition, longterm stability,determine if regulationsadequate spatial and temporalmanagement strategiesresolution and coverageare workingemissiondepositionestablish pollutant sourcesmobility, moderate to very highmeasurementsand quantify fluxestemporal and spatial resolution,check estimation algorithmsability to correlate with tracerimprove environment modelsspeciesdetermine if regulationsmanagement strategies areworking3instrumentation for environmental science 2000ñreport of a workshop and symposium, national science foundation, arlington, va, 2000.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles e. kolb131the past two decades in designing, fielding, and utilizing rapid sensors on mobileplatforms and remote sensing instruments. one point made in the nsf report isthat anticipated advances in sensors based on micro and nanotechnologyñcoupled with advanced information technology solutions to the problems of datacollection, processing, dissemination, and displayñmay make the distributed sensor network measurement strategy much more powerful and affordable.over the past 15 years, the atmospheric science community has developed aseries of mobile platforms with highly accurate and specific fast response instrumentation that have revolutionized atmospheric chemistry field measurements.these include highaltitude aircraft, such as nasaõs er2 and wb57, andloweraltitude aircraft like the nasa dc8, the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) and center for interdisciplinary remotelypiloted aircraft studies (cirpas) (naval postgraduate school) twin otters, thenational center for atmospheric research (ncar) c130, and the doe g1. inaddition, mobile surface laboratories are now being used for a wide variety ofurban and regional air quality and emission source characterization studies.4 typical configurations for the er2 and the mobile laboratory are shown in figures 1and 2.interestingly, the mobile (comparatively) fastsensor strategy has recentlybeen implemented for subsurface studies in the form of a truckmountedgeotechnical probe equipped with miniaturized laserinduced fluorescence or laserinduced breakdown spectroscopy sensors to detect vertical and horizontal disbox 1strategies for solving the undersampling problemmobile platform with fast sensors (process studies)platforms: mannedunmanned aircraft, balloons, trains, vansin situ or remote sensors with 0.01 to 10 second responseremote sensing (trends and distributions)satellite or airborne passive or active optical instrumentsdistributed sensor networks (trends and distributions)large numbers of relatively inexpensive sensors linked bytelecommunication (wireless, fiber optic) networks4see for example, lamb, b., mcmanus, j. b.; shorter, j. h.; kolb, c. e.; mosher, b.; harriss, r.c.; allwine, e.; blaha, d.; howard, t.; guenther, a.; lott, r. a.; siverson, r.; westberg, h.;zimmerman, p. environ. sci. technol. 1995, 29, 14681479; jim”nez, j. l.; mcmanus, j. b.; shorter,j. h.; nelson, d. d.; zahniser, m. s.; koplow, m.; mcrae, g.j.; kolb, c. e. global change sci.2000, 2, 397412.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132appendix dfigure 1view of nasa wer2 high altitude aircraft with stratospheric chemistryinstrument package.figure 2schematic of aerodyne research mobile laboratory deployed for air qualitystudies in mexico city.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles e. kolb133tributions of aromatic organic and heavy metal contaminants, respectively.5 box2 lists the general goal and some of the desirable characteristics for exploratoryand process study field measurement campaigns that are required to take fulladvantage of fastsensorðmobile platform strategy. box 3 illustrates some of theevolution in environmental analytical instrumentation (especially in atmosphericmeasurement technology) that has motivated the development of instrument suitessuch as those illustrated in figures 1 and 2.in order to produce the instruments and platforms that meet the specifications required by the measurement strategies listed in box 1, advances in enabling technologies must be exploited. table 2 lists some of the enabling technologies that are currently undergoing rapid development and presents examplesof the improvements in environmental instrumentation and measurement platforms they have or may soon allow.box 2innovative atmospheric chemistry fieldmeasurement designgoalexploit capabilities of advanced instruments and platforms to form effective and responsive field measurement systems tailored to the issuesbeing addressed.field measurement system characteristics¥simultaneous realtime measurement of many trace species¥each measurement technique calibrated and quality assured¥mobile, fastresponse instruments replace multiple, slow, fixedsitemonitors¥advanced platforms cover spatial scales necessary to addressproblem¥careful blending of static and mobile point and remote sensingmeasurements to assure intercompatibility and synergy¥immediate model analysis of field data to assess measurementsuccess and scope¥ongoing measurement efforts5see for example, sinfeld, j. v.; germaine, j, t.; hemond, h.f. j. geotech geoenviron. 1999, 125,10721077; theriault, g. a.; bodensteiner, s.; liberman, h. field anal. chem. technol. 1998, 2,117125; instrumentation for environmental science 2000ñreport of a workshop and symposium,national science foundation, arlington, va, 2000.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134appendix dfigure 3 shows an airborne version of one recently developed fast responseinstrument made possible by recent advances in materials, vacuum technology,ion optics, fluid dynamics, information technology, and control technology.6 thisaerosol mass spectrometer allows the realtime measurement and display of thenonrefractory, sizeresolved (~30 nm to ~1500 nm) ambient aerosol particle massloadings. figure 4 shows the ambient fine aerosol nonrefractory composition,box 3atmospheric species measurements evolutionmeasurement science:wet chemistry  electro or ion opticssampling frequency:batch  continuousanalysis rate:offline  real timesample preparation:concentrationconversion  whole airspecificity:species classes  species  isotopomerstable 2impacts of enabling technologiestechnologyexamples of evolving impactsstructural materialslighter, more robust sensors and sensor platformsenergy systemssmaller, longer lasting offgrid power sources, enhancedplatform propulsion systemselectroopticscompact, efficient solid state lasers and detectors, compactlongpath sampling cells, detector arrayssemiconductor technologycompact, robust electronics, throwaway sensors and datasystemsion opticsion traps, smaller tof and quadrupole mass filterspectrometersvacuum technologyfieldable sensors based on electron, ion, molecular, particlebeam methodsinformation technologyrealtime data processing and display, multisensorintegration, data fusion and assimilationcontrol technologyautonomous instrumentplatform operation, realtimeexperimental designfluid dynamicsmore efficient airborne platforms, better sampling systemsbiotechnologysmaller, faster diagnostics for microbial and biologicallyactive moleculesnanotechnologysmaller, lighter, cheaper everything6jayne, j. t.; leard, d. c.; zhang, x.; davidovits, p.; smith, k. a.; kolb, c.e.; worsnop, d. raerosol sci. technol. 2000, 33, 4970.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.charles e. kolb135physical power: 600 watts mass: 190 kg size: ~36ó x 36ó x 24ó(plus half rack of electronics)performance measurement size range: 30 nm to 1 m sensitivity: 0.01 g/m3 (60s sec.) sampling rate: 100 cm3 min1 maximum data rate: 100 hzg1 packageintegral size and composition information fornonrefractory bulk constituentson seconds time scalefigure 3an aerosol mass spectrometer allowing realtime sizeresolved chemical speciation measurements of fine aerosols, free standing and packaged for airborne measurements.706050403020100gm312:00 pm7/22/200212:30 pm1:00 pm1:30 pm2:00 pm2:30 pm3:00 pm3:30 pmdate and time80006000400020000alt (ft) nitrate sulphate ammonium organics wateraltitudefigure 4aerosol mass spectrometer airborne measurements of fine particle compositional mass loading and size distributions showing two sulfate aerosol layers in air massesfrom the ohio river valley.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136appendix dmass loading, and size distribution measured as a function of aircraft altitude ofthe coast of massachusetts in july 2002. the two large sulfate peaks are samplingair with back trajectories that left the surface over the ohio river valley two daysearlier.summaryit is clear that innovative instruments and measurement strategies are required to cure the undersampled environment problem. they can be developedand deployed if ongoing advances in a wide range of enabling technologies areadapted and exploited. for many environmental challenges, measurement requirements favor realtime, mobile, autonomous instruments. the resulting quantumleaps in measurement capabilities will have the potential to revolutionize atmospheric and environmental chemistry.environmental bioinorganic chemistryfran“ois m.m. morelprinceton universitythe coevolution of life and geochemistry on the earth has resulted in anextraordinarily tight coupling between the cycles of bioactive elements at thesurface of our planet and the growth of microorganisms. this is evidently true ofmajor plant nutrients such carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus. it is also true ofmany essential trace metals, such iron, manganese, copper, cobalt, nickel, andzinc, that serve as active centers in enzymes that catalyze the transformations ofcarbon and nitrogen in terrestrial and aquatic systems. the biological availabilityand use of these metals are modulated by intracellular and extracellular bindingcompounds produced by microorganisms. the chemistry of bioactive metals inthe environment, including their coordination to binding agents and to appropriate centers in proteins, thus controls the efficiency of critical environmental processes that govern the global cycles of carbon and nitrogen. a detailed understanding of the bioinorganic chemistry of these metals in various environs and oftheir effects on geochemically important processes presents major challenges andopportunities to environmental chemists as illustrated in the three oceanographicexamples below.the increase in o2 and concomitant decrease in co2 caused by the evolutionof oxygenic autotrophs on the earth, has resulted in an undersaturation of themain (and ancient) carboxylating enzyme, ribulose1,5bisphosphate carboxylase,responsible for the first step in carbon fixationñthe dark reaction of photosynthesis. to palliate this difficulty, a number of species of marine phytoplanktonhave evolved carbon concentrating mechanisms that all involve some forms ofthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fran‡ois m.m. morel137the zinc enzyme carbonic anhydrase.1 this enzyme catalyzes the hydration ofco2 and the dehydration of hco3ð. in the surface oceans, which are singularlydepleted in zinc, a number of phytoplankton species have evolved the ability toreplace zinc with cobalt and cadmium in carbonic anhydrase.2,3 in diatoms, whichare arguably the most important primary producer in the modern oceans, it appears that the activity of the external carbonic anhydrase is enabled by the formation of a silica frustule that serves, in part, as a proton buffer at the surface of thecell.4 unraveling the conditions that allow for an efficient zncocd replacement in carbonic anhydrase (and similar enzymes) in marine autotrophs and ofthe use of silica as a local proton buffer will provide a molecular understanding ofthe links between the global cycles of these trace metals and of co2 and sio2.the increase in o2 concentration in the oceans since the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis has also led to a massive decrease in the concentrations ofmetals such as iron and manganese, which form insoluble oxyhydroxides. thesemetals, particularly iron, are important in the transfer of electrons in photosynthesis and respiration and as metals centers in a wide variety of redox enzymes. notsurprisingly, there is mounting evidence that modern marine microorganismswage a fierce òiron waró against each other and that many have acquired theability to replace iron with other metals in key compounds. for example, theproduction of marine siderophores allows some marine bacteria to sequester ironand limit its availability to organisms that do not possess the appropriate transportproteins (figure 1).5 as a countermeasure, some eukaryotic phytoplankton extract the iron from fe(iii)siderophore complexes by reduction of fe(iii) to fe(ii)extracellularly.6 we need to elucidate the chemical forms of iron in seawater andthe mechanisms of iron acquisition by various microorganisns in order to assessthe role of iron in limiting primary production in the oceans7 and in controllingthe assemblage of planktonic species.nitrogen is generally considered the most important limiting plant nutrient inthe oceans. the processes that determine the total concentration of fixed nitrogenin surface seawaterñparticularly n2 fixation and denitrificationñthus exert afundamental control on marine primary production and on the resulting seques1badger, m. r.; hanson, d.; price, g. d. functional plant biology 2002, 29, 161173.2morel, f. m. m.; reinfelder, j. r.; roberts, s. b.; chamberlain, c. p.; lee, j. g.; and yee, d.nature 1994, 369, 740742.3lane, t. w.; morel, f. m. m. proc. natl. acad. sci. usa 2000, 97, 46274631.4milligan, a. j.; morel, f. m. m. science 2002, 297, 18481850.5butler, a. science 1998, 281, 207210.6maldonado, m. t.; price, n. m. journal of phycology 2001, 37, 298309.7coale, k. h.; fitzwater, s. e.; gordon, r. m.; johnson, k. s.; barber, r. t. nature 1996, 379,621624.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138appendix dfigure 1 two examples of ampiphilic siderophores produced by marine heterotrophicbacteria. redrawn from martinez et al. (2000).tration of co2 in the deep oceans. all the steps in the nitrogen cycle are catalyzedby metalloenzymes (figure 2). for example, all forms of nitrogenase (the enzymeresponsible for n2 fixation) contain a large number of iron atoms. iron, molybdenum, and copper are also involved in the various enzymes that carry out denitrification. there is presently wide speculation that iron availability limits the overallthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.fran‡ois m.m. morel139figure 2 a diagram of the nitrogen cycle with catalyzing enzymes and metal requirements of each step. note: amo = ammonium monooxygenase; hao = hydroxylamineoxidoreductase; nar = membranebound respiratory nitrate reductase; nap = periplasmicrespiratory nitrate reductase; nr = assimilatory nitrate reductase; nir = respiratory nitritereductase; nir = assimilatory nitrite reductase; nit = nitrogenase; nor = nitric oxidereductase; n2or = nitrous oxide reductase.rate of nitrogen fixation in the oceans.8,9 there is also some evidence that, insome suboxic waters, the concentration of available copper may be too low forthe activity of the copper enzyme nitrous oxide reductase and result in n2o accumulation and release to the atmosphere.10 understanding the nitrogen cycle ofthe oceans and the release of some important greenhouse gases such as n2o to theatmosphere thus requires that we elucidate the acquisition of metals such as ironand copper and their biochemical utilization by various types of marine microbes.as exemplified above, the major goals of environmental bioinorganic chemistry are to elucidate the structures, mechanisms, and interactions of importantònaturaló metalloenzymes and metalbinding compounds in the environment andto assess their effects on major biogeochemical cycles such as those of carbonand nitrogen. by providing an understanding of key chemical processes in thebiogeochemical cycles of elements, such a molecular approach to the study ofglobal processes should help unravel the interdependence of life and geochemistry on planet earth and their coevolution through geological times.8falkowski, p. g. nature 1997, 387, 272275.9bermanfrank, i.; cullen, j. t.; shaked, y.; sherrell, r. m.; falkowski, p. g. limnology andoceanography 2001, 46, 12491260.10granger, j.; ward, b. limnology and oceanography 2002, 48, 313318.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140appendix denvironmentally sound agricultural chemistry:from process technology to biotechnologymichael k. sternmonsanto companyagricultural practices are undergoing a transformation driven partially byadvances at the interface of chemistry and biotechnology. this paper outlinessome of the new technologies that are playing an integral role in catalyzing thatchange. topics of discussion include new chemical process technology andchemical catalysis that allows for more efficient production of herbicides as wellas transgenic crops and their benefits to agriculture and the environment.glyphosate is the active ingredient in roundup herbicide. the processmonsanto uses to manufacture glyphosate relies heavily on chemical catalysis(figure 1). improvements in our catalyst have driven profound environmentaland economic benefits in the manufacturing of glyphosate. one of the mainthemes around environmental chemistry moving into the future will be a renewedfocus on the development of novel homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts.one of the beautiful things about catalysts is their ability to positively impact theeconomics of a process often without the requirement for major capital investments.figure 1the current glyphosate process.catalystgi + o2stepspcl3dsidagiglyphosaten honaonaooohonoohpo3h2n hh2o3poohdea or hcn + ch2o + nh3p4 + chlorinedsida + formaldehydecatalystthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.michael k. stern141a key intermediate in the manufacturing of glyphosate is disodiumiminodiacetic acid (dsida). originally an hcnbased route was the only process used to manufacture this product. some of the advantages of this technologyare (1) itõs proven, (2) it uses readily available raw materials, and (3) the processtypically gives good yields. however there are a lot of challenges associated withthis chemistry. for instance, a considerable amount of waste is produced andhcn is a difficult raw material to handle due to its toxicity. accordingly,monsanto wanted to explore other technologies when we were faced with theneed to expand our dsida capacity in the early 1990s.we ultimately settled on a novel catalytic route for the production of dsida.the initial catalyst was a raney copper composition that allowed us to convertdiethanolamine, to dsida in a really interesting dehydrogenation reaction. thisis an endothermic reaction that gives off hydrogen as a byproduct. we were ableto get the facility to work with this catalyst, but there were a lot of operationalissues associated with this technology. raney copper is a very malleable softmetal which resulted in catalyst stability issues. ultimately we needed to go aheadand find something that was better.copper is essentially the only metal that catalyzes this reaction. the technical challenge was to find a way to stabilize copper under the reaction conditions.we spent a lot of time looking at whether you could put copper directly on carbon. it turns out that you really canõt do that very well. copper likes to movearound, particularly under the reaction conditions. so a new catalyst technologywas developed using platinum as an anchor that was then coated with copper.this resulted in a very stable catalyst (figure 2). the new catalyst technology hadsignificant environmental benefits. these included the use of less toxic raw materials and the elimination of nearly all of the waste produced by the older technology.figure 2secondgeneration catalyst.ptptptptptptcucucucopper plating technologycarbon supportthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142appendix dlet me switch gears to another catalytic reaction. this is the reaction wherewe take glyphosate intermediate and convert it to glyphosate using a carbon catalyst. this appears to be a very simple reaction, but there are several technicalissues related to the production of byproducts. the problem is that the byproducts go ahead and react with your desired product to make other undesired byproducts. what we needed was a catalyst that could do two reactions at the sametime. the first reaction converts glyphosate intermediate to glyphosate and theother is to react away the undesirable byproducts. we were successful in developing this type of catalyst which resulted in significant environmental and commercial benefits (table 1).the major benefits associated with this technology result from the more efficient use of water in the process. with the implementation of this new catalysttechnology we have been able to reduce the amount of water flowing through ourprocess by nearly 300 million gallons a year. this resulted in a concomitant reduction in flows to our biotreatment systems that reduce the amount of biosolidswe send to landfill. overall this was a very successful project for monsanto.iõd like to change focus from catalysis to another theme in green chemistry:that of atom efficiency. if you noticed in the glyphosate process, weõre not completely atom efficient. this is due to the fact that putting on the phosphonomethylgroup is challenging. the issue is that if you donõt protect the primary amine, youend up doing two phosphonomethyl reactions that yield the undesirable productglyphosine. the current solution to this problem is to protect the primary aminewith a carboxymethyl group, which ultimately gets removed in the last step of theprocess. the challenge was to find a more atomefficient protecting group.a team investigated this and developed a whole new technology based onnovel platinum catalysts. this technology allows for the selective demethylationof nmethylglyphosate to produce glyphosate acid directly. this would save onetable 1environmental benefits of new catalyst and process technologyannual reductions projected by 2002resourcessteam (btus/yr)880,000,000,000demineralized water (gal/yr)380,000,000wasteflow to biosystems (gal/yr)800,000,000sara 313 deep well injection (lb/yr)52,000biosludge (lb/yr)8,000,000landfilled solid waste (lb/yr)1,380,000sara 313 air emissions (lb/yr)17,600carbon dioxide production (lb/yr)100,000,000note: sara = superfund amendments and reauthorization act.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.michael k. stern143carbon atom when compared to the traditional route. however it was also discovered that you could use other protecting groups besides methyl. in fact it waspossible to use an isopropyl group, which under the reaction conditions could beremoved to generate acetone and glyphosate. the acetone can be recycled backinto the process, resulting in an extremely atomefficient system (figure 3).as mentioned above, glyphosate is the active ingredient in roundup herbicide. roundup plays an important part in the new wave of agricultural productsderived from biotechnology. this new technology has many economic and environmental benefits. expansion of the global acreage planted with roundup readycrops has resulted in a reduction of the use of pesticides by nearly 50 millionpounds per year. this can affect groundwater positively by reducing agriculturalchemical contamination in watersheds where a large percentage of roundupready crops are planted. when crops such as cotton and corn are protected againstinsect pest through biotechnology, we also see a benefit to nontarget organisms.so in summary, biotechnology has delivered significant environmental benefits.many of these benefits are consistent with the epaõs guidelines and focus.in conclusion, the chemical industry is going to be even more dramaticallytransformed in the future, and key advances will be made at the interface of chemistry and biology. discovery and development of new environmentally beneficialcatalyst and process technologies will be critical for the chemical industry tothrive in the united states. the new technologies will need to be relevant andhave a positive impact on the earnings and competitiveness of the chemical industry. advances in catalysis will be a key driver in the development of cleanerand more efficient chemical processes. finally, breakthrough discoveries arelikely to be the products of interdisciplinary work teams.h2o3pnco2ho2h2o3phnco2hpto+h2o3pnco2hnisopropyl glyphosatenco2hmoedritzerirani+ nh3oh2cat.nh2nco2hnisopropyl glycinefigure 3nisopropyl glyphosate: an atomefficient intermediate.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144appendix dstable isotopes and the future of environmentalchemical researchmark h. thiemensuniversity of california, san diegoin 1947, harold urey and, simultaneously, bigeleisen and mayer developedthe formalism for determination of the position of equilibria in isotope exchangereactions. these papers, for the first time, calculated at high precision the position of isotope exchange equilibria as a function of temperature. in the same year,nier reported the development of the double collector isotope ratio mass spectrometer, which allowed for measurements of isotope ratios at a precision sufficient to measure the modest isotope ratio changes associated with the temperaturedependencies of exchange reactions. in this sense, 1947 represents the birth ofstable isotope chemistry. subsequently, an enormous range of applications hasemerged utilizing isotope ratio measurements as a probe of natural processes thatinclude studies of atmospheric chemical processes, paleoceanography and climate, stable isotope geochemistry, and planetary sciences.although the utilization of stable isotopes as a means to resolve environmental processes has had many applications for more than a halfcentury, there havebeen some limitations on the extent to which specific processes, both chemicaland physical, might be resolved. these limits arise because with only a singleisotope ratio, there is a certain lack of specificity associated with the measurements.in 1983, thiemens and heisenreich reported a new isotope effect. this particular effect was unique in that the isotope ratios (e.g., of oxygen) alter on a basisother than mass. for example, in the case of ozone formation, the isotopomers16o16o17o16o16o18oform at essentially equally rates that exceed those associated with16o16o16o.these reactions proceed in part on the basis of isotopic symmetry, with the asymmetric species forming at a rate greater than the purely symmetric species. marcusand colleagues at cal tech have developed a chemical formalism that accountsfor a large proportion of the laboratory experiments. there remain some fundamental issues, however, with respect to a fully developed quantumlevel theory.while additional theoretical formalisms for the isotopic fractionation eventare still needed, the massindependent isotopic fractionation process has provideda new and definitive mechanism by which an extraordinary range of environmentalthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mark h. thiemens145processes may be resolved. the inclusion of the second isotope ratio measurement adds a sensitive probe of processes that may not be afforded by concentration or single isotope ratio measurements. as such, the use of massindependentisotope compositions of environmental molecular species has provided a newprobe to understand natural processes and to characterize anthropogenic impacts.there will be a wide range of new and significant applications in the future thatwill provide a powerful complement to other measurement techniques and modeling efforts. these include studies of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and geosphere,as well as paleoenviroments and global environmental change. such studies willbe of critical importance in evaluating and predicting global environmentalsustainability.present and future applicationsthere exist numerous recent review articles on the subject of massindependent isotope effects and details are available in these articles.1,2,3 a key point ofthe culmination of observations is that the most important chemical issues in theenvironment today, and as expected in the future, may be studied utilizing massindependent isotopic compositions. in the context of this report, this represents afuture chemical frontier area of chemicalenvironmental research.there exist a number of gases that possess massindependent isotopic compositions, and with future measurements, the frontiers of environmental chemistry may be extended. the following are specific, though not inclusive, examples.stratospheric and mesospheric co2it was first observed by thiemens et al.4 that stratospheric co2 possesses alarge and variable massindependent isotopic composition. this composition wassuggested as deriving from isotopic exchange with o(1d), the product of ozonephotolysis.5,6 as later confirmed by rocketborne collection of stratospheric andmesospheric air, this unique isotopic signature provides an ideal tracer of oddoxygen chemistry of the earthõs upper atmosphere, one of the most importantupper atmospheric processes. there are, however, several features that requirefurther measurement (laboratory and atmospheric) and theoretical considerations.1thiemens, m. h. science 1999, 283, 341.2weston, r. e. chem. rev. 1999, 99, 2115.3thiemens, m. h.; savarino, j.; farquhar, j.; bao, h. acct. chem. res. 2001, 34, 645.4thiemens, m. h.; jackson t. l.; mauersberger, k.; schuler, b.; morton, j. geophys. res. lett.1991, 18, 669.5yung, y. l.; demore; w. b.; pinto; j. p. geophys. res. lett. 1991, 18, 13.6yung, y. l.; lee, a. y. t.; iriow, w. b.; demaro, w. b.; chen, j. j. geophys. res. 1997, 102,10857.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146appendix dthis represents a future goal in need of pursuit because both climate and chemicalbudgeting considerations are impacted. as discussed in an earlier report,7 upperatmospheric co2 possesses a massindependent isotopic composition, while tropospheric co2 is strictly mass dependent (as a result of equilibrium isotopic exchange with water). this renders co2 an ideal tracer of stratosphere and troposphere mixing. quantification of this process is also of significance forunderstanding global chemical budgets and lifetimes of several greenhouse species. given that significant uncertainties remain, future measurements will becrucial in quantification of stratospheric and tropospheric mixing and in development of remediation policies associated with global climate change.greenhouse gas characterizationas discussed in the review article,8 several greenhouse gases have been observed to possess massindependent isotopic compositions. these include o3, co,and n2o. in each instance, this measurement has provided significant insightunattainable by other measurement techniques. the case of atmospheric n2o isparticularly interesting. nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas with a warming capacity nearly 200 times that of co2 on a permolecule basis, and serves as a majorsink for stratospheric ozone via photochemical destruction. in spite of decades ofresearch, the n2o budget is still inadequately understood. most recently, isotopicmeasurements of a new variety have proven to be particularly valuable. theseobservations utilize highprecision measurements of the isotopomeric fragmentsof no in a mass spectrometer.9,10,11,12 from such measurements, the internaln2o isotopomeric distribution may be determined. it is now recognized that theisotopomeric distributions of15n14n16o15n14n18o14n15n16o14n15n18o7thiemens, m. h.; jackson, t.; zipf, e.c.; erdman, p.w.; van egmond, c. science 1995, 270,969.8thiemens, m. h. science 1999, 283, 341.9toyoda, s.; yoshida, n. anal. chem., 1999, 71, 47114718.10brenninkmeijer, c. a. m.; rockmann, t. rapid commun. mass spec. 1999, 13, 2028.11rockmann, t.; kaiser, j.; crowley, j. w.; brenninkmeijer, c. a. m.; crutzen, p. geophys. res.lett. 2001, 28, 503.12toyoda, s.; yoshida, n. c.; urabe, t.; aoki, s.; nakazawa, t.; sugawara, s.; honde, h. j.geophys. res. 2001, 106, 7515.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.mark h. thiemens147are highly characteristic of specific processes, such as photolysis or defining individual point sources (biologic, abiologic).in the future, this particular variety of measurements will provide a new levelof detail in understanding the global atmospheric cycles of n2o as well as theother gases. there is a clear need for expansion of such measurements in a varietyof global environments and to obtain fundamental physicalchemical informationsimultaneously. with such concomitant developments, new details of n2o atmospheric processes may be obtained.atmospheric aerosol sulfate and nitrateatmospheric sulfate aerosols are known to exert a significant influence onearthõs surficial processes. they mediate climate, both as cloud condensationnuclei and as lightscattering agents. sulfate is also a pernicious respirable molecule with wellknown consequences for human health. it is estimated that thereare more than 60,000 deaths a year from cardiovascular disease associated withaerosol inhalation. recent studies have demonstrated a link to cellular damage.additionally, following wet and dry deposition, sulfate destroys biota, altersbiodiversity, and causes pervasive structural damage. the segregation of sulfurbetween gas and aqueousphase oxidative processes has implications for the degree of indirect effect of sulfate aerosols on climate due to its dependence onaerosol number densities. sulfate derived from gasphase oxidation results in newparticle formation. however, for aqueousphase oxidation, the sulfate is generated on a previously existing particle and does not contribute to the total aerosolnumber.it has recently been shown that atmospheric sulfate possesses a significantand variable oxygen massindependent isotopic composition. from a series oflaboratory and atmospheric measurements it has been demonstrated that thesemeasurements provide a highly sensitive mechanism by which the relative proportions of hetero and homogeneous oxidative pathways may be quantified.this represents a significant observational advancement, and future measurementson a global scale will dramatically enhance understanding of this important atmospheric species. it has also been shown that sulfate oxygen isotopic measurements of aerosols collected during the indian ocean experiment (indoex) revealed that the intertropical convergence zone (itcz) is a source of new aerosolparticles, which has significant consequences. first, this is a previously unrecognized process unaccounted for in any global climate model. secondly, this is asource of large (micronsized) particles and the mechanism associated with theirformation is unknown. gastoparticle conversion processes produce submicronrather than micronsized particles. the likely mechanism for this process may besurface catalysis, possibly on carbonaceous particles. should this be confirmed,there would be significant consequences. climate models assume that sulfate particles are white and reflective of visible light. if sulfur is catalytically oxidized onthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148appendix dcarbon surfaces, the sign of sulfate radiative forcing may be the reverse of whathas been assumed, in which case there could be significant error in climate models. it is therefore of considerable importance that the nature and magnitude ofthis process be resolved. fully understanding the reaction pathways can be accomplished only by an intensive combination of isotopic measurements, climatemodels, and laboratory studies of the relevant surface catalytic reactions. such aprogram typifies the future needs of environmental chemical research.as is the case of sulfate, nitrate aerosols also possess large, massindependentisotopic compositions. nitrate concentrations may double in the next halfcenturywith severe environmental consequences, including alteration of biodiversity,enhanced algal blooms, and loss of agricultural productivity. as in the case ofsulfate, the large massindependent isotopic signature has afforded new insightsinto a major global cycleñthe nitrogen cycle. there remains a large range ofstudies to be pursued, which will develop new understanding of the chemistry ofthe earthõs environment. once more, this may be accomplished by combinedlaboratory physicalchemical measurements, field observations, and modelingefforts. the ultimate consequence is a significant advancement in understandingglobal interactions of the chemical environment.summarythe utilization of massindependent isotopic measurements of a wide varietyof atmospheric, hydrospheric, and geologic species has advanced understandingof a wide range of environmental processes. the future development of the utilization and understanding of this new technique clearly will have numerous applications that should, and will, be advanced. issues in climate change, health, agriculture, biodiversity, and water quality all may be addressed. simultaneous withthe acquisition of new environmental insight will be enhanced understanding offundamental chemical physics.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.149ebiographies of workshop speakersjames g. anderson is philip s. weld professor of atmospheric chemistryat harvard university. he received his b.s. in physics from the university ofwashington and his ph.d. in physicsastrogeophysics from the university ofcolorado. his research addresses three domains within physical chemistry: (1)chemical reactivity viewed from the microscopic perspective of electron structure, molecular orbitals, and reactivities of radicalradical and radicalmoleculesystems; (2) chemical catalysis sustained by freeradical chain reactions that dictate the macroscopic rate of chemical transformation in the earthõs stratosphereand troposphere; and (3) mechanistic links between chemistry, radiation, anddynamics in the atmosphere that control climate. studies are carried out both inthe laboratory, where elementary processes can be isolated, and within naturalsystems, in which reaction networks and transport patterns are dissected by establishing cause and effect using simultaneous, in situ detection of free radicals,reactive intermediates, and longlived tracers. professor anderson is a member ofthe national academy of sciences.thomas w. asmus is a senior research executive at daimlerchrysler corporation. he is the corporate adviser on powertrain technologies and key corporate technical representative in industrygovernment joint technical activities. herepresents most of the research activities at the chrysler group. he has beeninvolved in many facets of engine r&d activities including energy managementsystems, alternative engines, emissions control, and fuel economy improvementfor nearly 30 years. dr. asmus is a society of automotive engineers (sae) fellowand received the 1999 american society of mechanical engineers (asme)soichiro honda lecture award, which was established by asme to recognizethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150appendix eindividual achievement or outstanding contributions in the field of personal transportation. dr. asmus is a member of the national academy of engineering.ruben g. carbonell is frank hawkins kenan distinguished professor ofchemical engineering at north carolina state university. he is currently director of the william r. kenan, jr., institute for engineering, technology, and science at north carolina state university, codirector of the national science foundation (nsf) science and technology center for environmentally responsiblesolvents and processes, and director of the kenan center for the utilization ofcarbon dioxide in manufacturing. his main areas of research include the application of transport phenomena and colloid and surface science principles to thedevelopment of coating, extraction and reaction processes based on carbon dioxide as a solvent, and affinity chromatographic separation processes for biologicalmolecules using ligands derived from combinatorial libraries. he earned his b.s.in chemical engineering from manhattan college and ph.d. in chemical engineering from princeton university. he won the north carolina state universityalumni association outstanding research award in 1989; the r.j. reynoldsaward for excellence in teaching, research, and extension from the north carolina state college of engineering in 1990; and the alcoa outstanding researchaward from the college of engineering in 2001.uma chowdhry is vice president for central research and development(cr&d) at the dupont company. she joined dupont in 1977 as a research scientist in cr&d and spent the first 11 years of her career there in various researchand management roles. she subsequently served as laboratory director and business manager in the electronics department before moving to the chemicals sector as laboratory director of jackson lab. from 1993 to 1995, she served as r&ddirector for specialty chemicals and was appointed business director for thedupont terathane business in 1995. in 1997, dr. chowdhry moved back to specialty chemicals as business planning and r&d director. in 1999, she was appointed director of dupont engineeringõs technology division. born and raisedin mumbai, india, she came to the united states in 1968 with a b.s. in physicsfrom the indian institute of science, mumbai university; she received an m.s.from caltech in engineering science and a ph.d. in materials science from themassachusetts institute of technology (mit). dr. chowdhry is a fellow of theamerican ceramic society and a member of the national academy of engineering.barry dellinger is the patrick f. taylor chair of the environmental impactof treatment of hazardous wastes and professor of chemistry at louisiana stateuniversity (lsu). he is the director of the lsu intercollege environmentalcooperative and the acting director of the biodynamics institute. he is a memberof the u.s. environmental protection agency (epa) science advisory boardenvironmental engineering committee. from 1981 to 1998, he was group leaderof environmental sciences and engineering at the university of dayton where healso held a joint faculty appointment. from 19781981 he was a senior projectthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e151scientist at northrop services inc. he holds a ph.d. in physical chemistry fromflorida state university and a b.s. in chemistry from the university of northcarolina at chapel hill. his research interests include origin and control of toxiccombustion byproducts, thermal treatment of hazardous wastes, pathways of formation of dioxins, gasphase and surfacecatalyzed elementary reaction kinetics,and sources and health impacts of environmentally persistent free radicals. he isa recipient of the charles a. lindberg certificate of merit, the engineering andscience foundation award for outstanding professional achievement, thewohlebenhochwald researcher of the year award, the ohio general assemblyaward for research excellence, and corecipient of numerous epa science toachieve results (star) research awards.david a. dixon is a battelle fellow in the fundamental science directorateat the pacific northwest national laboratory (pnnl), where he previously servedas associate director for theory, modeling, and simulation at the william r. wileyenvironmental molecular sciences laboratory. his main research interest is theuse of numerical simulation to solve complex chemical problems with a primaryfocus on the quantitative prediction of molecular behavior. he uses numericalsimulation methods to obtain quantitative results for molecular systems of interest to experimental chemists and engineers with a specific focus on the design ofnew materials and production processes. before moving to pnnl, he was research fellow and research leader in computational chemistry at dupont centralresearch and development (19831995) and a member of the chemistry department at the university of minnesota, minneapolis (19771983). he earned hisb.s. in chemistry from the california institute of technology and his ph.d. inphysical chemistry from harvard university, where he served as a junior fellowof the society of fellows, harvard university. he is a fellow of the americanassociation for the advancement of science, and a fellow of the american physical society. he is a recipient of the 1989 leo hendrik baekeland award presented by the american chemical society, the federal laboratory consortiumtechnology transfer award (2000), and the 2003 american chemical societyaward for creative work in fluorine chemistry.william h. farland is the acting deputy assistant administrator for sciencein the u.s. environmental protection agencyõs office of research and development. a member of the governmentõs senior executive service, dr. farlandõspermanent position is director of the epaõs national center for environmentalassessment, which has major responsibility for the conduct of chemical specificrisk assessments in support of epa regulatory programs, the development ofagencywide guidance on risk assessment, and the conduct of research to improve risk assessment. dr. farland began his epa career in 1979 as a healthscientist in the epaõs office of toxic substances, while he continued his research endeavors at the george washington university. his career has been characterized by a commitment to the development of national and international approaches to testing and assessment of the fate and effects of environmental agents.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152appendix edr. farland has received a number of awards and honors, including an epa silver medal and several bronze medals, for this work. dr. farland holds a ph.d.from the university of california, los angeles (ucla) in cell biology and biochemistry, an m.a. in zoology from the same institution, and a b.s. from loyolauniversity, los angeles. he was awarded an individual national research service award from the national cancer institute to pursue postdoctoral training indna damage and repair at the university of california, irvine, and at brookhavennational laboratory.janet g. hering is a professor of environmental science and engineering atcaltech, where she has been a member of the faculty since 1996. prior to that,she was an assistant and later associate professor of civil and environmental engineering at ucla. she has an a.b. in chemistry from cornell university, ana.m. in chemistry from harvard university, and a ph.d. in oceanography fromthe massachusetts institute of technologywoods hole oceanographic institution joint program. she has published more than 30 papers in refereed scientificjournals and is the coauthor of the book principles and applications of aquaticchemistry. she is a past recipient of the national science foundationõs younginvestigator award and presidential faculty fellows award and is a member ofthe editorial advisory board for the journal environmental science & technology.professor heringõs research interests include the biogeochemical cycling of traceelements in natural waters and water treatment technologies for the removal ofinorganic contaminants from potable water. her research includes both laboratory and field experimental studies and has been funded by the national sciencefoundation, the u.s. environmental protection agency, the american waterworks association research foundation, california sea grant, the petroleumresearch foundation, the university of california water resources center, thechevron research and technology company, and the metropolitan water district of southern california.charles e. kolb is president and chief executive officer of aerodyne research, inc. since joining aerodyne as a senior research scientist in 1971, hispersonal areas of research have included atmospheric and environmental chemistry, combustion chemistry, chemical lasers, materials chemistry, and the chemical physics of rocket and aircraft exhaust plumes. he is the author or coauthor ofmore than 150 archival publications in these fields. in the area of atmospheric andenvironmental chemistry, dr. kolb initiated aerodyneõs programs for the identification and quantification of sources and sinks of trace atmospheric gases andaerosols involved in regional and global pollution problems, as well as the development of spectral sensing techniques to quantify soil pollutants. he has alsodeveloped models of aircraft and rocket exhaust plumewake chemical kinetics,condensation physics, and dispersion processes critical to the systematic assessment of the impact of aerospace systems on the chemical structure of the uppertroposphere and stratosphere. dr. kolb received the 1997 award for creativeadvances in environmental science and technology from the american chemithe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e153cal society. he has been elected a fellow of the american physical society, theoptical society of america, the american geophysical union, and the americanassociation for the advancement of science and has served as the atmosphericsciences editor of the journal geophysics research letters (19951999).fran“ois m.m. morel is albert g. blanke professor of geosciences atprinceton university, where he is also director of the princeton environmentalinstitute and director of the center in environmental bioinorganic chemistry. hereceived the licence‘ssciences in math”matiques appliqu”es at the universit”de grenoble, the diplome dõing”nieur from universit” de grenoble, and a ph.d.in engineering sciences from the california institute of technology, pasadena.the main focus of his research is the interactions between aquatic microorganisms and their chemical milieu, with the goal of understanding the biogeochemical cycles of elements, particularly trace elements, and their ecological consequences at the local or global scale. the relationship between aquaticmicroorganisms and trace metals, some of which are necessary for growth andsome of which are toxic, is important for the ecology of plankton, the environmental consequences of metal pollution, and the possible control of primary production. at present, he is particularly interested in testing the socalled iron andzinc hypotheses, which, if true, could have important consequences for the efficiency of co2 sequestration by the oceans and, hence, for the global carbon cycle.michael k. stern is senior science fellow and director of technology, agricultural chemistry, at monsanto company. he joined monsanto in of 1989 as asenior research chemist in the metal mediated chemistry group of monsantocorporate research and was appointed science fellow in 1993 and senior sciencefellow in 1999. during his tenure at monsanto, dr. stern has been actively involved in a variety of research programs relating to the development of novelchemical processes and pharmaceuticals. he was the recipient of the monsantothomas and hochwalt science and technology award in 1993 for his role in thediscovery of the aromatic substitution chemistry used in the development ofmonsantoõs new process to manufacture 4aminodiphenylamine (4adpa) andreceived the presidential green chemistry challenge award for this process technology in 1998. he graduated from denison university with a b.s. in chemistry.he received an m.s. in chemistry from the university of michigan and a ph.d. inchemistry from princeton university. he was a postdoctoral associate in the department of chemistry at mit before joining monsanto. dr. stern is the author of24 scientific publications and the inventor on 24 u.s. patents.mark h. thiemens is dean of the division of physical sciences and professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry at the university of california, san diego (ucsd). he received his b.s. from the university of miamiand his ph.d. from florida state university. he joined the faculty at ucsd afterserving as a postdoctoral fellow at the enrico fermi institute at the university ofchicago. he has received an alexander von humboldt fellowship, the e.o.lawrence award from the u.s. department of energy in 1999, and the chancelthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154appendix elors associates award for excellence in research from ucsd in 2001. he wasnamed chancellors associates chair in 1999 and is a fellow of the americanacademy of arts and sciences. his research is focused on measurement of stableisotope variations at ultrahigh precision to develop experimental programs inwidely varying research fields that include atmospheric chemistry (aerosol andgreenhouse gas studies), the evolution of life and the atmosphere, the physicalchemistry of gasphase photochemical reactions, early solar system history andmars atmospherics (meteorite measurements), and gassolid conversion mechanisms.the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e155fworkshop participantschallenges for the chemical sciences in the 21stcentury: workshop on the environmentnovember 1618, 2002hamid abbasi, gas technology instituteheather c. allen, ohio state universityjames g. anderson, harvard universityken b. anderson, argonne national laboratorythomas w. asmus, daimlerchrysler corporationroger atkinson, university of california, riversidebetsey l. ballash, university of california, davismark a. barteau, university of delawarephilip h. brodsky, pharmacia (retired)gordon e. brown, jr., stanford universitywilliam h. brune, the pennsylvania state universitysteven h. cadle, general motorsruben g. carbonell, north carolina state universitya. welford castleman, jr., the pennsylvania state universitymarge cavanaugh, national science foundationuma chowdhry, the dupont companyhelena chum, national renewable energy laboratoryyoram cohen, university of california, los angelesdady dadyburjor, west virginia universityliese dallbauman, gas technology institutebarry dellinger, louisiana state universitythe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156appendix fdavid a. dixon, pacific northwest national laboratorysandra k. dudley, ch2m hillwilliam h. farland, u.s. environmental protection agencyhoward j. feldman, american petroleum instituteallan m. ford, gulf breeze, floridajoseph s. francisco, purdue universityjean h. futrell, pacific northwest national laboratoryraymond j. garant, american chemical societyrichard a. gross, polytechnic universitypatrick g. hatcher, the ohio state universitygeorge r. helz, university of maryland, college parkjohn c. hemminger, university of california, irvinejanet g. hering, california institute of technologyrobert e. huie, national institute of standards and technologywilliam m. jackson, university of california, davisrobert g. keesee, university at albany, sunycharles kolb, aerodyne research, inc.stephen g. maroldo, rohm and haas companystephen w. mcelvany, office of naval researchkristopher mcneill, university of minnesotajay c. means, western michigan universitymario j. molina, massachusetts institute of technologyfran“ois m. m. morel, princeton universitykarl t. mueller, the pennsylvania state universitymary neu, los alamos national laboratoryparry m. norling, randmitchio okumura, california institute of technologycharles peden, pacific northwest national laboratoryjeffery p. perl, chicago chem consultants corporationmichael j. prather, university of california, irvinedouglas ray, pacific northwest national laboratorysharon m. robinson, oak ridge national laboratoryj.w. rogers, jr., pacific northwest national laboratorymichael romanos, university of cincinnatif. sherwood rowland, university of california, irvineeric s. saltzman, university of california, irvinejohn h. seinfeld, california institute of technologybrent shanks, iowa state universityjeffrey j. siirola, eastman chemical companysubhas k. sikdar, u.s. environmental protection agencychristine s. sloane, general motors corporationlynda soderholm, argonne national laboratorymichael k. stern, monsanto companythe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix f157mark h. thiemens, university of california, san diegomatthew tirrell, university of california, santa barbarasam traina, university of california, mercedfrank p. tully, u.s. department of energyrichard p. turco, university of california, los angelesjay r. turner, washington universityjeanette m. van emon, u.s. environnmental protection agencyisrael e. wachs, lehigh universityjohn c. westall, oregon state universityelizabeth k. wilson, chemical & engineering newsthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158greports from breakout session groupsa key component of the workshop on the environment was the set of fourbreakout sessions that enabled individual input by workshop participants on thefour themes of the workshop: discovery, interfaces, challenges, and infrastructure. each breakout session was guided by a facilitator and by the expertise of theindividuals as well as the content of the plenary sessions. participants were assigned to one of four breakout groups on a random basis, although individualsfrom the same institution were assigned to different groups. each breakout group(colorcoded red, yellow, green, and blue) was asked to address the same set ofquestions and provide answers to the questions, including prioritization of thevoting to determine which topics the group concluded were most important. afterevery breakout session, each group reported the results of its discussion in plenarysession.the committee has attempted in this report to integrate the information gathered in the breakout sessions and to use it as the basis for the findings containedherein. when the breakout groups reported votes for prioritizing their conclusions, the votes are shown parenthetically in this section.discoverywhat major discoveries or advances related to the environment have beenmade in the chemical sciences during the last several decades?the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g159red group reportenabling capabilitiesanalytical (examples include single particles in the atmosphere, electroncapture detector, use of synchrotrons for aqueous systems, increased time resolution for atmospheric measurements)modeling (use of correlated chemical measurements to deduce environmental processes; modeling, from molecular to global; structureactivity relationshipsfor activity and fatetechnical solutionsemission control of lean combustion; catalytic converter; substitutesñheavymetals, cfcs, waterbased paintstable g1organization of breakout sessionsbreakout sessiongroupfacilitatorsession chairrapporteurdiscoveryredd. raberc. sloanejohn westallgreenm. barteau,m. barteau,mitchio okumurap. norlingp. norlingbluep. brodsky,p. brodsky,israel wachsw. castlemanw. castlemanblackj. jackiwj. futrellkristopher mcneillinterfacesredj. jackiwj. futrellkenneth andersongreend. raberc. sloanekarl muellerbluem. barteau,m. barteau,heather allenp. norlingp. norlingblackp. brodsky,p. brodsky,brent shanksw. castlemanw. castlemanchallengesredp. brodsky,p. brodsky,mary neuw. castlemanw. castlemangreenj. jackiwj. futrellwilliam bruneblued. raberc. sloanejay meansblackm. barteau,m. barteau,douglas rayp. norlingp. norlinginfrastructureredm. barteau,m. barteau,robert huiep. norlingp. norlinggreenp. brodsky,p. brodsky,eric saltzmanw. castlemanw. castlemanbluej. jackiwj. futrellgordon brownblackd. raberc. sloaneray garantthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160appendix gdiscoveriesozone hole; recognition of importance of speciation vs. total concentration;understanding of reactions on surfaces and microporous regionsgreen group reporttropospheric chemistrychemistry of air pollution, (e.g., photochemical origin of smog; acid rain;discovery of the relevance of biogenic emissions; aerosol chemistry, formation,and microphysics)stratospheric chemistrythe ozone holeñunderstanding of ozone chemistry in the stratosphere; heterogeneous chemistry in the atmospheremodels, databases, techniquesrecognition of systems approach; generation of databases of kinetics andenergetics; advances in computation; fundamental understanding of chemistry(free radicals); instrumentation (remote sensing, space based, advances in sensortechnology)synthesis: chemistry to produce systems with minimal environmental impactcfc replacements; pcb replacements; degradable pesticides, polymers;cleaner fuels; designer compoundsprocess advancesimplementing green chemistry; benign solvents; catalytic converters; engineefficiency via fundamental understanding; energy; energy storage and efficiency,photovoltaics; atom economysoil and water chemistryadvances in interfacial chemistry, biogeochemical cycles; remediation technology; trace metals; radiation chemistry, radionuclides; hydrophobic compoundsin the environmentthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g161negative advancesmtbeimpact of catalytic selfpropagating entitiesblue group reportprioritized listfundamental chemistryanalytical instrumentationsurface chemistrygeneticsunderstanding homogeneous atmospheric chemistryblack group reporttoolsindustrial ecology;lifecycle analysis; detection, monitoring, measurementscience (4); development of noninvasive spectroscopic technology; synchrotronbased methods, availability and development; application of gcms; computation and modeling (4); satellite technology (profiles, surface temperature, etc.)(3)technologiesuse of biomass in chemical reactions (instead of petroleum); advances inmembrane science; metabolic engineering of microbes and plants for remediation;drinking water disinfection and ozonation technologies; threeway catalysts (1);emission control technology (3); use of supercritical co2 to replace solvents (1)risk assessmentdevelopment of structureactivity relationships; ability to predict risk andriskbased corrective action (2); identification of endocrine disrupters and elucidation of risk mechanismair problemsrecognition of particulate matter (4); heterogeneous atmospheric chemistry(1); photochemical modeling ; understanding mechanisms of photochemical smogformation (2); rise and fall of cfcs; global warming; ozone depletion (3)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162appendix gwater problemsgroundwater remediation; bioaccumulation and persistent organic pollutants(2); detection of pesticides (1); human and ecohealth effects of arsenic and mercurysoil problemsdiscovery of dioxinsdiscovery of pahsinterfaceswhat are the major environmentrelated discoveries and challenges at theinterfaces between chemistryðchemical engineering and other disciplines, including biology, information science, materials science, and physics?red group reportphysicsscaling of physical and chemical properties with size (10); instrumentationand sensor development (10); application of quantum mechanics to understandchemical processes (1); understanding transport coupling with chemistry (2)materialsdevelopment of solvents; materials development (3); new catalysts (1);nanomaterialsmathematics and informationstatistical handling of data and statistical methods (3); cyber infrastructure(data preservation, processing, access) (9); theory and modeling of scaling (4)meteorology and geologytrace component behavior (2); control of pollutant plumes in groundwater(1); biogeochemical cycles (10); aerosol chemistry and clouds (2); chemicalweather (1); chemistryclimate links (2); air pollution processes (1)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g163biologylife in extreme environments (2); scaleup of bench to fullscale processes(2); application of microbiological biotransformations to industrial processes (2);conversion from batch to continuous processes (1); bioavailability (4); structureactivity relationships (8); new enzymes; bioinformatics (4); proteomics andgenomics (4)problems and issuesprofessional societies and journals; interdisciplinary and multidisciplinaryeducation (7); team approach; collaboration between development stages; completeness of lifecycle analysis (1); stovepiping of funding (2); breaking downadministrative barriers (1); changing the scientificacademic culture (motivation)(7); reward structure; industryacademic collaboration; communication (language) (1); regulation and science (1); instrumentation development; theory andmodeling; education of public and politicians (3); grand challenges must be defined and funded (10)green group reportthe blue group reported its analysis of interfaces as a matrix in which therows are a series of environmentally important chemistry and chemical engineering research areas, and the columns are the other disciplines that will participatein the research activity (table g2).blue group reportbiology (8)science (microbial community genomics; microbial in situ bioremediation;proteomics and metabolomics; pcr and revolutions in microbiology (6); engineering (bioprocessing, biotechnology, combining unit operations) (2)physics and other engineering (5)tools (new instrumentation; measurement systems and platforms; materialsand processes for alternative, nonfossil fuels)atmospheric science (5)modeling (chemical weather forecasting; air quality and human health; dispersion of chemicals; aerosol and cloud physics)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164appendix gtable g2matrix of interfaceshydrologybiologycomputationalandatmosphericandmathematicssciencegeologysciencemedicineadvancedsimulationsxxmultiscalecomputingxxdispersion ofchemicalsxxchemicalweatherforecastingxxcloud physicsand aerosolsair quality andhuman healthxmicrobialcommunitygenomicsxproteomicsxpcrmicrobiologyxclimatequestionsxxanalysis ofhighthroughputdatasetsxxinstrumentationmeasurementsystemsmicrobialremediationxbioprocessingxbiotechnologyxchemicalfootprintof societynonfossil energythe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g165socialothersciences andengineeringphysicsecologyoceanographytoxicology economicsxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166appendix ghydrology, geology, oceanography (5)dispersion of chemicals in groundwater and subsurface water (3); globalcycling (2)ecology (4)climate questions (4); ecotoxicologysocial sciences (3)chemical footprint of society (2); integrated assessment (1)computer science (2)hardware: advanced simulations on highperformance computers; design ofnew computer architectures; software: analysis of highthroughput datasets (1)mathematics (2)multiscale computing (time and space)agriculture and soil science (11)closedsystem agriculture (recycle all); precision farming (e.g., using gpcto improve farming); advances in pesticides, herbicide, and fertilizers; avoidingagricultural runoff; reducing agricultural footprint (largest impact on the environment)biology (8)biochemistry and biocatalysis; (green chemistry); genetic engineering;genomics and proteomics; epidemiology; effects of contaminants on humans;biomimetic processesearth sciences (7)biogeochemical and earth systems analysis; mechanisms and impact of natural contaminants; global cycles; c, n, etc.; subsurface detection and mapping;ocean ecology; climate; solid waste management; actinides in the environmentthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g167engineering (5)process monitoring; sensors, spectroscopy, end users; process development(batch to continuous; throughput); material sciences; bringing chemistry to otherengineering disciplines; systems and lifecycle analysismathematics, computational science, statistics (2)bioinformatics (handling huge databases); integration and mining of datasets (how to use the datasets); modelingspace sciences (2)remote sensing; recognition of rate of change on earth; astrophysics (chemistry, biology)physics (1)moving technology out of hands of physicists; green chemistry for microelectronics; amorphous systemsall + other (overarching)surface science; analytical techniques applied at the interfaces; integrationwith business model (economics); combinational chemistry at the interface withother disciplines; reduction of wastesgrand challengesintegrated environmental education; exploiting natural remediation process;agricultural as a closed system; development of renewable energy sources;development of renewable chemical feedstocks economically; mimicking naturalcomponentsblack group reporttechnical solutionsbiochemists, molecular biologists, separation scientists, physicists, materialscientists (biobased approaches; physics and material approaches)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168appendix grisk analysismedicine and health, social sciences, ecology, economics (health effects;ecological effects; social and political effects)state of the environmentbiologists, computer science, ecologists, meteorologists, instrumentation scientists, physicists (air quality; global warming; water quality; lifecycle analysis;biogeochemical cycles)challengeswhat are the environmentrelated grand challenges in the chemical sciencesand engineering?red group reportindustrial sustainability (1)ionic liquidslife cycle (1)remediationcosteffective methodscontaminant capture or sequestration (3)(physical chemistry)co2; radioactive wastelifecycle of particulates (2)properties and effects on health and climatefuel cellsh2 economy (2)environmental footprintbiogeochemical cyclerole of chemical cycles on climate, greenhouse gases, cloudsheterogeneous characteristics of environmental materials (e.g., solids) (7)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g169characterization of the organic composition of the atmospheresensing techniques; instrumentationenvironmental change (indicators) (2)traces in ice, trees, sediments; other indicatorswater (5)purification; industrial use; desalinizationtoxicityidentify materialscomputational chemistry (1)instrumentation at trace levels (6)methods that will allow breakthroughs in air samplingcatalysis by design (3)instrumentation; computation; materials sciencefunction and sensitivity of nonculturable organisms (1)photoinduced processesmacromolecular science (3)biological molecules; catalysts; humicunderstanding chemical reactivity (7)complex processes in atmosphere; water; soil; all of the precedingstudy of heterogeneous processes (1)diversion of funding of core sciences to hot initiativesseparations (3)water purification; dilute solutions; air; bioproductsgreen group reportglobalscale chemistry (11)global biogeochemistry; flux measurements; prediction, fate, and transportthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170appendix gof pollutants; speciation of all contaminants; chemistry and climate; carbon management; scaling in time and space; globalscale chemical monitoringwaste management (6)waste disposal technology; chemical; nuclear; mining; agriculture; animalresidue; carbon sequestration; in situ remediation of contaminated mediacontrol and understand chemical transformation (6)early lifecycle analysis; pollution prevention through alternative chemicalprocesses; technologies for water conservation; controlled oxidation of organicmolecules; endtoend chemical production processeshealth effects (1)molecular basis for doseresponse relationships; quantification of health risksfor particulate matternew tools (9)better computational tools; acquiring relevant highquality datasets; enhanced analytical capabilities; better models, theory, instrumentation; better analyticaltheoretical tools to understand chemistry at interfacesblue group reportfundamental understandingunderstanding climate and chemical links (11)¥unraveling mechanisms: chemical reactions and cycles in the environment¥characterization of chemical processes in the atmosphere, biosphere,and lithospheremeasurement of trace reactive species in atmosphere, ground and surfacewater (7)sensor development for subsurface (e.g., ph, flow, microbial activity, pollutants, metals (6)better instruments for monitoring¥predictive chemical modeling of biological chemistry (4)¥longterm monitoring and tools, networks (1) chemical approaches to solutionspredictive modeling for catalysts and customdesigned enzymes forbioremediation (10)chemical engineering pathways to environmental sustainability (5)conversion of solar energy into electrical and chemical energy (renewable) (4)the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g171transformation of complex agromaterials into advanced products (3)new materials: designed for recycling (triggerable disassembly) (3)conversion of wastes to useful products (2)organic reductive chemistry for biorenewable feedstocks (2)remediation of mercury (1)mimicking natural processesusing methane and hydrogen sulfide as feedstocksblack group reportenablerscomputing (hardware and software); genomic sciences; nanotechnologies;materials by design; selfassembly; instrumentation (in situ measurement of pollutants)energyglobal warming mitigation; carbon sequestration (6); economical solar energy (6); energy efficiency technologies (2)chemicalorganism interactionsmolecular toxicology (5); fundamental understanding of microbes/metabolicpathwaysñòperryõs handbook for bugsó (4); models of exposure effectsair and water issuesunderstanding heterogeneous chemistry (4); the structure of natural organicmatter (2); air: sources and characterization of toxics (1); speciation of toxic metals (1); smokestack emissions beyond sox and nox (1); chemical sources of toxicity of fine particulate matter (pm2.5) (1); environmentally persistent free radicals (1); understanding of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere (carbon cycles andsinks)remediationmetabolic engineeringñunderstanding pathways (3); economical metal sequestration methods (3); dioxins, mtbe (1); defluorination of fluoroorganicsgreen chemistry, pollution preventioncatalysis by design (7); solventfree processes (2); persistence of chemicalsin the environment (1); alternative materialsñstructurefunction relations (1);microreactorsñjustintime and local manufacturing (1); carbon source forchemicalsthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172appendix gfundamental understandingtechniques for assessing multisource risk (6); multimedia multiscale systems modeling (5); understanding natural environmental processes (3); control ofchemical transformation (3); modeling of episodic events in the climate and environment (1); genetic and proteomic markersinfrastructurewhat are the issues at the intersection of environmental studies and thechemical sciences for which there are structural challenges and opportunitiesñinteaching, research, equipment, codes and software, facilities, and personnel?red group reportwhatõs working wellsome user facilities such as ssrl, emsl computational facilities; acs environmental chemistry option; green chemistry funding has raised profile (butmay have taken from other environmental programs); multidisciplinary programswhatõs not working well?epa: lack of internal coordination and communication; deterioration of scientific facilities; coordination of environmental research effortñintra and interagency;continuity of funding; user facilitiesñease of access; principal investigator rewardstructure in national laboratories; lack of emphasis on environmental chemistryin nsf; initiativesñhowever valuableñhave come at the expense of core sciences and engineering; lack of overall strategyñwe are taking away from core tofund fads; disconnect between graduate research and undergraduate curriculumneedsuser facility for geosciences (set of field sites); strengthen epa r&d; anagency looking at environment over the long term; environmental equivalent ofnih (i.e., relationship to epa as nih is to fda); educate people with broadspectrum knowledge of the environment; curriculum reform to emphasize theenvironment; chemical programs to incorporate broad range of topics that arepart of environmental chemistry; continued development of sensors and of instrumentation that is deployable in real time (for water); general support for instruthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g173ment development (as in the medical field); interdisciplinary systems approachñresources and reward systemschallengesinter and intraagency coordination; gulf between environmental sciencesand others; market environmental chemistry as nih does for health; environmental chemistry not wellregarded compared to òrealó chemistry; atmospheric chemistry more accepted in academia than condensedphase studies; if funding potdoesnõt grow, allocation needs to be done smartlypayoffsfundamental lead to prediction; our wellbeing is at risk and must be addressed; better use of resources; social and political stability; ability to predictand plan for environmental change on global scale (could prevent global upheaval)a final wordéthe environment should not be considered a fad!green group reportstudent training in the environmental area (7)tenure process inhibits interdisciplinary collaboration (5)insufficient emphasis on classical measurements (5)kinetics; thermochemicalenvironmental chemistry is not considered a core subject in chemistry andchemical engineering departmentsñneed accreditation (5)coordination and interaction of similar programs across federal agencies (4)research needs (3)aircraft, ships, spacestatus of environmental chemistry in universities (e.g., few chemistry departments have major activities in the field) (2)transitioningleveraging: need for engineering expertise to develop instruments (2)concepts from researchers; how to implement the design and constructionneed environmental science home in nsf for sustained funding of individualinvestigators (2)heavymetal actinide chemistry (expertise is being lost)increased nih funding has put a strain on national centers (computing, spectroscopy, etc.) for environmental projectsthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174appendix gblue group reportthere is no single federal agency that is responsible for funding environmental science. epa is an environmental regulatory agency! there is a pressing needfor one centralized government agency for funding fundamental science with respect to the environment.the nsf science and technology centers and environmental molecularscience institutes and collaborative research in environmental molecular science grants program are small steps toward improved funding in the environmental science research area.sustained longterm support for individual investigators in the environmental chemistry/science area is needed (applies also to technicians and support stafffor research groups.)industry is a failure in environmental science r&d area and in providingattractive jobs for environmental chemistry students! (not all in blue group agreewith this statement).mechanisms for attracting more young people to environmental science andthe basic sciences are needed. good jobs are necessary to achieve this need.crosstraining of students among interdisciplinary areas is lagging far behind need.basic science and math training is absolutely essential for students in environmental science.there is only one national facility dedicated to environmental science research (emsl at pnnl)faculty in basic science departments who focus on environmental scienceresearch often have difficulties at tenure decision time because of a general lackof respect for environmental science research by other scientists.physical chemistry is not thriving in modern research universities, yet it provides the basic underpinnings of environmental chemistry.research agendas should be driven in part by societal needs (e.g., humanhealth), but basic, curiositydriven research funding must be protected and allowed to thrive.more scientific expertise is needed in policy making.black group reportagency funding and missionscontinuing mismatch between core competencies and problemdriven research (programs, time frames, etc.); chemistry and chemical engineering subdivisions not coherent with environmental problems; funding sources need to betied to problem horizons; need to avoid discontinuities for funding specific areas;the environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix g175need more sustained funding for instruments and instrumentation; mission alignmentñpressure on regulators to declare problems solved; need for continuity forlongterm monitoring; need appropriate mixture of individual investigators andcenters to meet various challengeschemistry chemical engineering educationchemistry and chemical engineering subdivisions not coherent with environmental problems; environmental aspects of chemistry and chemical engineering not always treated or sold well; barriers to crossdisciplinary work; need moreuse of environmental examples at undergraduate level; greater need to alignmultidisciplinary programs and expectations of graduate studentstoolsstructureactivity relationship models are too empiricalthings that are working wellincreases in joint agency funding (clarity of purpose); utilization of sbir;funding of large field studies; centersñsome successesthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176hlist of acronymsacsamerican chemical society3g1,3propanediolbhcbrominated hydrocarboncfcchlorofluorocarbonchcchlorinated hydrocarboncirpascenter for interdisciplinary remotelypiloted aircraft studiescmaqcommunity modeling of air qualityddtdichlorodiphenyltrichloroethanedeadrug enforcement agencydoddepartment of defensedoedepartment of energydomdissolved organic matterdsidadisodium iminodiacetic acidedcendocrine disrupting chemicalemslenvironmental molecular sciences laboratoryepaenvironmental protection agencyeprelectron paramagnetic resonancefdafood and drug administrationfoma1,1dihydroperfluorooctyl methacrylatethe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix h177gcmsgas chromatographyðmass spectrometrygomeglobal ozone monitoring experimentgpcgastoparticle conversiongpsglobal positioning systemhccihomogeneouscharge compression ignitionhcfchydrochlorofluorocarbonhfchydrofluorocarbonindoexindian ocean experimentipccintergovernmental panel on climate changeitczintertropical convergence zonemtbemethyl tertiarybutyl ethernasanational aeronautics and space administrationncarnational center for atmospheric researchnihnational institutes of healthnmrnuclear magnetic resonancenoaanational oceanic and atmospheric administrationnrelnational renewable energy laboratorynsfnational science foundationordoffice of research and developmentpagphotoacid generatorpahpolycyclic aromatic hydrocarbonpbdepolybrominated diphenyl etherpcbpolychlorinated biphenylpcdd/fpolychlorinated dibenzodioxins and furanspcrpolymerase chain reactionpmparticulate matterpm2.5fine particulate matter (smaller than 2.5 microns in diameter)pnnlpacific northwest national laboratoryppmparts per millionpptparts per trillionpsipounds per square inchsbirsmall business innovation research programscrselective catalytic reductionssrlstanford synchrotron radiation laboratorystarscience to achieve results (an epa grant program)sva/lbshareholder value added per poundthe environment: challenges for the chemical sciences in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178appendix hthpma2tetrahydropyranyl methacrylateusgsu.s. geological surveyvocvolatile organic compoundxasxray absorption spectroscopy