detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/10805the impact of academic research on industrial performance264 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309385220 | doi 10.17226/10805committee on the impact of academic research on industrial performance; nationalacademy of engineeringthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.eduthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press ¥ 500 fifth street, n.w. ¥ washington, d.c. 20001this study was supported by grant no. 9734 between the national academy ofsciences and the alfred p. sloan foundation and by the national academy ofengineering fund. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressedin this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the viewsof the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number 0309089735 (book)international standard book number 0309526027 (pdf)copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifthstreet, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); online at http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2003 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americathe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr.bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superiorachievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academyof engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under theresponsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter tobe an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues ofmedical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the instituteof medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by bothacademies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf arechair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcommittee on the impact of academic research onindustrial performancejerome h. grossman (iom), chair, lion gate management corporationand harvard university, cambridge, massachusettslillian c. borrone (nae), port authority of new york and new jersey(retired), new york, new yorkcolin crook, citicorp (retired), new york, new yorkdonald m. engelman (nas), yale university, new haven, connecticutdavid j. farber, university of pennsylvania, philadelphiaannetine c. gelijns, columbia medical center, new york, new yorkdaniel gregory, greylock management corporation, boston,massachusettsgeorge h. heilmeier (nae), telcordia technologies, inc. (retired),morristown, new jerseyadam b. jaffe, brandeis university, waltham, massachusettsjack l. kerrebrock (nae), massachusetts institute of technology(retired), cambridgekent kresa (nae), northrop grumman corporation, los angeles,californiah. donald ratliff (nae), georgia institute of technology, atlantaj. david roessner, georgia institute of technology, atlantarobert f. sproull (nae), sun microsystems, inc., burlington,massachusettsmorris tanenbaum (nae), at&t corporation (retired), short hills,new jerseythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vpanel on the network systemsand communications industryrobert f. sproull (nae), chair, sun microsystems, inc., burlington,massachusettsalfred v. aho (nae), columbia university, new york, new yorkjohn m. cioffi (nae), stanford university, stanford, californiadavid j. farber, university of pennsylvania, philadelphiageorge h. heilmeier (nae), telcordia technologies, inc. (retired),morristown, new jerseystephen wolff, cisco systems, inc., washington, d.c.panel on the medical devices and equipment industryannetine c. gelijns, chair, columbia medical center, new york,new yorkpaul citron (nae), medtronic, inc., minneapolis, minnesotadonald m. engelman (nas), yale university, new haven,connecticutjerome h. grossman (iom), lion gate management corporationand harvard university, cambridge, massachusettshomer pien, sru biosytems, woburn, massachusettsfrederick w. telling, pfizer inc., new york, new yorkpanel on the aerospace industryjack l. kerrebrock (nae), chair, massachusetts institute oftechnology, cambridgeantonio l. elias (nae), orbital sciences corporation, dulles, virginiakenneth c. hall, duke university, durham, north carolinarobert j. hermann (nae), global technology partners, llc, hartford,connecticutkent kresa (nae), northrop grumman corporation, los angeles,californiathe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vipanel on the transportation, distribution,and logistics services industryh. donald ratliff (nae), chair, georgia institute of technology,atlantacynthia barnhart, massachusetts institute of technology,cambridgerobert e. bixby (nae), ilog, inc., houston, texaslillian c. borrone (nae), port authority of new york and newjersey (retired), new york, new yorka. ray chamberlain, parsons brinckerhoff, inc., denver, coloradoadam b. jaffe, brandeis university, waltham, massachusettspanel on the financial services industrycolin crook, chair, citicorp (retired), new york, new yorkcamilo c. gomez, private consultant, santa fe, new mexicoadam b. jaffe, brandeis university, waltham, massachusettsblake d. lebaron, brandeis university, waltham, massachusettsjohn m. mulvey, princeton university, princeton, new jerseymorris tanenbaum (nae), at&t corporation (retired), short hills,new jerseynae program office staffproctor p. reid, study directordiane albert, j. herbert hollomon fellow (until january 1999)carol r. arenberg, managing editorthomas c. mahoney, consultantrobert p. morgan, nae fellow and senior analyst (through january 1999),and consultant (after january 1999)penelope j. gibbs, program associatenathan kahl, senior project assistantthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefaceamerican universities are integral to the success of american industry. thecore mission of the university, educating much of the american workforce, isessential to productivity growth, innovation, technological progress, and virtuallyevery other national economic and societal objective. academic researchñinphysical sciences, social sciences, computer sciences, and engineeringñprovidesa constant flow of ideas, analyses, and breakthroughs that vitalize industry. thestrengths of academic researchñprincipally the resources to focus on longterm,fundamental, risky goals and to mount broad collaborative projectsñcomplement the applied research and development (r&d) performed by industry. universities are a source not only of scientific and technological ideas that lead tonew products and processes, but also social and political insights that strengthenthe nationõs ability to adapt to new technologies and, therefore, to embrace continued innovation. as industries have become more dependent on innovation,new skills, and technological prowess, academic contributions have become increasingly critical to economic success.to assess and document the contributions of academic research to industry,the national academy of engineering initiated a study of the impact of academicresearch on five diverse industries: network systems and communications; financial services; medical devices and equipment; transportation, distribution, andlogistics services; and aerospace. all five industries are important in terms ofsales and employment, technological intensity, and expected growth rates; eachprovides a distinct example of current and historic patterns of interaction withacademia. the study is based on the opinions and judgments of a 15membercommittee of experts from industry and universities, supported by five panelsthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.(one for each industry) that reported to the study committee. the committeeõsdeliberations were informed by surveys of industry executives and leading academics, workshop discussions, and reviews of relevant publications.these five industries illustrate the wide range of contributions of academic research to industrial performance: graduates trained in modern research techniques; fundamental concepts and key ideas emerging from basicand applied research; and the development of tools, prototypes, and marketable products, processes, and services. the impact of academic researchderives from many disciplines, including the natural sciences and engineeringas well as the social and behavioral sciences, with the value of research in onefield often heavily dependent on advances in complementary fields. contributions also emerge from the broad base of knowledge resident at universities, which provide environments where ideas developed in one context oftenflourish in very different contexts. this broad knowledge base often resultsin contributions in areas essential to successful innovation but beyond anyspecific technology or field; examples include industry regulation and deregulation and the development of industry standards.the study identifies major crosscutting challenges for universityindustryresearch collaboration, including a growing imbalance in federal funding foracademic research, an underdeveloped interface between research universitiesand services industries (roughly 80 percent of the u.s. economy), and reconciling traditional university missions of teaching, research, and service with theincreased emphasis on the management of intellectual property. the committee recommends actions to meet these challenges for government, universities,and industry.on behalf of the national academy of engineering, i want to thank the studychairman, jerome h. grossman, the chairs of the industry panels, colin crook,annetine c. gelijns, jack l. kerrebrock, h. donald ratliff, and robert sproull,and other members of the study committee and the five industry panels (namedon pp. ivvi) for their considerable efforts on this project. i also want to thankproctor p. reid, the study director, who managed the project and helped thecommittee members reach consensus. thomas c. mahoney, consultant to thecommittee and lead staff support to the aerospace industry panel, and robert p.morgan, former nae fellow and lead staff support to the panels on the medicaldevices and equipment industry and the network systems and communicationsindustry were extremely helpful throughout the project, particularly during theclosing phase of the study. diane albert, former nae j. herbert hollomonfellow, provided lead staff support to the panel on transportation, distribution,and logistics services throughout the factfinding phase. penelope gibbs andnathan kahl from the nae program office provided critical administrative andlogistical support. carol arenberg, nae managing editor, was instrumental inpreparing the report for publication.viiithe impact of academic research on industrial performancethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixi want to extend the committeeõs thanks to everyone from government, industry, and academia who contributed to the project. in particular, i want toexpress our appreciation to the participants in the factfinding workshops,roundtables, and email surveys during the initial stages of the project (see addenda to chapters 2 through 6) and to those who briefed the committee.finally, i would like to express my appreciation to the alfred p. sloanfoundation for its generous support of this project.wm. a. wulfpresidentnational academy of engineeringthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacknowledgmentsthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the nrcõs report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that thereport meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsivenessto the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank thefollowing individuals for their review of this report: chris caplice, sabregroup; irwin feller, pennsylvania state university; james flanagan, rutgersuniversity; james f. gibbons, stanford university; cliff goodman, the lewingroup; patrick t. harker, university of pennsylvania; david heebner, heebnerassociates; kenneth h. keller, university of minnesota; ed lazowska, university of washington; robert w. lucky, telcordia technologies, inc.; hans mark,university of texas at austin; richard nelson, columbia university; george l.nemhauser, georgia institute of technology; john parrish, harvard medicalschool and massachusetts general hospital; sholom rosen, citibank (retired);chester s. spatt, carnegie mellon university; donald e. strickland, southernillinois university; marie c. thursby, georgia institute of technology; chelseac. white iii, georgia institute of technology; david c. wisler, ge aircraftengines; ben t. zinn, georgia institute of technologyalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. thereview of this report was overseen by nae member elsa garmire, dartmouththe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.college appointed by the national academy of engineering, who was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report wascarried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of thisreport rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.xiithe impact of academic research on industrial performancethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiiexecutive summary11introduction15setting the context, 16assessing the impacts, 20sectorspecific studies, 232report of the panel on the network systems andcommunications industry29definition of the industry, 30innovation system, 34contributions of academic research, 46mechanisms for universityindustry cooperation, 59findings and recommendations, 60addendum, 713report of the panel on the medical devices andequipment industry77definition of the industry, 79innovation system, 82contributions of academic research, 88impact on industrial performance, 102the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.recommendations, 104addendum, 1094report of the panel on the aerospace industry115scope of the study, 116innovation, 121findings, 123conclusions, 135addendum, 1385report of the panel on the transportation, distribution,and logistics services industry145definition of the industry, 146integrated logistics: a competitive differentiator, 147innovation system, 152contributions and impact of academic research, 154findings, 162recommendations, 165addendum, 1676report of the panel on the financial services industry173definition of the industry, 174innovation system, 178contributions of academic research, 183transfer mechanisms, 188opportunities for future academic research, 191findings and recommendations, 192addendum, 1987the contributions and impact of academic research205patterns of universityindustry interaction, 205the national innovation system, 206contributions of academic research, 208vectors of contribution, 213impact of contributions, 2148challenges for the future219services, 219the regulatory climate, 220xivthe impact of academic research on industrial performancethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvintellectual property, 221information technology, 223a balanced research portfolio, 223keeping pace and moving forward, 2259conclusions and recommendations227general recommendations, 229biographical information235the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviprefacethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summaryuniversities have a long history of contributing to industry and the economyin a variety of ways. yet only recently has attention been focused systematicallyon the nature and extent of these contributions to specific industries. with support from the alfred p. sloan foundation, the national academy of engineeringinitiated a study in 1998 to document and assess the contributions of academicresearch to the performance of five industry sectors: network systems and communications; medical devices and equipment; aerospace; transportation, distribution, and logistics services; and financial services. a 15member committee ofindustry and university experts conducted the study, with integral support fromfive panels (one for each industry).since this study began, there has been growing recognition of the importanceof universities and academic research to industrial innovation and performance.there has also been greater recognition of how the role of academic research haschanged over time, especially over the last 25 years as many universities havebecome more directly involved in the commercialization of the fruits of theirresearch. this study documents the contributions of university research to fivevery different industry sectors and provides a qualitative assessment of the impact of that research. the committeeõs conclusions cut across all five sectors; therecommendations propose steps that should be taken to meet a variety of challenges in academic research and industryuniversity interactions.few data are available to support a quantitative assessment of the impact ofacademic research on the performance of specific industries. quantitative measures of the output of academic research seldom go beyond counts of researchpapers, patents, and royalty income, none of which directly correlates with theimpact on industry. industrial performance can be measured by shareholderthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2the impact of academic research on industrial performancevalue, employment growth, market share, technical advances, and other factors,all of which tend to be cyclical and company specific. therefore, the committeerelied on informed opinion and expert judgments, supplemented by reviews ofthe literature, email surveys, workshop discussions, and panel deliberations, tomake qualitative assessments of the impact of academic research.all five industry sectors examined in this study are important in terms ofsales and employment, technological intensity, and expected growth rates. twosectors, medical devices and equipment and network systems and communications, have a recent history of extensive collaboration with academic researchers.the other three, aerospace, financial services, and transportation, distribution,and logistics services, have had more limited, less systematic interactions withthe academic research enterprise. all five have demonstrated significant capacities for innovation over the past decade. however, the financial services industryand the transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry, the two predominantly service industries, have only recently begun to integrate research anddevelopment (r&d) into their way of doing business. ultimately, the committeeconcluded that academic research has had a significant impact on performance inthe network systems and communications, medical devices and equipment, andfinancial services industries. the impact on performance in the aerospace and thetransportation, distribution, and logistics services industries has been moderate.academic research has made substantial contributions to all five industries,ranging from graduates at all levels trained in modern research techniques tofundamental concepts and key ideas based on basic and applied research to thedevelopment of tools, prototypes, and marketable products, processes, and services. the disciplinary sources of research contributions span the fields of engineering, the natural sciences, and the social and behavioral sciences, with advances in one field often combining and building on developments in other fields.pathways linking academic research and industries include: direct hires of students, graduates, and faculty; temporary exchanges of researchers; facultyconsultancies; joint research involving industry and academic scientists and engineers; industrysponsored research contracts and grants; a variety of institutionalmechanisms at universities (e.g., research centers, consortia, industrial liaisonprograms); technology licensing; startup companies; publications; conferences;and short courses.each industry studied illustrates a distinct pattern of collaboration withuniversities and has developed different mechanisms for taking advantage ofacademic contributions. for example, network systems has a history of drawingupon academic research for fundamental innovations, as well as using universities as test beds for new networking concepts that have provided the underpinnings of the internet, the world wide web, and ecommerce. figure es1shows the complex pattern of academic and industrial research over many yearsin this industry. the medical devices and equipment industry has also looked touniversities for fundamental multidisciplinary research in the physical sciencesthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3and engineering and the unique capabilities of academic medical centers forresearching, developing, testing, and improving devices, as well as conductingthe clinical trials necessary to obtaining regulatory approval, all in an atmosphere of close industryuniversity collaboration. in financial services, contributions of academic research in economics, engineering, and mathematics havebeen important to the development of new financial models and instruments, inspite of the industryõs lack of a well developed r&d infrastructure.this study confirms that graduates trained in research are a major componentof academiaõs contribution to industrial performance. u.s. universities are industriesõ primary source of people with research training and experienceñundergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty. researchtrained students and graduates at all degree levels play a critical role in thedevelopment, transfer, diffusion, and application of new knowledge and technology both within and between industry and academia.a second consistent message that emerges from a study of these five industries is that basic, longterm research performed by universities across a widerange of science and engineering disciplines has made significant contributionsto industry over time. for instance, portfolio theory, linear programming, derivative pricing theory, and prospect theory, all of academic origin, have laid thefoundation for whole new families of financial products and services. academiccontributions to linear and integer programming and to queue theory are thebuilding blocks of the informationmanagement and decisionsupport technologies at the heart of the integrated logistics revolution. medical devices, such asmagnetic resonance imaging machines and pacemakers, are based on the contributions of fundamental research arising from multiple disciplines in the naturalsciences and engineering.universities perform roughly half of all basic research in the united states,most of it funded by the federal government. over time, basic research resultsbuild on one another and intermingle with results in other fields, often throughthe free exchange of people and ideas that universities facilitate. typically pursued with no specific commercial application in mind, basic research has provided the technological underpinnings for commercial innovation. relevant research findings have come from multiple disciplines, indicating that a portfolio ofresearch investment in many different fields is essential to continued progress. insome cases, the original academic source of a basic understanding of a process ortechnology is forgotten by the time the knowledge is put to use; in other cases,nobel prizes are awarded years later for fundamental breakthroughs. individualacademic researchers may or may not receive the credit they deserve for theconstant flow of commercial innovations, but there can be no doubt that basicresearch and the publication of its results have made a unique and essentialcontribution to industrial performance.contributions from applied academic research are also very important toindustry. today, academic applied researchers and their academic researchthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4the impact of academic research on industrial performancefigure es1examples of academic governmentsponsored (and some industrysponsored) it research and development in the creation of commercial products andindustries. source: nrc, 2003.lansrings, hubnetethernet, datakit, autonetlans, switched ethernetgraphical user interfaces workstationsgraphicssketchpad, utahgm/ibm, xerox, microsofte&s, sgi, ati, adobelisp machine, stanfordxerox altoxerox star, apollo, sunengelbart / rochesteralto, smalltalkstar, mac, microsofttimesharingctss, multics / bsdunixsds 940, 360/67, vmsinternetarpanet, aloha, internetpupdecnet, tcp/iprisc processorsberkeley, stanfordibm 801sun, sgi, ibm, hpvlsi designberkeley, caltech, mosismany1965197019751980198519901995200519651970197519801985199019952005client/server computingberkeley, cmu, cernparc, dec, ibmnovell, emc, sun, oracleentertainmentspacewar (mit), trek (rochesteratari, nintendo, sgi, pixaruniversityindustry r&dproducts$1 bil. marketto world wide webthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5raid /disk serversrelational databasesberkeley, wisconsinibmoracle, ibm, sybaseberkeleystriping/datamesh, petalmany19651970197519801985199019952005world wide webalta vistanetscape, yahoo, google19651970197519801985199019952005speech recognitioncmu, sri, mitbell, ibm, dragondragon, ibmbroadband l in last milebellcore (telcordia)amati, alcatel, broadcomstanford, uclaportable communicationlinkabit, hughesqualcommberkeley, purdue (cdma)parallel databasestokyo, wisconsin, uclaibm, iclicl, teradata, tandemparallel computingilliac 4, cmu, caltech, hpcibm, intelcm5, teradata, cray t3ddata miningwisconsin, stanfordibm, arboriri, arbor, platocern, illinois (mosaic)from internetuniversityindustry r&dproducts$1 bil. marketthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6the impact of academic research on industrial performanceinfrastructure are directly involved in the development of industrial tools, prototypes, products, and production processes, as well as the delivery of productsand services. box es1 shows examples of specific applied academic researchcontributions to each of the five industries. sometimes academic applied research yields cumulative, incremental advances over time that prove to be ofmajor importance to industry. individual companies have also greatly benefitedfrom universitybased research to solve discrete practical problems related tobox es1contributions of applied academic researchnetwork systems and communications. contributions include packet switching and the internet tcp/ip protocol, both key elements in the development ofthe internet. the mosaic web browser interface was an important step in therapid evolution of the worldwide web. university researchers and other university personnel have contributed in significant ways to routers, the developmentof atm switches, digital subscriber line (dsl) technology, thirdgeneration wireless transmission, computer graphics, search engines, traffic management,stable broadcast networking, the evolution of new networks, and the development of standards.medical devices and equipment. the development of a wide range of therapeutic and diagnostic devices has resulted from the involvement of academic researchers and academic medical centers in r&d, prototype testing, evaluation,and clinical trials. devices and equipment include magnetic resonance imagingequipment; wholebody cat scanners; flexible endoscopy; lasers for a broadrange of medical applications, from gastrointestinal surgery to eye surgery; cardiac assist devices; organ and joint replacements; ultrasound and minimally invasive surgical techniques; and advances in tissue engineering.aerospace. contributions to the development of tools, include advanced nonintrusive instrumentation, flow visualization techniques, and computational fluiddynamics. contributions to specific technologies have been made in the areas ofheat transfer, combustion cooling, and aeromechanics; lowreynoldsnumber airfoil design; internet by satellite, including protocols and computational tools fordata integration; and foldingwing design for small unmanned aerial vehicles.transportation, distribution, and logistics services. contributions includeoptimization modeling for shippers, software applications/decision support systems for routing, production scheduling, logistics, and distribution management.academic spinoff companies have commercialized much of this software.financial services. contributions include new financial instruments, including index funds and derivatives; financial information and research tools, including risk/credit metrics and financial risk management software; models for pricing derivatives and securities; and advances in cryptography for specific financial services.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7their businesses. universitybased research centers, with industrial participation, have become another important venue for applied research as well as moredirected basic research of value to industry. applied research throughmultidisciplinary collaboration among science, engineering, and/or medical faculties is a unique strength of academia. most of the funding for applied researchat universities comes from federal agencies that want specific problems solvedrelated to their missions. industry funds some academic applied research directly via research contracts and also indirectly through support of universitybased research centers. industry funding of academic research increasedthroughout the 1990s, but industry still provides only a small proportion of totalfunds for academic research.the natural sciences and engineering disciplines are not the only fields thatmake important research contributions to industrial innovation and performance.the contributions of the social and behavioral sciences to industry have beengreatly undervalued. researchers in business, economics, psychology, and manyother fields have made valuable contributions to progress in the industries studied. for example, in network systems and communications, social and behavioral scientists have provided the knowledge base for the formulation of regulatory policy and have generated useful knowledge and insights into groupdynamics and decision making, the diffusion of new technologies, the nature andvalue of network externalities, and the relationship between organizational characteristics and information dissemination and sharing.challenges and opportunitiesthe industry studies revealed six major, crosscutting challenges and opportunities for universityindustry research that warrant careful attention by universities, industry, and government.first, there is a growing imbalance in federal r&d funding. current investments in life sciences far outpace investments in the complementary disciplinesof physical sciences, engineering, and the social and behavioral sciences. theindustry studies show time and again that the value of research results in one fieldoften depends heavily on advances in complementary fields. in addition, universities must maintain a mix of basic and applied research to sustain their role asrepositories of expertise and resources in many disciplines. federal funding isnow virtually the only source of support for basic research, which makes theeffective management of federal research programs of paramount importance.program managers in federal agencies must work with academic and industrialresearchers to develop research agendas that might lead to major new insights.the challenge is not just to maintain a balance between basic and applied research, but also to ensure that the basic research portfolio is sufficiently diverse tostimulate innovative thinking by academic researchers in many fields.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8the impact of academic research on industrial performancesecond, the industry studies underscore the need for industries and universities to continue exploring mechanisms and pathways for bringing the benefits ofacademic research to industry, keeping in mind that what works well in oneindustry may not work well in another. both partners should experiment withnew approaches. universityindustry linkages must be adaptable, and universities should be on the lookout for opportunities to link up with new industries andexplore leadingedge industrial research activities and challenges. crosssectoralmovement and interaction between individual academic and industrial researchers are essential to promoting the effective twoway exchange of knowledgeand technology.third, the studies suggest that services industries represent a significantsource of opportunity for universityindustry interaction. services account formore than 80 percent of the u.s. gross domestic product, employ a large andgrowing share of the science and engineering workforce, and are the primaryusers of information technology. in most manufacturing industries, service functions (such as logistics, distribution, and customer service) are now leading areasof competitive advantage. innovation and increased productivity in the servicesinfrastructure (e.g., finance, transportation, communication, health care) have anenormous impact on productivity and performance in all other segments of theeconomy. nevertheless, the academic research enterprise has not focused on orbeen organized to meet the needs of service businesses. major challenges toservices industries that could be taken up by universities include: (1) the adaptation and application of systems and industrial engineering concepts, methodologies, and qualitycontrol processes to service functions and businesses; (2) theintegration of technological research and social science, management, and policyresearch; and the (3) the education and training of engineering and science graduates prepared to deal with management, policy, and social issues.fourth, in recent decades, universities have increasingly emphasized technology transfer and the generation of income from research activities by patenting and licensing research results and the creation of technology transfer offices.the increased attention to the management of intellectual property has had manypositive consequences for both industry and academia, including providing incentives for invention and innovation and the dissemination and commercialization of new technologies. however, many questions remain regarding the netreturns on investments in technology transfer, as well as their impact on the coreresearch and educational missions of universities. these are questions that academic researchers are well equipped to address.fifth, regulation and regulatory changes continue to have a profound influence on industry receptivity to contributions by academic research. in turn,academic research continues to shape the regulatory environment of many industries, including most of those in this study. research universities are wellequipped to provide interdisciplinary expertise that can inform ongoing regulatory debates in these and other industries. moreover, the influx of academicallythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9trained scientists and engineers into financial, health, communication, transportation, and other regulatory bodies has strengthened these agenciesõ ability todraw effectively on research advances across a spectrum of disciplines relevantto their tasks. the rapid pace of technological change in many sectors and itseffect on the structure, competitive dynamics, and economic and societal impacts of many industries underscores the importance of sustaining, as well asdeepening, the current productive relationship between academic researchersand regulators.finally, information technologies are critical to the performance of all industries and will continue to be so in the future. industryõs need for the continueddevelopment, diffusion, and effective application of advanced information technologies presents major opportunities for academic research in mathematics,computer sciences, physical sciences, life sciences, multiple engineering disciplines, and social and behavioral sciences.conclusionthe committeeõs review of these five very different industries shows thatacademic research has clearly provided benefits to industry and has had a positive, longterm impact on industrial performance. however, it is difficult toidentify specific mechanisms by which this impact can be maximized. theresearch competencies, the ability to interface with industry, the quality of infrastructure, and many, many other characteristics vary greatly from university touniversity. in addition, industries in the abstract do not interface with universities; only individual companies do. and companies in a given industry also varyin their ability to manage interfaces with universities, in their expectations ofwhat academic researchers can provide, in the complexity of their research problems, and in their time horizons. and all of these vary over time. when thisstudy began, hightechnology industries, such as network systems and communications, were booming, attracting academic researchers and potential graduatestudents to well funded industrial laboratories, growing operations, and a plethoraof startup companies. as the study comes to a close, this same industry isexperiencing decreases in sales, stock prices, investments, research funding, andemployment. thus, both the unique characteristics of individual institutions andthe changes brought about by economic cycles must be kept in mind in assessingthe impact of academic research.ultimately, the study of these five industries underscores the core strengthsof the academic research enterprise. because universities are venues for agreater range of ideas and disciplinary perspectives than any other institutions inthe u.s. innovation system, they have vast potential for multidisciplinary research. in addition, universities are the only places where advanced researchand education are integrated on a large scale. the constant flow of new studentsthrough universities continuously revitalizes the academic research enterprise,the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10the impact of academic research on industrial performancechallenging the assumptions of faculty and bringing fresh perspectives to research. indeed, the rich and varied interaction between university researchfaculty and students and companies in many industries exposes the former toindustrial challenges that often serve as stimuli to basic and applied research inacademia. these core strengths augur well for the future of academic researchand its continuing contributions to industry performance.general recommendationsthe general recommendations of this study call for actions that could enhance the contributions of university research to industrial growth and performance. recommendations for individual industries can be found in the body ofthe report. the general recommendations address crosscutting challenges andopportunities that apply to more than one industry.general recommendation 1.because the contributions of academic researchare diverse and often indirect, a broad and balanced portfolio of academic research should be maintained. recent trends in federal funding indicate thatfunding levels for research in the physical sciences, engineering, and the socialand behavioral sciences should be increased.¥congress and the administration should restore the balance in federalfunding of academic research by increasing support for research in thephysical sciences, engineering, and the social and behavioral sciences tocomplement and leverage the results of recent heavy investments in thelife sciences and medical sciences.¥federal funding of academic research should continue to emphasize longterm basic research, as well as applied research (typically funded bymission agencies). multidisciplinary research should be encouragedthrough support of projectspecific research teams and other institutionalized mechanisms, such as engineering research centers and otheruniversityindustry research centers.general recommendation 2.industries and universities should continue toexplore mechanisms and pathways for bringing the benefits of academic research to industry, keeping in mind that what works well in one industry may notwork well in another. both partners should experiment with new approaches.universityindustry research linkages should be adaptable, and universitiesshould be on the lookout for opportunities to link up with new industries andexplore leadingedge industrial research activities and challenges.given the importance of personal relationships among academic and industrial researchers for productive collaboration and knowledge transfer, universitiesthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11and industry should foster interactions between university and industrybasedscientists and engineers in the following ways:¥a major program of fellowships should be established to attract and support graduate students in science and engineering.¥sabbatical programs should be established and/or expanded to encourageacademic and industrial researchers to spend time in each otherõs homeresearch settings.¥more balanced participation by academic researchers and their industrycounterparts in major conferences on specific sectors, technical systems,and disciplines should be encouraged.¥new ways of supporting personal interactions across academiaindustryboundaries, including using technology to support collaboration, shouldbe explored.¥universityindustry research centers should be structured to facilitate closeinteraction between academic and industrial researchers.¥academic reward structures, such as promotion and tenure criteria, shouldbe reviewed and modified (as necessary) to encourage and reward researchers who attract research support from industry and/or address significant research questions of direct importance to industry.¥intellectual property rights policies and practices that facilitate productiveresearch collaboration with industry should be promulgated at universities.general recommendation 3.the ability of academic researchers to contributeto services industries and the receptivity of leaders in the services industries tothe potential contributions of academic research must both be improved. thefollowing steps would have immediate benefits:¥academic research contributions and capabilities relevant to each industry should be documented and promoted in the targeted communities toeducate senior managers about how academic research might improvecompany performance in the marketplace.¥common legal frameworks acceptable to industry and academia shouldbe established detailing the terms of confidentiality and related conditionsto facilitate academic researchersõ access to operational networks andrealtime data.¥federal mission and regulatory agencies with primary responsibility forthe services industries (e.g., securities and exchange commission, internal revenue service, federal communications commission, and u.s.department of health and human services) should consider funding academic research in ways that encourage greater participation by the services industries. engineering research centers funded by the nationalthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12the impact of academic research on industrial performancescience foundation and university transportation centers funded by theu.s. department of transportation could serve as models.general recommendation 4.individual researchers and organizations, such asthe association of university technology managers, that gather data on university research and technologytransfer activities should continue to monitor andassess the effectiveness of incentives for transferring academic research results(particularly intellectual property policies and practices) and the impact of entrepreneurial activity by academic researchers on the traditional university missionsof education, research, and service. the following issues should be addressed:¥the costs to institutions of patenting research results, including the costsof maintaining and defending patents, should be assessed and comparedto the benefits, in terms of income from licenses and royalties.¥steps being taken to disseminate patent information to improve thechances of commercialization should be reviewed and best practices identified.¥best practices in the longterm management of patent inventories shouldbe shared among research institutions.¥the effectiveness of technology transfer via patented inventions shouldbe assessed and compared to transfer via more traditional mechanisms,such as publications. the benefits to faculty and universities should alsobe compared.¥the impact of universityindustry research collaboration and technologytransfer activities on undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education,the composition of academic research, the stability of academic researchfunding, the private and social returns from academic research, the manytraditional service roles of the university, and other related issues shouldbe assessed.general recommendation 5.government regulatory agencies, including thefood and drug administration, the environmental protection agency, the federal communications commission, and the securities and exchange commission, should be encouraged to sustain and strengthen their productive interactionwith academic researchers and to continue to explore new mechanisms for bringing scientific and engineering advances, including scientifically based conceptsand tools, to bear more rapidly and effectively on regulatory processes.general recommendation 6.government, industry, and universities shouldwork together to meet the challenges and opportunities created by informationtechnologies. the following steps would be beneficial:the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary13¥boost federal funding for fundamental research in information technologies, as part of an effort to redress the imbalance in federal funding forvarious disciplines in academic research.¥increase public and private sector investment in software research, withan emphasis on (1) engineering methods for assessing and improvingquality and (2) software that is more flexible and responsive to changingbusiness conditions.¥support more interdisciplinary research on existing and potential information technologies that combines engineering methods and the socialand behavioral sciences.referencenrc (national research council). 2003. innovation and information technology. washington,d.c.: the national academies press.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introductionthe importance of research universities to the strength of the u.s. innovationsystem and the national economy has long been recognized. in recent decades,public policies have sought to bolster the contribution of the nationõs academicresearch enterprise to u.s. industry and economic growth. nevertheless, as of thelate 1990s relatively few studies had been done on the contributions and impactof academic research on specific industrial sectors of the economy. to addressthis gap, the alfred p. sloan foundation sponsored a number of industryspecificstudies in the late 1990s. in 1998, as part of that series, the national academy ofengineering (nae) was asked to undertake this study to assess the contributionsof academic research to five hightechnology manufacturing and service industries reflecting the diversity and shifting balances in the national economy. thefive industries are: network systems and communications; medical devices andequipment; aerospace; transportation, distribution, and logistics services; andfinancial services.this report, based on the deliberations of the study committee and the factfinding activities of industryspecific panels of experts, describes specific contributions of academic research to these industries and modes of interaction between industries and universities. it also provides qualitative assessments of theimpact of academic research on the performance of each industry and, whereapplicable, identifies trends and emerging opportunities for increasing contributions from academic research.15the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16the impact of academic research on industrial performancesetting the contextthe critical role of universitybased research and associated activities in theu.s. system of technological innovation is well documented (e.g., brooks andrandazzese, 1998; cohen et al., 1998; florida and cohen, 1999; journal oftechnology transfer, 2001; and mowery et al., 1999). with the increase in government support after world war ii, university research flourished. in the 1970s,research and development (r&d) performed by universities comprised around10 percent of all r&d in the united states. after a slight dip in the early 1980s,universitiesõ share rose to about 13 percent in 2002 (nsb, 2000; nsf, 2003). in2002, nearly threefourths of total university r&d expenditures were classifiedas basic research and about 22 percent as applied research (nsf, 2003). universities account for roughly half of the basic research performed in the unitedstates (nsf, 2003).1figure 11 shows the sources of funding for university r&d from 1953 to2002. since 1953, the largest share has been provided by the federal government, although the percentage of federal support fell from a high of more than70 percent in the mid1960s to 60 percent in 2002. by contrast, funding fromindustry fluctuated from 8 percent in the 1950s to a low of 2 percent in 1966 to7 percent from 1988 to 2001 (nsf, 2003). from 1968 to 2002, however, industry was the fastest growing source of funding for academic r&d. in constant1996 dollars, industrial support of academic r&d grew nearly 900 percent05,00010,00015,00020,00025,00030,00035,00040,0001953195519571959196119631965196719691971197319751977197919811983198519871989199119931995199719992001nonprofitsuniversitiesindustrynonfederal government federal government$ millionsfigure 11 university r&d funding by source (constant 1996 dollars).source: nsf, 2003.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction17during this period (although it started from a relatively small base) (nsf, 2003).several surveys from the 1990s indicate that industry accounts for a significantly larger share of funding for academic r&d in specific fields, especiallyengineering. a 1993 survey of engineering faculty members active in researchshowed that 17 percent of their research support came from industry (morgan etal., 1994). a survey of more than 1,000 university research centers in 1990,many of which were founded during the 1980s, revealed that 31 percent of theirsupport came from industry (cohen et al., 1994).2figure 11 also shows that, since 1968, the second fastest growing sourceof funding has been internal academic resources, which increased by nearly700 percent and accounted for 20 percent of r&d funding in universities andcolleges by 2002. internal funds from universities include generalpurpose stateand local appropriations, generalpurpose grants from outside sources, royaltyincome, endowment income, and unrestricted gifts.figure 12 shows changes in federal support for academic research byagency. the most striking change since 1970 is the large increase in fundingfrom the national institutes of health (nih); the share of funding from otheragencies remained level or declined slightly. this shift has resulted in a corresponding shift in the technical fields supported by federal research funds(rapoport, 1999). figure 13 shows that, from 1973 to 2001, the percentage oftotal federal funding for academic research dedicated to the life sciences rose01,000,0002,000,0003,000,0004,000,0005,000,0006,000,0007,000,0008,000,0009,000,00010,000,000nihdodnsfall others1973197619791982198519881991199419972000$ millionsfigure 12 federal obligations for academic r&d by agency, 1973ð2001 (constant1992 dollars). source: nsf, 2001a.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18the impact of academic research on industrial performancefrom 54.8 to 63.7 percent, and the share allocated to mathematics and computerscience research increased slightly from 3.1 to 5.5 percent. during this period,engineeringõs share of the total federal funding of academic research remainedflat at roughly 8 percent; funding for the physical sciences decreased from14.7 to 9.9 percent; funding for the social sciences decreased from 5.8 to1.8 percent (nsf, 2001b). during this same period, federal funding for academic research increased from $1.6 billion to $15.2 billion in current dollars(nsf, 2001b). the amount and distribution of support for academic research inspecific subfields (e.g., aeronautical engineering vs. biomedical engineering)varies widely over time.30%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%197319751977197919811983198519871989199119931995199719992001 other sciences social sciences, total  engineering, total  math & computer sciences, total  environmental sciences, total  physical sciences, total  psychology, total  life sciences, total figure 13 percentage of federal obligations for total academic research by field,1973ð2001. source: nsf, 2001b.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19another indicator of the role of universities in the u.s. research enterprise ispatenting. throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, government policy increasingly favored stronger protection for intellectual property resulting from publiclyfunded research. several universities had already increased patenting activity inthe 1970s, largely as a result of the emergence of biotechnology, but the propensity to patent increased markedly after 1980.4 before 1980, all american universities were issued fewer than 250 patents annually; by the mid1990s the numberhad exceeded 1,500, the majority in the health care and life sciences (nelson,2000). overall, the number of universityheld patents increased more than 10fold between 1982 and 1998 (nsb, 2000). in fiscal year 2000 (fy00), u.s.universities applied for more than 6,300 new patents and were issued more than3,700 (autm, 2001). other indicators of the growing industrial relevance ofacademic research are the approximate doubling of the percentage of paperscoauthored by university and industry personnel from 1981 to 1995 (nsb, 1998)and an increase in the percentage, from 49 percent in 1988 to 55 percent in 1996,of front pages of industrial patents that cite university papers (jankowski, 1999).research by the association of university technology managers (autm)shows that university involvement in several kinds of commercially relevantactivities accelerated in the 1990s (autm, 2000). in fy00, at least 368 newcompanies were formed based on academic discoveries. more than 100 licensesto university patents generated over $1 million apiece for their university owners, with the university of california system holding 10 of these and columbiauniversity 16. total license income to universities in fy00 was $1.076 billion,much of it attributable to a few big winners (autm, 2001). examples includethe $160 million earned by michigan state university over the life of twocancerrelated patents, the $143 million lifetime earnings of stanford universityfor the recombinant dna genesplicing patent, the $27 million paid to iowastate university for the fax algorithm, and the $37 million earned by the university of florida for gatorade (rogers et al., 2000).the combination of growth in nonfederal funding sources, shifts in the technical fields receiving the largest share of government support, the increase inacademic ownership of intellectual property resulting from academic research,and the increase in financial rewards from the licensing and commercialization ofresearch results have changed the role of academic research in the u.s. innovation system. the universityõs role of participating in large government researchprograms driven by cold war priorities has given way to an environment inwhich university researchers and research managers are much more aware of thepotential for the commercialization of their research. greater ownership, andtherefore greater control, of intellectual property has put research universitiesmore directly into the value chain of new technology development, especiallyin the life sciences. technology transfer offices have been created at more than200 research universities to manage patents, licensing and royalty contracts, andother business and legal issues related to universitiesõ intellectual propertythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20the impact of academic research on industrial performance(sampat and nelson, 1999). although the flow of license and royalty incomeremains confined to a small number of universitiesñjust 10 universities plus theuniversity of california system accounted for more than twothirds of licenseincome in fy00ñuniversity managers now recognize the potential of generatingincome from their research and are paying much more attention to increasingreturns on their intellectual property by managing relationships with corporations, supporting startup companies by faculty, and negotiating beneficial licensing agreements and royalty terms (autm, 2001).assessing the impactsif the economic benefits of academic research could be unambiguously quantified, the choice of effective research investment policies might be straightforward. unfortunately, it is extremely difficult to apportion the economic outputof an industry to the results of academic research. although a large number ofspecific results of university researchñcertain drugs, software applications,algorithmsñhave been applied directly to industrial practice and products, theoverall benefits of academic research are surely much larger. the cumulativescientific and technological knowledge in a field that underlies varied productsand services may be even more important than specific inventions or innovations.a programmer who writes a webbased orderentry system for a new business,for example, makes use of countless contributions from academic research thatled to lowcost integrated circuit chips, software tools, the internet, and a myriadof related technologies.several economists have attempted to calculate the private returns (returns toinvesting firms) and the social returns (returns to both firms and consumers) fromuniversity research.5 others have used regression analysis to evaluate the impactof academic research on industrial patenting, manufacturing productivity, andother measures of industrial performance (adams, 1990; jaffe, 1989). possibleapproaches to a quantitative assessment of the impact of academic research onindustrial performance are summarized in box11.no matter which approach is adopted, measuring the impact of academicresearch is an inexact science. isolating, tracking, and measuring the contributions of a given body of academic research to the performance of particular firms,industries, and regional economies is complex and difficult (feller, 1996). therefore, this committeeõs assessments of individual industries are necessarily qualitative, based on informed judgments by knowledgeable experts in industry anduniversities, as well as case studies, informal surveys, workshop deliberations,and examples.the nae deliberately selected diverse industries for this study. each industry is influenced by many factors, such as size, age, trade dependence, and research intensity, all of which influence both the amount of relevant researchperformed and the ability of an industry to absorb the results. on the one hand,the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction21 (continued)box 11quantitative measurements of the impact ofacademic researchpatents and patent citations could be used as proxies for industrial performance to trace the contributions of academic research to patents. francis narinand colleagues at chi research, inc., identified a sizable increase in the citationlinkages between u.s. patents and scientific research papers from the late 1980sto the mid1990s. òreferences from u.s. patents to u.s. authored research papershave tripled over a six year period, from 17,000 during 1987ð1988 to 50,000 during 1993ð1994, a period in which the u.s. patent system grew only by30 percent.ó the authors concluded that òpublic science plays an essential role insupporting u.s. industry, across all the sciencelinked areas of industry, amongstcompanies large and small, and is a fundamental pillar of the advance of u.s.technology . . . [furthermore] the data show that the science that is contributing tohigh technology is mainstream; it is quite basic, quite recent, published in highlyinfluential journals, authored at major universities and laboratories, and supportedby nsf, nih, the departments of defense and energy, and by other public andcharitable institutionsó (narin et al., 1998). although this study did not focus specifically on universities, the authors also found that about half of the u.s. papers citedin u.s. industry patents were authored at academic institutions.porter and stern (1998) used international patents per million persons as anoutput measure of innovation, and correlated it with other inputs, such as investmentsin education and r&d. perhaps academic patents could be used in this fashion.surveyssurvey research could be used to obtain information about a variety of indicators of university research and industrial performance. based partly on a 1994survey of industrial r&d managers, w. cohen and associates at carnegie mellonuniversity concluded that òuniversity research provides critical shortterm payoffsin some industries (such as pharmaceuticals) and is broadly important in numerous industriesó (cohen et al., 1998). the survey provided information about thepercentage of industry r&d projects using university research and the extent towhich industries used various university research results, including patents, formoving information from universities to industrial r&d facilities.morgan, strickland, and colleagues conducted mail surveys and telephone interviews with engineering and science faculty about research they conducted that theybelieve contributed to industry (morgan et al., 1997). interviews were also conductedwith industry counterparts or collaborators. the authors concluded that university engineering and science research is often relevant to industry and that real, tangiblecontributions are being made. however, when interviewees were asked to place adollar value on their contributions, relatively few responded (morgan et al., 1997).quantifying dollar valuesoverall impacts of individual universities. a study released in 1997 attempting to measure the impact of one research university, mit, on the economy andemployment concluded, òif the companies founded by mit graduates and facultyformed an independent nation, the revenues produced by the companies wouldmake that nation the 24th largest economy in the world. the 4,000 mitrelated companies employ 1.1 million people and have annual world sales of $232 billion.ó mitthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22the impact of academic research on industrial performancerelated firms are prominent in electronics, software, and biotechnology and tend tobe concentrated in silicon valley and boston. more than half of the companiesfounded by mit graduates were founded by graduates in electrical engineering(bankboston, 1997).in a study conducted in the early 1990s, the stanford university licensingoffice compiled information about technologybased companies founded by members of the stanford community (graduates, faculty, etc.). an aggregate estimateof roughly $31 billion in revenue was attributed to firms in the san francisco bayarea (leone et al., undated).1dollar impacts of university patents and licenses. using economic impact models,the association of university technology managers (autm) estimates that in fy98,$33 billion of u.s. economic activity was attributable to the results of academic licensing from u.s. universities that participate in the autm survey, supporting 280,000 jobs(autm, 1999). in another study, pressman (2000) reports that 150 licensees withagreements to use mitowned patents sold $3 billion in licensed products. more than500 of some 850 mit patent license agreements since 1980 are active.estimating economic and social returnsmansfield estimated the annual social returns from academic research, whichinclude returns to both firms and consumers, from 1975 through 1978 to be 28 percent, although he warned that the estimate was very rough. mansfield also estimated that sales of new products in 1985, based on academic research that was firstcommercialized between 1982 and 1985 in seven industries, including drugs, instruments, and information processing, totaled about $41 billion, or 5 percent of totalsales for those industries (mansfield, 1991). additional benefits were estimated forprocess improvements. mansfieldõs work was based in part on surveys of firms thatindicated that without university research, about 10 percent of industrial innovationswould not have occurred or would have occurred only after sizable delays.trajtenberg (1999) estimated the social return of computerized tomographyscanners to be more than 200 percent. a question that then arises is what portionof the returns from this innovation can be attributed to academic research. giventhat fundamental scientific discoveries provided the basis for producing ct scanners, direct dependencies are difficult to discern; thus, the contribution of academic research is also extremely difficult, if not impossible, to quantify.cohen et al. (1998) summarized studies by jaffe (1989) and adams (1990) inwhich regression analyses were used along with production functions to evaluatethe impact of academic research on industry. jaffeõs (1989) study was focused onthe effects of academic r&d on industrial patenting, whereas adams (1990) examined effects on manufacturing productivity.using multiple approaches and proxiesjaffe (1998) suggested a combined approach to quantifying the impacts ofacademic research on industrial performance. òi do not believe that it is possible toperform a reliable and comprehensive measurement of the outcomes of science andtechnology programs. this does not mean, however, that measurement is pointless.by looking at multiple indicators, captured and evaluated at multiple levels of aggregation (individual projects, individual programs, agencies, and the economy as awhole) we can draw reasonably reliable conclusions. further, the use of multipleindicators reduces the need to be overly concerned about the limitations of any one.ó1mit and stanford may be counting some of the same people (e.g., someone with a b.s.from mit and a ph.d. from stanford or vice versa).the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction23the diversity of the five industries precludes the emergence of universal, economywide truths. on the other hand, the committee was able to identify best practicesthat could be generally implemented, as well as critical issues and shortcomingscommon to these five industries, and perhaps others.for example, the studies of the five industries clearly indicate the importanceof research in both the natural sciences and engineering, as well as the social andbehavioral sciences, in the development and broad implementation of innovations. academic studies of consumer behavior, for instance, have been importantto the emergence and success of electronic commerce. policy research on regulations and standards has contributed to changes in banking (the end of glasssteagall, which prohibited banks from accepting deposits and underwriting securities and established the federal deposit insurance corporation),communications (the breakup of at&t), logistics (the deregulation of truckingand airlines), and a wide range of similar legal and regulatory changes. thecontributions of academic research to a social, legal, political, and economicenvironment that encourages innovation are often overshadowed by the morefamiliar contributions to advances in science and technology.sectorspecific studiesthis study is based on the premise that the research and technology needsand strategies of industries are sector specific as well as company specific, as isthe character of academicindustry interactions. because the frontiers of commercial research, development, and innovation vary widely among companies in thesame industry and among industries, research and resulting innovations can havea wide range of effects on commercial success. some of the differences are afunction of the characteristics of science and technology, but most of them areattributable to differences in research intensity, necessary returns on investment,market size, competition, product mix, and other distinctive characteristics ofan industry. the five industries examined in this study encompass a greatmany variations.box 12 summarizes the five industries, all of which are important in termsof u.s. sales and employment, technological intensity, expected growth rates,and other metrics. one of the difficulties encountered in defining these industries is that subsectors in an industry may differ widely. in network systems andcommunications, the panel focused on the innovative computer networking segment of the industry rather than on older communications services, such astelephony. in the medical devices and equipment industry, the panel assessedonly the more sophisticated subsectors of the industry. the aerospace panelfocused on five subsectors of the aerospace industry, three of which are large,mature businesses whose interactions with universities differ substantially fromthose of the two smaller subsectors. in transportation, distribution, and logisticsservices, the panel focused primarily on the contributions of one technologicallythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24the impact of academic research on industrial performancedriven approach, namely integrated logistics, to the movement of freight. thissubsector has undergone a good deal of innovation with significant contributions from academic research; the industry as a whole, however, has not. thefinancial services panel took a comprehensive view of the industry, includingconsumer and commercial services, investment banking, and insurance. themedical devices and equipment industry and the network systems and communications industry have a history of extensive collaboration with academic research. the aerospace industry, the financial services industry, and the transportation, distribution and logistics services industry generally have had morelimited, less systematic interactions with academic researchers.box 12industry definitionsnetwork systems and communications. focused was on the innovative computer networking segment of the industry, including computing and communications equipment, software, and services (basically all information technology except for integrated circuits). the industry generated roughly $715 billion in salesand more than 2.2 million jobs in 2000.medical devices and equipment. includes five north american industrial classification system (naics) codes: (1) surgical and medical instruments, (2) surgicalappliances and supplies, (3) dental equipment and supplies, (4) irradiation apparatus, (5) and navigational, measuring, electromedical, and control instruments.medical information systems are also included. as of 1999, the global market formedical devices was $138 billion, and the u.s. market accounted for 37 percent ofglobal demand. the u.s. industry supplied 40 percent of the global market withshipments of $55 billion and employed nearly 300,000 workers.aerospace. includes five sectors, ranging from the mature (1) largescale airframes, (2) jet engine, and (3) launchvehicle businesses to the newer businessesof (4) unmanned aerial vehicles and (5) spacebased information systems. theindustry as a whole accounted for more than $146 billion in sales and 800,000 jobsin 2000.transportation, distribution, and logistics services. focuses on integratedlogistics services, including inventory carrying costs and transportation and administrative costs associated with moving freight and people. the industry hadroughly $1 trillion in sales and employed more than 3.6 million people in 2000.financial services. includes all services associated with the packaging and description of financial securities and the implementation of financial transactions.the industry accounted for roughly $820 billion of u.s. gross domestic productand provided nearly 6 million jobs in 2000.sources: aia, 2001; delaney and wilson, 2001; mcgrawhill and u.s. department ofcommerce, 2000; u.s. bureau of the census, 2001, 2002.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction25all five industries have demonstrated an impressive capacity for innovationover the past decade. however, only the three manufacturing industries (network systems and communications; medical devices; and aerospace) have longstanding, well developed r&d functions. by contrast, the two predominantlyservice industries (transportation, distribution, and logistics services; and financial services) have only recently begun to develop an r&d ethos in the traditional sense. the following chapters describe each industry in greater detail andsummarize the findings for each industry.notes1there are serious limitations to using the categories basic research, applied research, and development to characterize the r&d enterprise (stokes, 1997). in spite of the uncertainty in placingspecific research projects into these categories, science and technology agencies that produce r&ddata routinely use them.2in some cases, the federal government requires that a university obtain matching funds fromindustry as a prerequisite for supporting a research center.3the five industry sectors examined in this study do not correspond exactly to categories forwhich industry research and other data are collected. furthermore, academic research in severalfields may contribute to these industries, making it difficult to assign the contributions of specificdisciplinary research in universities to a specific industry sector.4several factors contributed to this: a 1980 supreme court decision, diamond vs chakrabarty,upheld the validity of a broad patent in biotechnology; the patent and trademarks law amendmentsact (p.l. 96517), often referred to as the bayhdole act of 1980, changed longstanding federalpolicy that had not allowed research institutions to own inventions developed under federal researchcontracts or to license or otherwise pursue commercialization of the invention; and the creation ofthe federal circuit court of appeals in 1982 provided a strong champion of patentholder rights(mowery et al., 1999).5in an assessment of seven industries, mansfield (1991) estimated that the annual social returnsfrom academic research from 1975 to 1978 were 28 percent. mansfield also estimated that 1985 salesof new products based on academic research that were first commercialized between 1982 and 1985totaled about $41 billion, or 5 percent of total sales for those industries. for a review of approachesto measuring social returns of r&d not specifically focused on academic research, see jones andwilliams, 1998.referencesadams, j. 1990. fundamental stocks of knowledge and productivity growth. journal of politicaleconomy 98(4): 673ð702.aia (aerospace industries association). 2001, aerospace facts and figures: 2001/2002. washington, d.c.: aerospace industries association. available online at: http://www.aiaaerospace.org/stats/factsfigures/ff0102/ffsummary.cfm. [august 21, 2003]autm (association of university technology managers). 1999. fy 98 licensing survey. availableonline at: http://www.autm.net/indexie.html. [june 24, 2003]autm. 2000. autm licensing survey, fy 1999. northbrook, ill.: autm.autm. 2001. autm licensing survey, fy 2000. northbrook, ill.: autm.bankboston. 1997. mit: the impact of innovation. special report of the bankboston economicsdepartment. march. available online at: http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/founders/. [june 24,2003]the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26the impact of academic research on industrial performancebrooks, h., and l.p. randazzese. 1998. universityindustry relations: the next four years andbeyond. pp. 361ð399 in investing in innovation: creating a research and innovation policythat works, l.m. branscomb and j.h. keller, eds. cambridge, mass.: mit press.cohen, w.m., r. florida, and w.r. goe. 1994. universityindustry research centers in the unitedstates. pittsburgh, pa.: center for economic development, carnegie mellon university.cohen, w.m., r. florida, l.p. randazzese, and j. walsh. 1998. industry and the academy: uneasypartners in the cause of technological advance. pp. 171ð199 in challenges to research universities, r. noll, ed. washington, d.c.: the brookings institution.delaney and wilson. 2001. managing logistics in a perfect storm. 12th annual state of logisticsreport. washington, d.c.: cass information systems.feller, i. 1996. technology transfer from universities. pp. 1ð42 in higher education: handbook oftheory and research, j.c. smart, ed. new york: agathon press.florida, r., and w.m. cohen. 1999. engine or infrastructure? the university role in economicdevelopment. pp. 589ð610 in industrializing knowledge, l.m. branscomb, f. kodama, and r.florida, eds. cambridge, mass.: mit press.jaffe, a. 1989. real effects of academic research. american economic review 79(5): 957ð970.jankowski, j.e. 1999. trends in academic research spending, alliances, and commercialization. journal of technology transfer 24: 55ð68.jones, c.i., and j.c. williams. 1998. measuring the social return to r&d. quarterly journal ofeconomics 113(4): 1119ð1127.journal of technology transfer. 2001. symposium on technology organizational issuesin universityindustry technology transfer. special issue. journal of technology transfer 26(1).leone, a., j. vamos, r. keeley, and w.f. miller. undated. a survey of technology based companies founded by members of the stanford university community. an unpublished study commissioned by the stanford university office of licensing, stanford, california.mansfield, e. 1991. academic research and industrial innovation. research policy 20: 1ð12.mcgrawhill and u.s. department of commerce. 2000. chapter 45, medical and dental instruments and supplies, in u.s. industry and trade outlook 1999. new york: mcgrawhill.morgan, r.p., d.e. strickland, n. kannankutty, and j. grillon. 1994. research on academic engineering research. part ii. how engineering faculty view academic research. asee prism 4(3):30ð35.morgan, r.p., d.e. strickland, m.e. sava, and n. kannankutty. 1997. academic engineering research at a time of change: the tilt towards industry. pp. 226ð234 in proceedings of ieeeinternational symposium on technology and society. new york: ieee.mowery, d.c., r.r. nelson, b.n. sampat, and a.a. ziedonis. 1999. the effects of the bayhdoleact on u.s. research and technology. pp. 269ð306 in industrializing knowledge, l.m.branscomb, f. kodama, and r. florida, eds. cambridge, mass.: mit press.narin, f., k. hamilton, and d. olivastro. 1998. the increasing linkage between u.s. technologyand public science. p. 101 in aaas 1998 science and technology yearbook, a. teich, s.d.nelson, and c. mcenaney, editors. washington, d.c.: aaas.nelson, l. 2000. many forms of technology transfer from universities. viewgraph presented at theaaas science and technology policy colloquium, april 2000, washington, d.c.nsb (national science board). 1998. science and engineering indicators 1998. washington, d.c:u.s. government printing office.nsb. 2000. science and engineering indicators 2000. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice.nsf (national science foundation). 2001a. federal funds for research and development: detailedhistorical tables: fiscal years 1951ð2001. nsf 01334. arlington, va.: nsf.nsf. 2001b. federal funds for research and development: federal obligations for research touniversities and colleges by agency and detailed field of science and engineering: fiscalyears 1973ð2001. nsf 01331. arlington, va.: national science foundation.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction27nsf. 2003. national patterns of research and development resources: 2002 data update. arlington, va.: national science foundation. nsf 03313. available online at: http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf03313/start.htm. [june 24, 2003]porter, m., and s. stern. 1998. evaluating u.s. innovative capacity: the innovation index. presentation at mit innovation summit, march 13, 1998, cambridge, massachusetts.pressman, l. 2000. measuring product development outcomes of patent licensing at mit. paperpresented at aaas annual meeting, washington, d.c., february 17ð22, 2000.rapoport, a.i. 1999. how has the field mix of federal research funding changed over the pastthree decades? issue brief nsf 99328. arlington, va.: national science foundation, division of science resources studies.rogers, e.m., j. yin, and j. hoffman. 2000. assessing the effectiveness of technology transferoffices at u.s. research universities. journal of the association of university technology managers 12: 47ð80.sampat, b., and r. nelson. 1999. the emergence of standardization of university technologytransfer offices: a case study of institutional change. prepared for the new institutionaleconomics, september 16ð18, 1999. washington, d.c.: world bank.stokes, d.e. 1997. pasteurõs quadrant: basic science and technological innovation. washington,d.c.: the brookings institution.trajtenberg, m. 1999. economic analysis of product innovation: the case of ct scanners. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press.u.s. bureau of the census. 2001. statistical abstract of the united states. washington, d.c.: u.s.government printing office.u.s. bureau of the census. 2002. statistical abstract of the united statesð2002. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office. available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statisticalabstract02.html. [june 24, 2003]the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2report of the panel on the networksystems and communications industrythe panel on network systems and communications, one of five panelsformed by the committee on the impact of academic research on industrialperformance, was asked to examine the impact of academic research on theperformance of the network systems and communications industry and recommend ways based on trends in the industry and the research community to increase this impact. the panel of six included three members of nae (all fromindustry), one other member from industry, and two from academia. three of thepanel members were also members of the parent committee. the panel reviewedthe literature, developed several case studies, and sent a questionnaire to expertsin academia, the computer industry, the network systems and communicationsindustry, and government. the questionnaire was followed by a workshop attended by approximately 30 senior individuals in the network systems and communications sector (see addendum).the network systems and communications business sector flourishedthroughout the 1990s, when the growth of the internet, the technologies thatimplement it, and the businesses and services that use it were unprecedented.telecommunications servicesñespecially wireless digital telephones and pagingservicesñalso grew rapidly. much of this success was attributable to exponentialimprovements in the performancetocost ratio of microelectronics over the pastthree decades. technical innovations emerging from within the industry and fromacademic research have been essential. some innovations were the culminationof decades of research; some were shortterm developments that entered the29the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30the impact of academic research on industrial performancemarket via startup companies; and some were incremental improvements toexisting products.in the last 30 years, digital technologies have transformed the telephonenetwork from an analog system to a computercontrolled system with digitalswitching and transmission. the process of digitalization has changed the industry from two distinct businessesñcomputers and communicationsñto one business in which computers and communications are intermingled in products andservices. this convergence was accelerated by advances in microelectronics andincreases in the bandwidth available for communications (messerschmitt, 1996).the result is increasingly pervasive data networking, based largely on the packetswitching technologies that emerged from academic and industrial research tospawn the internet.the network systems and communications industry has a large and expanding services component. for the telecommunications industry, which has alwaysbeen a service provider, the challenge is to invent and offer customers new,valuable services that generate new sources of revenue. for the computer portionof the industry, highperformance communications are making a wide range ofnew services feasible. examples include remote sensors and control systems;integrated supply chain management systems; application service providers; fulltime, realtime stock quotes; and instant messaging.definition of the industrythe network systems and communications industry must be defined verybroadly. it clearly includes the manufacturing of telecommunications equipmentand the services that use such equipment, such as telephony, wireless telephony,broadcast television, cable and satellite television, radio, and internet service.both the equipment and services sectors increasingly require computing equipment and software, and, in fact, the computer and communications industries areno longer separate industries. for example, cellular telephony depends on a broadrange of technologies: the cell phone contains a liquid crystal display, an embedded computer with a lot of software, and advanced chips that integrate most of thecomponents of a highfrequency radio; the transmission formats depend on advances in digital speech compression, signal modulation, and coding; the basestations depend heavily on digital integrated circuits and computers for switchingand control and fiberoptic links between them; tracking a moving telephonerequires that computers at adjacent base stations exchange protocol messages forthe handoff; and the billing, provisioning, and maintenance of the service requirelargescale computing and software systems of the service provider. separatingthis integrated system into òcommunicationsó and òcomputingó components issimply not possible. in short, computing and communications equipment andservices have converged, creating new business and technical opportunities.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry31the explosive growth of the internet is the most visible manifestation ofthis trend toward convergence. the technologies underlying the internetñjust like those that underlie the cellular telephoneñinclude computing andcommunications. special computers serve as routers, and network servicesknit together the transmission links and implement the collection of internetprotocols that carry internet traffic. the explosive growth of the internet,however, is attributable not to these basic provisionsñwhich existed before1993ñbut to new services that created consumer demand: electronic mail,the world wide web of information and its associated browser software; chatgroups; realtime delivery of audio and video media; online merchandising;banking and financial transactions; supplychain integration of suppliers andcustomers; and numerous other applications. some applications merely extend existing internal information technology systems to provide internetaccess. but others, such as ebayõs success with online auctions, are entirelynew business concepts. as the internet becomes more pervasive, old ways ofcomputing, in which data was created, stored, and manipulated at a singlesite, are giving way to networked systems in which data can be accessedremotely and shared extensively.the computers embedded in everyday objectsñtelephones, cars, televisions,furnaces, hifi equipmentñare becoming increasingly capable and increasinglynetworked. some cars already can connect with a diagnostic and help center bycellular telephone or satellite communications. home networks in which multiplepersonal computers in a household are linked over existing telephone wires andshortrange wireless devices will soon make networking of appliances routine. aworld in which all devices have an internet address is not out of reach. thuscomputers increasingly require communications to fulfill their functions, andcommunications increasingly require computers to fulfill theirs.the technologies of computing and communications are becoming indistinguishable. all of them depend on software to express functions at all levelsin the network. a few years ago, a modem was a complex, integrated circuit.today, with more complex algorithms and faster computers, modems are written in software embedded within digital signal processors. many algorithmscan be used equally well in computing and communications settings. for example, schemes to digitize and compress video signals are useful both formanipulating and storing video information on a computer disk and for transmitting it over digital communications channels. similarly, encryption technology can be used to protect sensitive information in a computer system or intransit over a network.these three trendsñconvergence, embedding, and network applicationsñcharacterize the network systems and communications sector. the panelõs assessment of the contributions of academic research to this industry is based on thisbroad definition.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32the impact of academic research on industrial performancesizebecause our definition has vague boundaries and because the industrialclassifications used to gather statistics have not been adapted to the rapid changesin the industry, it is difficult to determine the size of the network systems andcommunications sector. table 21 summarizes sales and employment in theinformation technology industry based on bureau of the census data (u.s. bureau of the census, 2002). taken together, sales of computer and communications equipment and services (all information technology minus semiconductors) were about $715 billion in 2000, and the industry employed more than2.2 million people (u.s. bureau of the census, 2002). expenditures forinformationprocessing equipment increased almost 10 percent per year on average from 1970 to 1994; the corresponding figure for computers and peripheralswas 27.5 percent (nrc, 1999). a 1999 survey found that telecommunicationsmanufacturing was growing by 16.3 percent annually, computer software by16.6 percent, and computer hardware by 9.5 percent (ctis, 1999), howeverthese rates have dropped significantly since early 2000.structurethe role of research and innovation in the network systems and communicationssector can best be understood in the context of the structure of the industry, whichinfluences the mechanisms of innovation and thus how new technologies and products are introduced. the very general description that follows is intended only toreveal similarities and differences with the other industries studied in this report.manufacturingthe structure of the computer industry is horizontal; the communicationsindustry was vertically integrated but has been rapidly changing to a horizontaltable 21 sales and employment in the information technology industry, 2000salesnumbernaicsarevenuesof jobscode($ billions)(1,000)it manufacturingcomputer and peripheral equipment3341$110.0190communications equipment3342119.3291software511288.6331semiconductors andother electronic components3344168.5621it servicesdata processing services514242.9296telecommunications services5133354.21,165anorth american industrial classification system. source: u.s. bureau of the census, 2002.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry33structure as well. in a horizontal structure, numerous suppliers manufacture partsand components that many integrators assemble into subassemblies that are thenassembled into final products by numerous competing original equipment manufacturers. the multiplicity of companies at each manufacturing step ensures intense competition throughout the production process, not only in terms of pricebut also on a wide rage of performance characteristics. for example, manufacturers of personal computers buy disk drives from any one of about a dozensuppliers. a company that needs a customized integrated circuit may design thecircuit but use one of several competing semiconductor foundries to manufactureit. specialized circuit board assembly firms can assemble and test complete circuit boards, giving an electronic design firm the ability to design and sell a uniquecomputer interface board with custom chips without having to invest in eitherchip or board manufacturing facilities.the divestiture of at&t and the subsequent deregulation of communications services forced the communications industry to change from a vertical to ahorizontal structure. today there are many vendors of telecommunications equipment and components. custom integrated circuits can implement very complexcommunications functions; coupled with custombuilt and proprietary softwaredesigns, equipment vendors compete intensely in terms of technology, reliability,and cost of ownership.another important feature of the network systems and communications sector is its reliance on components with well defined interfaces. integrated circuitsare a good example: the physical, electrical, and logical behaviors of chip interfaces are specified by the manufacturer and used by the customer to determinehow to incorporate a chip into a subsystem with other components. subsystemsthen become components of still larger systems. software, another component,plugs into the operating system that supports it by linking the software interfaces(sometimes called application programming interfaces, or apis). a piece of software that is compatible with a certain operating system adheres to the interfacesprovided by the operating system. computer systems are built from complexhierarchical assemblies of subsystems and components, sometimes hundreds oreven thousands of them. some of the components are custom built, and some arestandard. thus, interfaces give rise to components, which in turn give rise tobusinesses structured around buying and selling components.key component interfaces become industry standards, which are usuallyadopted by industry groups to hasten the spread of a new technology, increasesales volume, and, therefore, decrease cost. standards maintained by a group withbroad representation from competitive suppliers are said to be open standards.for example, the personal computer memory card international association isan industry group that establishes standards for interchangeable interface cardsfor laptop computers. the standards group includes several producers of cardsand several producers of laptops to ensure that the standard cannot be manipulated to benefit one competitor over another. by contrast, standards promulgatedthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34the impact of academic research on industrial performanceby a single vendor are said to be proprietary. for example, the programminginterface for microsoftõs windows operating system is proprietary; microsoftspecifies it and can change it at will.standards play a special role in communications. broadly speaking, they are necessary to ensure that components and subsystems connected via a communicationschannel can operate together (e.g., they obey the same conventions for encoding voicesignals, multiplexing many simultaneous phone calls on a single channel, performingoperation and maintenance functions). standards of this kind are necessary for guaranteed, sustained interoperability, and changes must be carefully designed to avoid evenslight interruptions of network service. new versions of standards must be designed sothey can be introduced incrementally, connect new equipment to old, test new protocols, and so on. the same considerations apply to internet protocols.servicescommunication services (e.g., voice and data transmission, switching, anddistribution) are a major portion of the network systems and communications industry. the number and structure of telecommunications service providers havebeen in constant flux since the divestiture of at&t and the deregulation of localtelephone services. first, new companies emerged offering wireless telephone services. then another group of new companies emerged as internet service providers.to increase their revenue, carriers have been developing valueadded services,such as voice mail, call forwarding, call waiting, 800 service, electronic mail, andvirtual private networking, along with conventional transmission and switchingservices. internet service providers provide national and regional portals that offernews, chat rooms, advertising, and direct access to the world wide web.computing services are also a major element of the industry. system integration,the design and deployment of communications and information systems for largeclients, has become a major source of revenue for many equipment vendors. in recentyears, an important service has been to implement network capabilities across companiesõ existing computer systems. in some cases, networking has focused on providinginternet access for employees and customers; in others, the focus has been on thedevelopment of internal networks linking production and distribution facilities acrossthe company. so far, neither academic nor industrial research has addressed theproblems of service delivery in a structured and sustained manner.innovation systemmost innovations are incremental improvements, such as design refinements,improvements in technology and manufacturing processes, a better understanding ofcustomer needs, and integration of previously separate products. for example, important performance metrics for communications equipment include low power and highdensity (so that many circuits can be accommodated in the confined spaces of wiringthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry35closets, boxes mounted on telephone poles, and even central switching offices). bothpower and density can be improved by advances in integratedcircuit technologies,which in turn, derive primarily from incremental improvements in fabrication equipment, processing steps, and materials. research results may be the basis for some ofthese improvements, and research has achieved major breakthroughs in these areas;this research is performed or funded by materials, equipment, and microchip fabricators, not by the telecommunications equipment manufacturers (see box 21).box 21the cellular telephonethe rapid spread of cellular telephones probably epitomizes the popular conception of innovation. the use of cellular telephony started out slowly but thenexploded. there were 11 million subscribers in 1992 and 141 million in 2001. thelook, feel, and weight of cell phones have also evolved rapidly.although the original cellular concept was developed at at&t bell laboratories in 1946, cellular technology was not the outgrowth of fundamental research onradiofrequency propagation and control. rather, it was the result of demanddriven technological improvements developed by corporate researchers, primarilyat bell laboratories and motorola. the long delay from the initial idea to deployment was principally the result of regulatory and business decisions that deemphasized the development of cellular technologies. only a few systems, suchas improved mobile telephone service, were deployed at all (in 1964). because ofthe delay, developers benefited from the microelectronics revolution and were ableto use inexpensive microprocessors and integrated circuits to make equipmentcheaper, lighter, and less power hungry.until recently, cellular telephony in the united states was dominated by theadvanced mobile phone service (amps) analog standard developed in the early1970s. the switch to digital transmission occurred more rapidly in europe, withthe gsm (global system for mobile communication) standard, which uses timedivision multiple access. a competing digital scheme that relies on spreadspectrum technology (cdmañcode division multiple access) was developed as aproprietary standard by qualcomm. in march 1999, the firms competing overcdma intellectual property and products agreed to support a single worldwidestandard to promote widespread adoption. personal communications systemsservices in the united states use these techniques in a new, larger frequencyband. many cellular telephones contain electronics that will work with more thanone of these standards and thus can operate in many areas around the world.academic research has played only a small role in the development of theseinnovations. until the telephone industry was deregulated, using public funds tocompete with bell laboratories research was considered pointless. moreover,bell laboratories did not fund academic research in this area; instead they recruited graduates of broad science and engineering programs and trained them inspecialized research areas on the job. after the breakup of the bell system, newfirms entered the telecommunications arena, demand for engineers trained in cellular technologies grew, and academia began to respond. today, considerableacademic research is being done in these technologies.source: ctia, 2003; qualcomm corporation, 1999; roessner et al., 1998.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36the impact of academic research on industrial performancefor many businesses, vendors of materials, products, and services throughoutthe supply chain are major sources of innovation. buying an integratedcircuit chip,for example, implicitly buys a share of the dramatic improvements in price andperformance of integrated circuits (mooreõs law).1 over time, innovations willmake the chip faster or cheaper or more capable. a telecommunications carrier thatwants to deploy synchronous optical network (sonet), a transmission protocolthat defines optical carrier levels and their electrically equivalent synchronoustransport signals, can purchase switches, multiplexers, and test equipment from thevendors who developed sonet technology. this pattern is a direct consequenceof the òhorizontaló structure of the industry. dell computer, for example, does nothave inhouse r&d; in effect, dell is a broker that negotiates attractive deals to buycomponents and computerassembly services for its buildacomputertoorder business. dell depends on r&d investments by its vendors, especially intel andmicrosoft, that make the microprocessors and operating system software on whichthe personal computer business depends. dellõs innovations have been in its business model and supplychain management, not in its technology.innovation can also be purchased by acquiring other companies, especiallyventurecapitalbacked startup companies that have introduced new productswith new technologies. a startup company is a new business, often with aninnovative technology but with considerable risk. often the innovative technology has its origins in academic research. if the company makes good progress,both in technology and in the market (e.g., beta testing, or success in getting itsapproach adopted by standards consortia), it becomes an attractive target for alarger company seeking to strengthen its technology or product line. for example, texas instruments bought amati; fore systems bought berkeley networks and marconi bought fore systems; cisco bought granite systems; andbroadcom bought epigram. each of the acquired companies had ventured into anew technical area. epigram, for example, had devised a way to use home telephone wiring to transmit 10mb ethernet traffic and had made progress in standardizing the scheme through the home phoneline networking alliance.broadcom, itself an innovative fabless chip company specializing in integratinganalog and digital functions of cable and twistedwire modems, saw buyingepigram as a natural way to enhance its core business.although hightech startups seldom do research in the classic sense, manybehave much like òapplied researchó projects in an industrial laboratory. theyformulate technically aggressive plans based on established principles to pursueand evaluate; the results of experiments often inform several products. for example, transwitch attempted to increase the telecommunications protocol processing integrated on a single chip, as well as to partition the chip functions into anòarchitectureó so that a small number of chip designs could be used to build a widevariety of telecommunications products. both amati and epigram conceived waysof using advanced signalprocessing techniques to adapt digital transmission to thecharacteristics of realworld, twistedpair copper wires (amati) or inhousethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry37telephone wiring (epigram). the technologydevelopment activities of these companies are much like those in industrial research, but they are done in a commercialsetting and with strong incentives to bring innovations to market rapidly.industrial research is concentrated in the laboratories of a few of the largestcompanies, such as intel, microsoft, ibm, compaq, lucent, at&t, hewlettpackard, sun microsystems, and xerox. although many of these firms invest 10 to15 percent or more of revenues in r&d each year, the vast majority of this is foròdevelopment,ó that is, for the engineering of the next generation of products.research focused on objectives more than 18 months or one or two product cyclesout is estimated to be, at most, 5 percent of that 10 to 15 percent, or far less than1 percent of revenue.2 a few large companies eschew research, preferring insteadto buy innovative companies (e.g., cisco). companies in the services sector, however, generally do not engage in or support research. for example, at mci, which isgenerally considered a technology leader, the advanced technology group is primarily concerned with testing new equipment and working with vendors to solveinteroperability and operation, administration, and management problems.industry research is usually driven by market needs but often includes somefundamental or longrange projects as well. for example, ibmõs research on theinternet and electronic commerce includes some longterm work on cryptographicsystems for security and authentication. industrial research often links advancedtechnologies to emerging product needs. for example, as the java programminglanguage became popular, industry laboratories at sun, ibm, and elsewherelaunched projects to devise advanced techniques for the compilation, synchronization, and code simplification required for its implementation. previous researchresults in these areas had not adequately addressed the needs of the java language, of todayõs large memories, or of multiprocessor servers. some of thisresearch is fundamental in the sense that it can be applied to problems other thanjava language implementations. in fact, even though research in engineeringfields is usually targeted toward meeting specific engineering needs, the resultsare often useful for many other applications.one of the companiesõ aims in operating research laboratories is to expandtheir capability for bringing in new ideas and new people (cohen and levinthal,1990). the laboratory is expected to recruit people who cannot be recruited by anengineering organization; it is also expected to interact with the intellectualcommunity by attending conferences, publishing papers, collaborating with universities, or entering partnerships with other companies; and it is intended tocounteract the risk inherent in the narrow focus of engineering projects on product development.a culture of innovationinnovation in the network systems and communications industry can takemany paths. even when research plays an essential role, there is no linear paththe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38the impact of academic research on industrial performancelansrings, hubnetethernet, datakit, autonetlans, switched ethernetgraphical user interfaces workstationsgraphicssketchpad, utahgm/ibm, xerox, microsofte&s, sgi, ati, adobelisp machine, stanfordxerox altoxerox star, apollo, sunengelbart / rochesteralto, smalltalkstar, mac, microsofttimesharingctss, multics / bsdunixsds 940, 360/67, vmsinternetarpanet, aloha, internetpupdecnet, tcp/iprisc processorsberkeley, stanfordibm 801sun, sgi, ibm, hpvlsi designberkeley, caltech, mosismany1965197019751980198519901995200519651970197519801985199019952005client/server computingberkeley, cmu, cernparc, dec, ibmnovell, emc, sun, oracleentertainmentspacewar (mit), trek (rochester)atari, nintendo, sgi, pixaruniversityindustry r&dproducts$1 bil. marketto world wide webfigure 21examples of academic governmentsponsored (and some industrysponsored) it research and development in the creation of commercial products andindustries. source: nrc, 2003.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry39raid /disk serversrelational databasesberkeley, wisconsinibmoracle, ibm, sybaseberkeleystriping/datamesh, petalmany19651970197519801985199019952005world wide webalta vistanetscape, yahoo, google19651970197519801985199019952005speech recognitioncmu, sri, mitbell, ibm, dragondragon, ibmbroadband l in last milebellcore (telcordia)amati, alcatel, broadcomstanford, uclaportable communicationlinkabit, hughesqualcommberkeley, purdue (cdma)parallel databasestokyo, wisconsin, uclaibm, iclicl, teradata, tandemparallel computingilliac 4, cmu, caltech, hpcibm, intelcm5, teradata, cray t3ddata miningwisconsin, stanfordibm, arboriri, arbor, platocern, illinois (mosaic)from internetuniversityindustry r&dproducts$1 bil. marketthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40the impact of academic research on industrial performancefrom a research result to advanced development to product development to economic return. ideas and people tend to bounce around; new ideas can be stymied bypolitical or business impediments and forced to take alternative routes. the industry does not have a few mechanisms for creating and exploiting innovations. instead, it enjoys what has been called a ònational research cultureó that fostersinnovation (lazowska, 1998). some of the features of that culture are described below.a 1995 report of the national research council computer science andtelecommunications board documents the effect of the research culture in thecomputer and highperformance computing arenas (nrc, 1995). a more recentreport (nrc, 2003), documents how technologies are born (often in academia),are taken up and extended by other academic or industrial groups, become theseeds of startup companies or new products in larger companies, as well as howthe market for the technology grows and matures (figure 21). all paths tomarket are erratic, and often take 15 years. the diversity in the academic andindustrial sectors lends robustness to the process: a good idea is very hard tocompletely eradicate. among the findings of that report are:¥research has kept paying off over a long period.¥the payoff from research takes time. at least 10 years, more often 15,elapse between initial research on a major new idea and commercialsuccess. this is still true in spite of todayõs shorter product cycles.¥unexpected results are often the most important. electronic mail and theòwindowsó interface are only two examples.¥research stimulates communication and interaction. ideas flow back andforth between research programs and development efforts and betweenacademia and industry.¥research trains people, who start companies or form a pool of trainedpersonnel that existing companies can draw on to enter new markets quickly.¥doing research involves taking risks. not all public research programshave succeeded or led to clear outcomes even after many years. but therecord of accomplishments suggests that government investment in computing and communications research has been very productive.mobility of ideasas figure 21 suggests, the number and types of research structures amonguniversities and industry provide a kind of redundancy; an idea that cannot advance in one environment may flourish in another. as an example, the path ofreduced instruction set computing (risc) started out with john cockeõs ibm801, developed at ibm research. although the ideas were countercultural andthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry41did not have a great impact at ibm, they spawned two research projects, one atberkeley and one at stanford, to explore them further. both university projectsresulted in prototype processor designs. the stanford project formed the nucleusof a startup companyñmips computerñto build risc microprocessors. theberkeley project led to an advanced development project at sun microsystems todevelop its sparc instruction set. both led to commercially successful products.moreover, publication of the work in professional journals rapidly spread awareness of the technology. a related example occurred in the evolution of relationaldatabases. a researcher at ibm, ted codd, developed an idea that found littleencouragement at ibm, whose products at the time used a competing databasetechnology. nevertheless, codd was able to seed academic work at berkeley thatenlarged the interested community and eventually led to two startup companies,ingres and oracle, and a huge industry (nrc, 1999). both processor and database technologies were later embraced by ibm.table 22 shows one way that ideas can move between academia andindustry. a key idea of this sketch is the òdemocratizationó phase, in which atiny research community is deliberately enlarged into a community with acritical mass of researchers exchanging ideas, building prototypes, and teaching others. this step was clearly discernible in the histories of both risc andrelational databases, and was, perhaps, the key step in the spread of very largescale integration design techniques that carver mead and lynn conway developed in the late 1970s. democratization in that case involved writing a textbook, teaching teachers, and starting courses in a halfdozen graduatedepartments to spread the ideas. these efforts resulted in a selfsustainingresearch community that built computeraided design software, built a shortrun chip fabrication system (mosis), designed a number of novel chip architectures, and trained hundreds of students in the art of integratedcircuit designand computer architecture.table 22 how ideas can move between academia and industryuniversityindustry/government1.theoretical result2.student graduates to industry laboratorythat encourages individual researchersand builds a basic prototype.3.democratization phase, in which manypeople work on the idea (e.g., risc)4.advanced development leads to acommercially successful product in asmall but significant market.5.academics study the details and fill in6.market explodes. industrial researchthe gaps [lots of difficult research here]advances technologies.source: tennenhouse, 1998.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42the impact of academic research on industrial performancemobility of peoplepeople often move on to new challenges, sometimes taking with them innovative ideas. the industry asserts, òtechnology transfer is a contact sport,ó thatideas transfer best when people carry them. universities are, of course, a primarysource of people, graduate and undergraduate students, many of whom have hadresearch experience. university graduates with research experience are very valuable to industry, not only as staff for its research functions, but also as technicalleaders in product development organizations. curious people with broad technical knowledge who are trained in solving technical problems through research areextremely valuable in todayõs product engineering groups.people with ideas often feel impelled to find a receptive environment, and inthe 1990s startup companies were a powerful attraction. university graduatessometimes embarked immediately on a startup company, based on ideas formulated or prototyped while they were students. faculty members often took leaveto start companies or to consult with companies that embraced their new ideas. infact, departing faculty members and students left some academic computer science departments with large gaps in their curricula and research programs, especially systems and networks programs (morris, 1998).3 the lures are not onlyfinancial. many students who would otherwise go to graduate school complainthat academic research is sterile and irrelevant; they prefer to actually do engineering, to build a product that will change the world.the mobility of people includes flow from industry to academia. for instance, in a 2001 survey, many computer science programs reported record numbers of applicants for doctoral programs, attributable to the demise of manyinternet startups (bryant and vardi, 2002). anecdotal evidence also suggeststhat many industry researchers have found places in universities as industrialresearch spending has declined at telecommunications and computer hardwarecompanies. their knowledge and industrial experience can provide valuable insight for academic research.open structuresthe structure of the network systems and communications industry promotescertain kinds of innovation. when components have well defined interfaces,innovators can offer improved components with the same interfaces, so theyremain compatible with their predecessors. thus, there is a readymade marketfor the new product. moreover, some interfaces are specifically designed to accommodate innovation. for example, the òoperating system interfaceó invitesapplication programmers to write innovative applications by eliminating the needto deal with a myriad of details of hardware control. standards for communications and network protocols (interfaces) allow innovative products to interoperatewith or supplant predecessors.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry43an òopenó interface by definition is an interface controlled by a consensus ofthe interested parties. formal standards, for example, are open, and the industryhas many industry consortia that develop and maintain open standards (e.g.,ietf, x/open, omg). open interfaces promote innovation by providing innovators with a dependable, stable interface for new products. the success of thederegulation of telecommunications services depends on standard interfaces. forexample, a compatible local exchange carrier must be able to connect intothe networks of other local exchanges and longdistance carriers with predictable interfaces.softwaresoftware is the universal building material of network systems and communications products and services, and the importance of software as an enabler ofinnovation cannot be overemphasized. the vital functions of many products andservices are controlled by software. many innovations are merely software improvements, but dramatic innovations sometimes come from relatively simple software. for example, the world wide web is essentially a set of common standardsapplied to a preexisting internet communications infrastructure enabled by browsersoftware. another example is an easy change in software to use a digital compression algorithm to increase the effective speed of a modem; this change was basedon digital signal processors becoming fast enough to implement a highspeed modem in software alone. an encryption feature could also be added easily.software coupled with telecommunications has another virtueñupdated software can be distributed rapidly to customers over a network. whether the newversion fixes a bug or introduces a new feature, customers can easily upgradetheir equipment, and new software systems are frequently introduced by allowingfree downloads over the network (e.g., the netscape browser, media players). bydistributing software widely at zero or low cost, firms count on network effects togenerate even broader use and to build a strong market base for their products.4software can be customized to meet the special needs of individual customers. although many vendors do not offer variants because of the expense oftesting and maintaining separate versions for separate customers, òopen sourcesoftware,ó makes the source code available to customers allowing them to innovate independently. although some large pieces of software (e.g., the linuxoperating system and gnu software tools) are available in open source, it is toosoon to tell whether open source software will become a significant pattern inthe industry.multiplier effect of infrastructureinfrastructure is critical to the advancement of network systems and communications technologies. at any given time, the installed networking andthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44the impact of academic research on industrial performancecomputing facilities are the substrate upon which further innovations are developed and introduced. the innovations may, in turn, lead to pressure to enhancethe infrastructure, thus initiating a new cycle. the early arpanet is an example;the need to connect arpanet to other networks led to internetworking protocols, most notably the transmission control protocol and internet protocol(tcp/ip) (cerf and kahn, 1974). the demand for connections led to highertransmission speeds, faster routers, and routing protocols that could be scaled toa larger network. the larger network and its protocols and naming conventions,in turn, provided the nearuniversal connectivity that led to the creation of theworld wide web. the growth of the web increased the demand on the capacityand scale of the network, and today, the infrastructure is being challengedto carry traffic with realtime requirements, such as voip (voice over ip)and video.advances in network infrastructure have been a key to fostering innovation.the federal government made the initial investments in arpanet and nsfnet.as the network expanded to nonacademic customers, regional network consortiabuilt up the network. today, service revenues support the network, but the federalgovernment continues to support experiments that may lead to significant improvements in performance (internet2). a similar pattern of infrastructure investment occurred in academic computing facilities. when workstations were firstintroduced, the national science foundation (nsf) helped equip academic research centers with the new technology, which served as a substrate for academicresearch in networking and interactive computing. subsequently, parallel computers were provided to encourage research on software tools for writing highperformance parallel computing applications.intellectual propertyin addition to patents, the industry also issues many licenses and crosslicenses. no company has a dominant position in the industry based on intellectual property (in contrast to the way xerox dominated the copier industry whenits basic xerography patents were still in force). patents covering interfacesñwhether computer buses or communications protocolsñmust be licensed widelybecause interfaces must be open to be widely used. therefore, to receive theirendorsement, most standards bodies require that patents covering standards belicensed liberally.size of the research investmentgovernment fundingthe federal government has provided major support for university computing and networking facilities. the defense advanced research projects agencythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry45(darpa) and nsf were particularly active in the development and growth ofthe internet and continue to provide the bulk of support for new initiatives innetworking research and infrastructure. federal funding for research in computer science increased from $129 million in 1980 to $1.5 billion in 1999 (nsf,2001). in 1999, roughly 33 percent of this funding was provided to universitiesñthe rest went to industry and government agencies; more than 75 percentof funding for basic research went to universities. in electrical engineering, ofwhich communications is a subset, federal funding for research remained basically flat throughout the 1980s and 1990s, peaking at $881 million in 1993 andretreating to $699 million in 1999 (nsf, 2001). the share of total funding forelectrical engineering research that went to universities rose, however, from10 percent to 27 percent during this period. the two federal agencies thatsupport research in computing and communications are the u.s. department ofdefense (dod) and nsf, in that order.federal funds support roughly twothirds of university research in computerscience and electrical engineering. some of this funding is used to support theacquisition of research equipment and to support graduate students. the numberof graduate degrees in electrical engineering and computer science increasedrapidly through the 1980s and the 1990s; the number of masterõs degrees awardedmore than doubled; 925 doctoral degrees in computer science and 1,596 in electrical engineering were awarded in 1998 (hill, 2001). the proportion of nonresident aliens in total doctoral degree enrollments in computer science and computerengineering has risen steadily since 1945, up to 55 percent in 2001. interestingly,data from the most recent taulbee survey indicate that only 17 percent of newfaculty are nonresident aliens; proportionately fewer foreign students take positions at u.s. universities (bryant and vardi, 2002).industry fundingcomputerrelated industries tend to be r&d intensive. firms in this sectorspend a greater percentage of sales revenues on r&d than any other industryexcept medical devices and pharmaceuticals. in computerrelated industries,roughly 10 to 20 percent of corporate r&d funds are spent on research (ratherthan development). according to a 1999 report by the national research council, òsuch expenditures tend to derive from, and result in, the fast pace of innovation characteristic of the fieldó (nrc, 1999). although the volume of r&dinvestment in computerrelated industries has kept pace with the growth of business over the past decade, the r&d spending of the telecommunications component of the network systems and communications sector has contracted in thewake of at&tõs divestiture, deregulation, and most recently, deep recession inthe telecommunications industry.although the amount of industry support for university research in networksystems and communications is not known, overall industry support for researchthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46the impact of academic research on industrial performancein science and engineering in universities represents about 7 percent of the totaluniversities receive. the percentage is higher, perhaps as high as 15 to 20 percent, in engineering; support varies by the rank and reputation of the universityprogram (morgan and strickland, 2000). for the most part, computerrelatedindustries have tended to draw on academic research more extensively than thetelecommunications industry.some of the largest firms in information technology provide significant support for university research. ibm currently spends several hundred million dollars per year for research at universities. support for university research providesibm with access to activities at universities and contact with potential futureemployees. microsoft has established a large research organization that emphasizes fundamental research. it too has established research collaboration with anumber of universities, including southern california, utah, yale, and westvirginia university. other firms have established relationships with a small number of universities. one example is the at&t center for internet research atucberkeley that was funded by at&t in 1998 for three years. another example is intel corporation, which has established research sites at the universityof california at berkeley, carnegie mellon university, and the university ofwashington among others (http://www.intelresearch.net/).some research organizations require or encourage both industry and government funding. nsf supports universitybased engineering research centers andscience and technology centers that must have industry contributions to supplement government funding. initiatives like internet2 and next generation internet,which are funded principally by government, solicit industry support.contributions of academic researchacademic research has made essential contributions to the network systemsand communications industry. the special strengths of universities are reflectedin the ways they have contributed to the industry:¥human capital. undergraduates and graduate students educated in universities have become key players in industry as individual researchers, development engineers, technical leaders, and entrepreneurs. research experience in universities is highly valued by industry even for nonresearchemployees. as students and faculty flow to industry and startup companies, they provide an effective form of òtechnology transfer.ó¥longterm fundamental research. with proper funding, academic research is able to work on longterm problems that may be ignored byindustry or may even be anathema to dominant industry businesses, technologies, regulations, or prejudices.¥intellectual diversity. academia provides an open setting that can engage colleagues in various disciplines and industries; the results arethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry47reported in the open literature. concurrent research projects and different approaches provide a kind of redundancy and expand the community of researchers on promising topics. shared artifacts of experimentalresearch, especially software, are an important way to disseminate research results.¥collaboration with industry. direct collaboration between industry andacademia, both on specific projects and in longer term relationships, hasproduced significant contributions to network systems and communications. there are many collaborative structures but no dominant or òbestócollaboration scheme.¥test beds. university laboratories can serve as test beds for new technologies. most of the early participants in the arpanet, for example,were universities, which played an important role in testing and refiningthe technology. the pattern has continued with the gigabit testbed,vbns, and other networks, such as a campuswide wireless network atcarnegie mellon university.¥nuclei for startup companies. university research can lead to technologies and people that become the seeds of new businesses.examples are google and yahoo, both spinoffs of research at stanford university.at an october 1998 nae workshop to collect information and exchangeideas for this study, the participants came to the following conclusions: (1) thenetwork systems and communications sector has benefited greatly from a national research culture in which individuals move frequently between academiaand industry, thereby increasing their knowledge of both and their contributionsto both; (2) personal relationships are crucial; and (3) universities not only invigorate the research culture with fresh students each year, but they also houseopen research projects that anchor technical disciplines.human capitalindustry looks to universities to educate and train students who will staffindustry r&d projects. industry considers human capital to be the most important product of universitiesñeven more important than new knowledge capturedin research results. the question of whether industry wants students with a broadtechnical education or with training in specific skills, such as programming in agiven computer language or the operation of a certain kind of computer or communication device, is answered differently by different businesses. larger companies tend to prefer broadly educated candidates who can learn skills quickly onthe job. smaller companies that do not have people to serve as mentors andtrainers prefer trained candidates.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48the impact of academic research on industrial performancetraining in research is extremely important to innovation, even if an individual does not continue to do research. industry considers research experiencevaluable because it demonstrates the abilities necessary for any technical endeavor: selfmotivation, problem solving, teamwork, knowledge of related research, contact with other researchers and colleagues, the ability to organize anamorphous problem, and the perseverance to overcome setbacks. graduates withadvanced degrees have already shown greater than average ability; and researchtraining is considered evidence that an individual can tackle difficult technicalproblems, such as designing and building complex systems.students of electrical engineering and computer science have typicallybeen in great demand, not only by companies in the network systems andcommunications sector, but also by other companies trying to modernize theirinformation technology. the bureau of labor statistics estimates that almost4 million informationtechnology workers will be needed by 2010, comparedwith 1.9 million in 2000 (bureau of labor statistics, 2001). if this projectionremains accurate, the current rate of graduation in u.s. universitiesñapproximately 27,600 undergraduates and 900 ph.d.s in computer science per yearñwill not bridge the gap (hill, 2001). students and faculty who participate instartup companies are important to the culture of innovation. a significantnumber of network systems and communications businesses have been foundedby students straight from universities or by faculty, who either take a leave ofabsence or leave permanently. these companies are often formed to exploit atechnology developed in the university. one of the bestknown examples is sunmicrosystems, which began as a startup company to commercialize a computer workstation designed at stanford and unix software originally conceivedand developed at bell laboratories by thompson and ritchie then furtherdeveloped by bill joy at ucberkeley. in the summer of 1998, six (out of 60)members of the electrical engineering faculty were on leave from stanforduniversity to work with startup companies. faculty members who return to theuniversity report that their research has been stimulated greatly by their experience. a founder of granite systems, for example, said that he now has a farbetter sense of what it takes to produce a product, as well as the state of theindustry (d. cheriton, stanford university, personal communication, september 8, 1998).a report by bankboston on the impact of a research university concludedwith the following statement: òif the companies founded by mit graduates andfaculty formed an independent nation, the revenues produced by the companieswould make that nation the 24th largest economy in the world. the 4,000 mitrelated companies employ 1.1 million people and have annual world sales of$232 billionó (bankboston, 1997). mitrelated firms are especially prominent inelectronics and software. more than half of the companies founded by mitgraduates were founded by graduates in electrical engineering (which at mitincludes computer science).the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry49research in engineering and computer scienceuniversity research in electrical engineering and computer science has madesignificant contributions to the network systems and communications industry. insome cases, academic research projects have been essential to the creation ofbilliondollar businesses (see figure 21 for some examples).academic research has also built a foundation of techniques and analysistools that are widely used as enabling tools by the industry. these include techniques for the optimization of computer programs, for the automatic design ofintegratedcircuit chips, and for the verification of bus specifications. these techniques are not dramatic developments that spawned businesses, but they havebeen important to the industry as a whole. the digital cryptographic techniqueswidely used today to ensure privacy and authentication in electronic commerceand related applications were invented in academia (nrc, 1996). the development of objectoriented programming, from the first step (simula 67) to the mostrecent form (java), took 30 years. most of the research was necessarily conductedin academia, because industry typically does not invest in risky research thatoffers only longterm prospects for payoff.the two case studies below illustrate how academic research has contributedto the network systems and communications sector: (1) the internet, which showsa 30year trajectory of academic and industrial r&d to build a revolutionarycommunications technology; and (2) research in signal processing that led toa startup company, amati communications, that successfully exploitedthe technology.case study: the internetacademic research played a key role in the development of internetworking,the connection of disparate networks into a worldwide, scalable, packetswitchednetwork. the internet, which now connects more than 100 million people andcomputers, was the direct result of governmentfunded research begun in the late1960s to link different kinds of academic research computers. although industrywas essential to the scaling of the internet and the development of services, theearly technical development depended almost entirely on university research (fora more detailed case study, see sri international, 1997; for a brief chronology,see box 22). the arpa funded research, development, and deployment of thisrevolutionary packetswitching technology, because the telecommunications industry showed no interest in participating.the story begins with the arpanet, which was initiated by darpa in thelate 1960s as a way to share access to expensive or specialpurpose researchcomputers around the country. precursor ideas for packetswitching networkshad been developed at mit and ucla, but paul baran is credited with discovering packet switching while at the rand corporation in the early 1960s. donalddavies, a researcher at the u.k.õs national physical laboratory independentlythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50the impact of academic research on industrial performancediscovered the idea of packet switching in 1965, deciding upon some of the sameparameters for his network design as baran, such as a packet size of 1024 bits.arpa built an early network by contracting with bolt, beranek, and newman tobuild packet switches (imps) at research computers at about a dozen universities.in addition, academic research projects were initiated to develop protocols bywhich different types of computers could communicate, to outfit the computerswith suitable hardware and software interfaces to the network, and to measure theperformance of the operating network. similar networks were also developed,such as a network using satellite or radiotransmission links to connect thepacket switches.early protocol experiments, together with the clear need for interconnectingthe various kinds of networks being developed, pointed to a need foròinternetworking.ó the key idea is the internet datagram, a universal way offormatting network packets, together with associated protocols (tcp/ip), introduced in a paper by cerf and kahn (1974) while cerf was a member of thestanford faculty. this paper provided the first definition of internet architectureand led to implementations and experiments at several universities. with thetcp/ip implementation developed in òberkeley unixó software (at the university of california at berkeley) and released in the late 1970s, it was easy toconnect academic research computers to the network. ad hoc committees ofacademic researchers refined the tcp/ip protocol standards, including application protocols.in the late 1970s, academic computer science research centers not served bythe arpanet banded together to form csnet, also using the tcp/ip protocol. inbox 22chronology of the internet development1969darpa commissions arpanet to promote networking research.1974vinton cerf and robert kahn publish a paper specifying the tcp/ipprotocol for data networks.1981nsf provides seed money for csnet (computer science network) toconnect u.s. computer science departments.1982darpa establishes the tcp/ip protocol as standard.1984the number of hosts (computers) connected to the internet exceeds 1,000.1986nsfnet and five nsffunded supercomputer centers are created. nsfnetbackbone operates at 56 kb/s.1989number of hosts exceeds 100,000.1991nsf lifts restrictions on commercial use of the internet. world wide websoftware is released by cern, the european laboratory for particle physics.1993mosaic browser developed at nsffunded national center for supercomputer applications at the university of illinois is released.1995u.s. internet traffic is carried by commercial internet service providers.1996number of internet hosts reaches 12.8 million.source: sri international, 1997.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry511983, the new network was linked to the arpanet, an event that could be calledthe birth of the internet. subsequently, the network continued to grow, and thedemand for connections increased. in 1986, with the creation of nsfnet, theresponsibility for the principal òbackboneó of the nationwide network shiftedfrom darpa to nsf. the network could be used only for research and education, and academics continued to play a major role in network governanceand engineering.with the emergence of the world wide web, the internet was no longer onlyfor research and education but became a worldwide network connecting businesses and consumers, as well as researchers. the idea of browsing text documents obtained in a uniform way from any machine connected to the internet wasdeveloped in 1991 by tim bernerslee, then at the cern nuclear researchfacility in geneva, switzerland. documents on the web may contain òhyperlinksóto other documents, thus linking documents into a complex òweb.ó marcandreesen and other researchers at the university of illinois later extended theweb to include pictures and other types of data. they also built a graphicallyoriented browser, called mosaic, that allows users to òclickó to follow a hyperlink,thus opening browsing to a wide range of people. jim clark recruited andreesento cofound netscape communications, which developed netscapeõs navigatorbrowser product based on mosaic. microsoft soon developed a competing product, internet explorer. the combination of pictures, ease of use, and supportedproducts enabled the web to grow with astonishing speed. it quickly developedinto a mechanism for publishing, for finding information, and for transactingbusiness electronically.as more computers were connected to the network, the bandwidth andswitching capacity had to be expanded. darpa and nsf, with university andindustry support, organized a series of test beds to explore highspeed networkingtechnologies and test emerging products and protocols. between 1990 and 1994,nsf and darpa funded the gigabit testbed initiative, a universityindustrygovernment effort to explore networking technologies at speeds of 155 mb/s andhigher; one of these test beds achieved longhaul transmission at 800 mb/s. nsfoperated the vbns network (very highspeed backbone service) in conjunctionwith mci to link more than 75 universities in a network with backbone speeds of622 mb/s to 2.4 gb/s and access links of 43 mb/s to 155 mb/s until the vbnsnetwork was terminated in april 2000. the participants explored new applications of advanced communication bandwidth and protocols, as well as operational and governance issues. universities are presently engaged in a new roundof infrastructure enhancement, internet2, designed to meet a full range of academic research needs.as the internet expanded, commercial businesses and services grew up alongside government and academic operations. new companies were started to sellpacket switches (routers), application software, authoring tools, and networkservices. the leaders were not the telecommunication companies, but startupthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52the impact of academic research on industrial performancecompanies, such as cisco and netscape, using technologies developed in universities. network service providers emerged as regional networks (e.g., nearnet,barrnet) and were encouraged to connect to the national backbone operated aspart of nsfnet. international connections were also developed. as the internetgrew, major telecommunications companies began to offer internet service aswell. in the united states today, businesses and residents in most densely populated areas have a choice of several internet connection methods and service providers.the governance and engineering of the internet are unique: a governing body(the internet activities board) and engineering standards organization (internetengineering task force) consist of volunteers from internet participants. at first,committees of academics and the few government contractors that were buildingand operating the network set protocol and other engineering standards. today,these committees have broad participation from academia, industry, and nonprofit organizations.academic contributionsan sri study commissioned to analyze the nature of the research that contributed to the internet described the contribution of academic research in somedetail (sri international, 1997):the internet appears, overall, to be primarily a problemdriven, technologybasedinnovation that required little direct input from fundamental research for its realization. the driving forces, interestingly, were not profit incentives in the privatemarket, but public goods, first in the realm of national defense and subsequentlyin the university and government research infrastructure, as a means of fosteringcommunication among computer scientists. what we are calling the internetõsintrinsic technologiesñnetwork design, packet switching, routers, protocols,browsersñwere the products of problemdriven research conducted in universities and government contractor laboratories with government support. one possible exception is the research conducted at the university of illinoisõ ncsa[national center for supercomputer applications], which took place in an environment (according to andreesen) that enabled researchers to head off in directions that looked òinterestingó without seeking justification. nonetheless, the context was one of application, as suggested by the centerõs name. although theevolution of the internet did not encounter technical roadblocks that requiredfundamental research for their resolution before further progress could be made,there is obvious, fundamental research content in both the internetõs intrinsic andsupporting technologies. the electronic and physical infrastructures that comprisethe internet clearly depend on information theory, solidstate physics, electrooptics, and other fields on which modern communications technology is basedand for which nsf has provided substantial support.the sri study stresses the importance of government, industry, and universities in the development of the internet and points out that, as the focus ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry53technical and organizational innovation shifted from government to industry overa 30year period, universities played a constant supportive role. by following thecareer trajectories of some key individuals who moved among the three sectors,the sri study highlights the importance of networks of individuals and the importance of human capital. the study also cites the frequent opportunities forinteractions and linkages among the three sectors and the ease with which individuals can move across sectors in the united states as important factors tosuccess (sri international, 1997).the internet is an example of the major impact academic research can havein the creation of an entirely new technology. although the enormous impact ofthe internet is unusual, this case illustrates how government, academia, and industry can contribute to technologicalñand therefore economicñsuccess.case study: amati communicationsamati communications was founded in 1991 by stanford university professor john m. cioffi to commercialize technology for transmitting highspeed digital signals over copper telephone wires. the technology, named discrete multitone(dmt) modulation, was one of several technologies competing to be adopted asan industry standard. dmt is now an accepted standard for providing dsl (digital subscriber line) service and a commercial success.researchthe original work on dmt was conducted in 1987 by a research group atstanford directed by cioffi, who was then an assistant professor. cioffi usedfunds from an nsf presidential investigator award (1987ð1992), with matchingfunds from several companies, including bell communications research, to investigate asymmetric digital subscriber lines. the initial objective was to developreliable transmission of highquality digital movies over phone lines, which required speeds about 10 times faster than integrated service digital network (isdn)lines, the existing technology. later, the objective evolved to encompass highspeed internet access and other data applications. the researchers investigatedmany methods and focused on an old encoding technique called multitone transmission, in which separate frequency channels (tones) carry separate digital signals. a crude analogy would be sending several channels of morse code over atelephone line, with each channel using a different audible frequency (like theseven separate tones used in touchtone dialing). a receiver can split out theseparate tone frequencies and decode each morse sequence.the goal of cioffiõs research was to transmit data as fast as possible, whichwould require using many separate frequency bands and sophisticated signalingtechniques (not morse code!) in each band. this objective led cioffi and histeam to seek fundamental improvements in digital signal processing algorithmsthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54the impact of academic research on industrial performancethat could be applied to various channels. but the most important innovation wasthe adaptation of each band to the bandõs transmission characteristics. in effect,dmt measures the properties of signals transmitted over each band and thenallocates data accordingly. a band that attenuates signals less than another bandcarries more data. a band that introduces less noise than another also carriesmore data. dmt also measures and compensates for the transmission characteristics of each pair of copper wires. this complex scheme is practical because ofinexpensive digital signalprocessing hardware.some of the key innovations for dmt were patented while cioffiõs groupworked to refine, promote, and publish the method in ieee journals and atamerican national standards institute standards meetings. three of the patents,which are assigned to stanford, are still valuable and are licensed throughout thetelecommunications and data communications industry. at least one patent, onpioneering artificial intelligence techniques used in the adaptation, is considerednecessary to comply with any of the existing or emerging dmt standards. inaddition to patents, cioffi and his graduate students acquired valuable knowhowthat would benefit any company that attempted to use dmt.amati startup companyin 1991, after an unsuccessful search for corporate partners, cioffi foundedamati communications corporation with stanford university and a stanfordalumnus, mr. kim maxwell, who was the companyõs first ceo. amatiõs visionwas to òget dmt on every phone line in the world.ó to be successful, amati hadto make dmt an industry standard, which involved working with national andinternational standards organizations and competing with other technologies. onmarch 10, 1993, after competitive testing against several other technologies,including an alternative promoted by at&t, dmt technology was selectedunanimously as a u.s. standard.as part of stanfordõs contribution to the company, cioffi was given three yearsof leave (with 50 percent leave spread over two years to make up the third year). inexchange for an exclusive licensing and sublicensing privilege on the dmt patents,stanford received stock and a promise of royalties. in 1997ð1998, stanford received $7.9 million when it liquidated its holdings in amati; royalties totaled morethan $8 million in 2001 (stanford university corporate guide, 2001).between 1991 and 1998, amati employed several of cioffiõs graduate students, at least four of whom were directly involved in the stanford research andhad considerable knowledge of dmt. stanfordõs then dean of engineering, jimgibbons, was chairman of amatiõs board of directors until 1998.amati went public late in 1995 and was a growth leader on the nasdaq forapproximately one year. in march 1998, texas instruments acquired amati andthe dmt license for approximately $450 million in cash. at the end of 2001,3.6 million residential dsl (digital subscriber lines) using dmt technology werethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry55installed in the united states, which was then projected to grow to 13.5 millionby 2005 (internetweek, 2001).academic research in economics, social sciences,management, design, and policyacademic research in a variety of nonengineering disciplines has also contributed to the network systems and communications sector. this research has focusedon how computers and communications systems fit into larger socioeconomic systems. examples include how information technology systems increase businessproductivity; the effects of email on people and organizations; how people use theinternet; the effect of the internet on family structures; the effect of prices oncommunications services; and the value of communication services to consumers.some of these studies have formulated and tested models to explain thebehavior of people and systems in operation. for example, the goms model ofperformance grounded in cognitive psychology (card et al., 1983) has been usedto design interactive interfaces. john anderson has built several successful computerized tutoring systems based on a detailed understanding of how peoplemodel specific subjects (e.g., geometry and algebra) and the errors in thesemodels. results of social psychology research on electronic communicationhave been used to improve training for new users, in effect teaching them aboutthe social norms and effects that spring from the technology.in some cases, the models only described what had been observed, but in a fewcases they were used to predict the behavior of future systems. for example,models can predict how well people will perform simple interactive computertasks. although models cannot predict whether one chat room or email system willbe more popular than another or the details of email usage, general principles canbe learned. for example, people are generally less inhibited when using an electronic communication medium than in facetoface interactions. observations suchas this can lead to a better understanding of network systems and communications,but they cannot be used as a guide to design. at a workshop held in connection withthis study, the consensus was that these research topics should be given moreattention, especially as the services provided by network systems and communications become more important and affect a greater portion of society.economics, policy, and regulationbecause communication systems have historically been operated as regulated monopolies, researchers in economics and policy were able to study themextensively. the work of one academic, alfred kahn of cornell university, wasused as a basis for the deregulation of several industries, including trucking,airlines, and communications (kahn, 1970, 1971). nevertheless, a great manyquestions about economics and policy remain to be answered (see box 23).the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56the impact of academic research on industrial performancebox 23contributions of economics and other social scienceresearch to the development of information technologyrole of regulation. economics research by alfred kahn (1970, 1971), pauljoskow, roger noll, and kip viscusi redefines the role of regulation from protecting the public interest to stepping in when markets fail to drive prices to marginalcosts. this redefinition has helped spur deregulation in a number of industries,including communications.network externalities. work by hal varian, paul david, brian arthur, garthsaloner, david shapiro, and others shows that the network industries and information industries are characterized by ònetwork externalitiesó that make the valueto a consumer of a particular product or service increase as more people use it.an example is an internet connection that becomes more valuable with the amountof information available and the number of people connected. this insight reinforces the importance of getting products and services to the marketplace quickly, pricing them low at first to establish markets, and then raising prices as moreunits are sold and their value grows.internet economics. research by mcknight and bailey (1997) and othersaddress the implications of the pricing of internetbased resources and services, such as the allocation of resources based on the willingness of usersto pay.group dynamics and decision making. research by sara kiesler, suzanneiaconno, wanda orlikowski, and others (e.g., siegel et al., 1986) on group dynamics and decision making in small electronic groups informs the design of groupdecisionsupport systems.diffusion of applications. research by m. lynne markus (1987) and othersexamine how critical mass predicts the diffusion of networked applications withinorganizations and informs the deployment decisions for information technology applications.distribution of the benefits of information technology. research by torabikson, lee sproull, and others demonstrates that peripheral members of socialsystems benefit more from using electronic communication than central members(e.g., sproull and kiesler, 1991) influencing policy decisions about subsidies foraccess to the internet.information sharing. research by paul attewell, tora bikson, sara kiesler,robert kraut, lee sproull, and others demonstrates how personal attributes andorganizational characteristics such as incentive systems influence peoplesõ use ofinformation technology for information sharing. research by julian orr (1990) andothers demonstrates that service technicians often have more useful technicalexpertise than system designers and share their knowledge in a community ofpractice. this work influenced the design of a communitybased troubleshootingdatabase at xerox corporation that has significantly improved service performance (bell et al., 1997).sources: sirbu, 1998; nrc, 2000.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry57the telecommunications policy research conference is an annual forum forscholars engaged in research on policyrelevant telecommunications and informationissues and publicsector and privatesector decision makers engaged in telecommunications and information policy. the wide range of topics at the 2002 conferencereflected the intense academic interest in telecommunications policy. topics included:comparative telecommunications policies in the united states and abroad; broadbanddeployment and uptake; spectrum management; computer and internet security; wireless communications standards; mergers and acquisition; intellectual property; basicresearch in telecommunications; mass media; and numerous other topics. universityresearchers presented the majority of research results at these sessions, reflecting theactive involvement of academic research.business and managementbusiness schools have long been concerned with how information technology can be exploited for the benefit of businesses (see box 24). for example,research on decisionsupport systems not only developed techniques for collecting and presenting relevant business data to management, but also compared thequality of decisions made with different kinds of supporting technology. therapid development of the internet has opened up new avenues for study, such assupplychain integration, which uses the network to connect a manufacturerõsprocessplanning system to the corresponding systems of its suppliers to ensure asmooth flow of the component parts required to fulfill orders. success will depend on solving problems related to information technology, network protocols,and control theory. electronic commerce will certainly face new problems thatmust be addressed.optimizing network design in network systems and communications businesses is a similar problem to the transportation problems studied by operationsresearch. in the early development of the arpanet, attention was focused onoptimization of network design. today, the emphasis is on techniques to expandnetworks to meet burgeoning demand.psychology and social sciencesresearch by psychologists and social scientists has focused on how people usecomputer and communication systems, the effects of these systems on people, howpeople interact with each other, and how they work in organizations. these studiesare retrospective, conducted after the technology has been deployed long enoughfor transient behaviors to abate. de sola poolõs classic book, the social impact ofthe telephone (1997), is a fine example. other examples are computers in classroom culture (schofield, 1995), connections (sproull and kiesler, 1991), thehomenet field trial of residential internet services (kraut et al., 1996), and thesecond self (turkle, 1984), a study of personal interactions with computers.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58the impact of academic research on industrial performanceresearch has also helped guide the design of computer and communicationsystems. the psychology of humancomputer interaction, a classic work bycard, moran, and newell (1983), showed how studies in cognitive psychologycould be used to estimate human performance when interacting with a computer.these and other performance studies have influenced the design of graphical userinterfaces. ethnographic studies of the behavior of boys and girls at play havebeen used to inform the designs of many products.box 24contributions of business research to the development ofinformation technologiescritical success factors. rockart (1981) identifies factors critical to the successof information systems in business settings. the author addresses the question ofwhich information is critical to the success of a business; the questions a databaseshould answer; and how information systems can be designed to support business objectives.decisionsupport systems. work by keen and scott morton (1978) promulgates the idea of using information systems to support corporate decision makingat a variety of levels.information technology and strategic management. research by earl (1988)stresses that it is not just for backoffice operations but contributes to a firmõscompetitive advantage. companies that deploy and employ information technology systems wisely can benefit in the marketplace.computersupported cooperative work. this research introduces the idea ofusing information technology to allow people to work cooperatively within and acrossorganizations, thereby overcoming differences in geography or time.productivity and information technology. productivity gains from investmentsin information technology have been hard to measure, but brynjolfsonõs (1991)analysis of firmlevel data (as opposed to industrylevel data) indicates that investments may have large payoffs, but not immediately. the author identifies factorsthat contribute to positive returns from investments and the characteristics of firmsthat do and do not experience increased productivity.software development methodologies. research by cusumano (1991) provides guidance on software development methodologies from the point of viewof management.process handbook. this repository of businessprocess knowledge developed bythe mit process handbook project (malone et al., 1999) can facilitate further research and help determine best practices for deploying information technology. theclassification and structure of the database itself is a powerful tool.source: based on malone, 1998.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry59design researchseveral universities have developed broad multidisciplinary programs aimedat harnessing developments in information technology to human needs. a leaderin this area, the mit media laboratory, brings together individuals from a broadspectrum of disciplines, including the humanities and fine arts, to conduct research and application development. for example, the news in the future projectexplored innovative ways to present the news to people using electronic media bytailoring content, presentation, and structure to the needs of the viewer. in addition to developing prototype applications, the laboratory often works on fundamental technologies, such as video compression or image understanding.mechanisms for universityindustry cooperationcollaborations between industry and academia raise some obvious questionsabout the kinds of organizations and mechanisms that work best. a questionnaireon the subject sent to 60 researchers for this study elicited a wide range ofresponses. for example, one respondent felt that òcenters which promote closeinteractions between academic researchers and knowledgeable industrial sponsors are probably a prerequisite for making progress.ó another mentioned severalcollaborative arrangements: joint research programs, like mitõs project athena;experimental test beds and university centers, like the nsfsupportedsupercomputing centers; and consortia. another respondent felt that òcentershave an indifferent record in communications . . . i doubt that such forms ofcollaboration will ever be a success.ó still others felt that the structure of theorganization didnõt make much difference as long as the participants understoodeach otherõs value systems.nsf has several programs to create universitybased, industryuniversityresearch centers and engineering research centers (ercs), both of which requireindustrial participation. the ercs, which are designed to integrate research andeducation, have generally received favorable reviews (parker, 1997). however,the telecommunications research center at columbia university, funded bynsf from 1985 through 1995, was the only erc established in the networksystems and communications area.the network systems and communications sector does not have an institution comparable to the semiconductor research corporation, an organizationthat provides industrial support for university research relevant to semiconductors, based on a 10year technology òroad mapó to help guide research fundingdecisions (bailey et al., 1998). although the establishment of a consortium ofnetwork systems and communications businesses has been discussed, nothing hascome of it so far. a consortium of computer storage peripheral companies, national storage industry consortium, has been established to support academicresearch through focused programs like optical storage. in addition, some firmsthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60the impact of academic research on industrial performancehave targeted their research support for a small number of universities; for example, in late 1998, at&t and the international computer science institute atucberkeley announced formation of the at&t center for internet research(acir), a multimilliondollar research center that at&t agreed to fund for atleast three years (at&t and international computer science institute, 1998).recently, intel has sited research operations at ucberkeley, carnegie mellonuniversity, and university of washington, all centers where researchers are intelemployees and university professors are engaged as laboratory directors andtechnical leaders (intel, 2003).the microelectronics innovation and computer research opportunities(micro) program in the university of california system is an example of a stategovernment effort to encourage universityindustry cooperation. the microprogram was established in 1981 by the state of california to support innovativeresearch in microelectronics technology, its applications in computer and information sciences, and its necessary antecedents in other physical science disciplines. the program is a partnership between industry and the state in which thestate supplements industry funds and waives overhead on university researchfunding. in 2001ð2002, 96 companies contributed approximately $6 million incash and equipment to fund 98 different projects (micro, 2002). in some cases,micro support has led to increased federal funding, as well as longterm partnerships between universities and industry. for instance, after an initial conceptphase, the raid (redundant arrays of inexpensive disks) project at ucberkeleyreceived micro support, which led to the creation of an industrial consortium in1988ð1990. the federal government became a research sponsor in 1990. by1996, raid was a $10 billion industry.in general, universityindustry collaborative arrangements in network systems have received mixed reviews. no structure has emerged as the òbest,ó norhas any scheme emerged that works robustly in different circumstances. it appears that strong personal leadership and a collaborative spirit between an academic researcher and his or her industrial counterpart are the elements essentialto success. the problem, of course, is that a good collaborative project canfounder if one key individual (e.g., the òchampionó in the firm) is transferred ormoves elsewhere.findings and recommendationsacademic research has made essential contributions to the network systemsand communications sector. although these contributionsñtrained researchers,new technologies, algorithms, and prototype systems; early operating experience;studies of social and economic effectsñcannot be quantified, they have undoubtedly had a substantial impact. in this industry, the academic ivory tower has beenheavily populated by entrepreneurial engineerresearchers.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry61findingsfinding 21. academic research has played and will continue to play an importantrole in the research culture of the network systems and communications industry.universityindustry collaborations are fostered by a vigorous research culture, and academic research has been crucial to the technical evolution of theindustry, especially in the development and deployment of the internet. to besure, the recent deep recession in the telecommunications sector, which has forcedsignificant reductions in corporate r&d budgets and manpower, has furtherdiminished the industrial research contributions of this important subsector of thenetwork systems and communications industryña trend begun with the breakupof the bell system and further deregulation. given the historical reliance of thetelecommunications sector on internal industrial research, changes may beneeded. if trends in industrial research persist, academic research in telecommunications will have to be increased. however, for the most part, the researchculture that supports the network systems and communications industry is functioning well and needs no major repairs.people are the key components of this research culture. collaboration between universities and industry often depend on sometimes fragile personal relationships that can be threatened if an industry researcher is reassigned or anacademic researcher goes off in a new direction. students, faculty, postdoctoralstudents, researchers with longterm visions, and researchers who focus on applied problems play different roles. contrary to popular opinion, universityindustry projects are not devoted exclusively to longterm basic research; teamsof faculty and students often address pragmatic, applied problems in close cooperation with industry.the flow of people from academia to industry and vice versa is essential tothe wellbeing of the industry and to academic research. the universityõs role offueling the research culture with trained students is unique, and training in research is extremely important for innovation, even if the researcher does notcontinue to perform research but becomes part of an academiclike cadre thatpursues innovations in industry (such as the groups awarded the association forcomputing machineryõs software system award).universities also have a very broad research culture, and network systemsand communications systems have increasingly drawn on the wide range of technologies and expertise available at research universities. electrical engineeringand computer science are, of course, central to the industry, but other areas, suchas cognitive science, social science, economics, and business modeling, are becoming increasingly important, especially as the importance of informationtechnologydelivered services increases. some research universities (e.g., ucberkeley, university of michigan, indiana university) have created informationcentered schools that focus on the social, political, and organizational contextof information.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62the impact of academic research on industrial performanceto participate in the research culture, a company must have a capacity toabsorb innovation, an industrial research laboratory, for example, that can absorbpeople and ideas from outside the firm and exploit them within the firm. despitethe trend in industry research toward applied problems, industry laboratorieshave so far retained this absorptive capacity. in the last 15 years, innovations inthe industry have focused on completing the digital revolution in telecommunications (e.g., new switching gear); new transmission protocols (e.g., sonet andasynchronous transfer mode), and transmission equipment; faster modems; therefinement and deployment of fiber optics; the refinement of ip protocols; andthe widespread deployment of the internet.the focus is now shifting toward innovative services, which requires anunderstanding of psychology, consumer behavior, social phenomena, and otherdisciplines that can inform the design and operation of new services. the explosive growth of the world wide web can be attributed to its social properties morethan to its technical capabilities. industry is most likely to devise and launch newservices, but formal research on the uses and effects of these services is mostlikely to be undertaken in academia.finding 22. innovation cycles in the network systems and communicationsindustry have worked well.an astonishing number of incremental changes have cumulatively taken onthe character of breakthroughs. the internet, for example, had its roots in thearpanet in 1969, was developed and deployed incrementally, and waslaunched into the public arena by the world wide web and browsers in 1993.the effect on the industry was of a breakthrough; the telecommunicationsindustry today is utterly different from the industry of 10 years ago. similarly,the incremental evolution of technologies (e.g., batteries, lowpower circuits,integrated radiofrequency elements) to support small portable devices spawnedbreakthrough products, such as pagers, cellular telephones, and packetradio modems.innovations in the network systems and communications industry have beencharacterized by the integration of a wide range of technologies: chip designswith increasing levels of integration; digitalanalog integration in wireless andwireline communications (e.g., cellular and satellite telephony, wireless devices,such as pagers and security devices, modems and cable modems, localarea network and intranetwork systems and communications receivers, optical networkinterfaces); internetworking technologies; and, above all, the increasing use ofsoftware technologies of all kinds. the convergence of computing and telecommunications has brought together a wide array of technologies for new products.academic contributions to these innovations have varied widely. some innovations originated in university research and were spun off into venturecapitalbacked startup companies. this route is supported by established universitypolicies, a workforce eager to engage in risky startups, and a mature venturethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry63capital industry that has been willing to back telecommunications and networking businesses. many academics have been consultants for network systems andcommunications companies. academic design departments have worked on industry projects, and some companies have supported academic research, oftendirected toward solving specific problems. sometimes, new companies or products have emerged from businessschool entrepreneurship programs.finding 23. the success of industryacademic collaboration (as defined byparticipants) depends more on leadership and people than on the type of collaborative structure.organizational structures, such as research centers that foster universityindustry collaboration, receive mixed reviews in network systems and communications. success appears to depend less on the choice of structure, the fundingarrangements, or the legal agreements than on the leadership and passion of thepeople involved. a committed leader is essential for establishing personal relationships, and, in general, researchers consider inducements to individuals (asopposed to institutions) more effective than collaborative organizational structures. dependence on personal relationships can sometimes lead to problems,however. a collaborative effort between industry and a university can founder ifa key individual (the òchampionó within the firm) is transferred or moved elsewhere within the company. overall, therefore, the diversity of approaches toindustryacademic collaboration is healthy for both partners.finding 24. creating standards is an important aspect of innovation in communication systems.standards are necessary for interoperability, which is essential to the industry. the more interoperability, the faster the growth of the user base and the fasterthe increase in value of the system. the success of many businesses depends onthe number of other entities that can communicate in a networkñthe value ofnetwork externalities.committees of industry members, sometimes with academic participation,usually determine standards. many internet standards groups, such as the internetengineering task force (ietf); the atm forum, which was organized to promote datanetworking uses of asynchronous transfer mode (atm); and thediscrete multitone modulation standard for asymmetric digital subscriber lines,have academic participants. in the united states, university researchers oftenhave difficulty participating in setting standards because of time and travel demands. in europe, academic participation has been stronger. u.s. researcherscould be helpful in gathering data and analyzing standards proposals; good dataand independent analysis could reduce squabbling over business biases and focusmore attention on design issues.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64the impact of academic research on industrial performancefinding 25. academic institutions have been at the forefront of network infrastructure deployment.the united states led the way in deploying advanced infrastructure criticalto enabling research (e.g., arpanet, nsfnet, vbns, ngi, internet2). the deployed infrastructure has led to further developments. for example, the worldwide web was successful partly because networking infrastructure had alreadybeen installed.academic institutions have played a crucial role in the deployment of network infrastructure. ever since nsfnet was formed, universities have recognizedthe importance of the internet to academic endeavors of all kinds, not just computer science and engineering research. with funding from nsf and other sources,universities have been willing to deploy leadingedge technologies. deploymentssuch as internet2, which was spurred in large part by universities, are likely toincrease the speed and throughput of network services available to universitiesand thus to support research that requires highperformance networking infrastructure. however, this may not necessarily stimulate research on networking.conflicting demands on these systems has created some tension between providing robust services for other research fields and experimentation for networkingresearch. a stateoftheart network that can be used for experiments in networking has not been developed.finding 26. the network systems and communications industry is evolving indirections that may require new kinds of universityindustry partnerships to exploit research.as communicating appliances proliferate, the need for harmonizing the technological and human elements increases. examples include: designing communication services that users can understand and exploit; integrating multiple devicesand services to create personalized configurations; designing new user interfaces;and streamlining or automating customer service functions. even within a network, areas that are not purely technical will also require research: the provisionof services; the quality of service; incompatibilities between heterogeneous products and services; security; and network management and operation. optimalinteractions among product design, network organization and management, service provision, and technology will require close collaboration between university researchers in the social, behavioral, and management sciences on one handand engineers and scientists on the other. as the industry moves toward offeringmore òinformation servicesó rather than òcommunications devices,ó it must turnto the market rather than to research for guidance. in the future, university research might focus on how individuals and society as a whole value and usenetwork systems and communications services.finding 27. many internet service providers are not willing to make their dataavailable to researchers.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry65many pressing research questions in network systems and communicationsrequire studies of the characteristics of networks under normal operating conditions as a basis of comparison. research on limiting congestion, improving thequality of service, and improving routing requires traces or other logs of actualnetwork activity. although data are available for some experimental networks,many internet service providers have not been willing to make their data available to researchers. this has hampered university research that might lead toimproved network design and operation. the problem could get worse if serviceproviders become more vertically organized and less open about their operations,problems, and needs.finding 28. the high cost of protecting intellectual property could impede research.industry and academia are both becoming increasingly protective of theirintellectual property rights, and the enormous economic activity in the networksystems and communications sector encourages this trend. the processes ofworking out licensing and sharing agreements could impede the free flow ofideas necessary for research to flourish. whenever universities band together ina research consortium or a single universityindustry collaboration is started,researchers spend much time and energy working out intellectual property agreements.the trend can be counteracted in several ways. òopen sourceó software licensesthat implicitly recognize that unused intellectual property has no value explicitlypromote sharing. other ways of reducing the costs of intellectual property protectioncould include standardized forms of collaborative research agreements.finding 29. longterm research is important to the future of the network systems and communications industry.despite the apparent success of network systems and communications technologies, many difficult problems must be solved for the industry to continue togrow and prosper. continued rapid expansion of a sophisticated communicationsinfrastructure with millions or billions of network elements is bound to face somedifficult problems. the industry needs softwareengineering discipline to ensurethat modules intended to fit together do so and that upgraded modules can beintroduced without disrupting network operation. distributed systems must bedesigned to be robust under failure, to remain stable under all operating conditions, and to guarantee performance requirements. some longterm problems,such as the quality of service and security, are related to scale limitations. currentdata networks require many people with sophisticated skills; and the designcomplexity and deployment scales of these systems exceed our engineeringknowledge. as the extraordinary growth of the industry slows, new problems willhave to be addressed, such as the impact of microelectronic components withdifferent costs and technical properties, new computational needs as the rate ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66the impact of academic research on industrial performanceminiaturization slows, and the technical implications of these changes. indeed, asindustrial research investments change, and as human capital stresses wax andwane, it is important to keep longterm academic research activities alive, precisely because they are the longlived seeds from which both ideas and peoplecan spring, regardless of the shortterm financial health of the industry.recommendationsrecommendation 21. universities and industry should take steps to ensure thatfaculty and students are available to carry on research in computer science andother information technology fields in the future.innovation, either from research or incremental engineering, depends on trainedresearchers. projected demand for computer science and other information technology graduates indicates periodic shortages in coming years. to maintain the pipelineof both academic and industrial researchers, the following measures could be taken:¥universities should provide early research experiences for undergraduates or even secondary school students.¥universities should provide careerdevelopment support for young faculty members.¥fellowships should be provided for graduate students to encourage themto pursue research degrees; industry should provide some of this support.¥universities and industry should provide incentives for industry engineersto return to academia for training in research.¥universities should develop cooperative programs in which masterõs degrees are based not only on course work, but also on research experience.¥training in academic research should include training in some of thequalities students will need for jobs in industry.¥research should involve addressing not only small technical puzzles inisolation, but also complex systems problems in context. students shouldbe encouraged to confront complexity and to address realworld data andoperational problems.¥research should encourage teamwork.¥highcaliber industry researchers and engineers should be encouraged totake sabbaticals to work in academia, thus bringing realworld researchproblems into academic settings.recommendation 22. universities and industry should continue to developdiverse collaborative arrangements.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry67industry and universities should resist the temptation to impose standard structural mechanisms to promote collaboration. incentives for personal interactionsbetween university and industry should be encouraged in the following ways:¥provide support for strong, committed leaders and the collaborative organizations they lead.¥encourage sabbaticals in both directions, enabling academics to spendtime in industry, especially in startup companies.¥support people and projects that involve academic and industry researchers in essential ways.¥explore new ways to support personal interactions across academicindustry boundaries, including using technology to support collaboration.recommendation 23. universities and industry should make every effort toinvigorate academic research on networking.the extraordinary success of the internet and the lure of internetrelatedstartup companies have tended to focus attention on shortterm goals, causing longterm research to suffer. the situation could be improved in thefollowing ways:¥acknowledge that the research community must take risks.¥focus academic research on the thorny problems of large systems: modeling, maintenance, upgrades, qualityofservice, security, and so on. bothfunding agencies and academics must recognize that largescale systemscan best be addressed in a university setting. even applied systemsresearch can be structured in a way that accommodates a longterm approach.¥universities and funding agencies (and industry) should support longterm, radical research on networks.¥universities and industry should encourage interdisciplinary research thatcombines network technologies with design and social science disciplines.networked devices (especially handheld mobile devices) will have tomeet both technical and human requirements.¥universities should recognize that valuable innovations and engineeringin the field are often not channeled through traditional peerreviewedpublications. therefore, effective industry interaction should be morehighly valued in decisions about academic promotion and tenure.¥to revitalize academic research on networking, the national sciencefoundation should consider sponsoring a workshop on the subject thatbrings together academic and industry participants. a new agenda couldprovide a strong argument for industry support, either by individual firmsor by a consortium.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68the impact of academic research on industrial performancenotes1gordon moore (cofounder of intel) predicted in 1965 that the transistor density of semiconductor chips would double roughly every year. see moore, 1965.2for example, during fiscal year 2001, microsoft spent $4.38 billion on product research anddevelopment activities excluding funding of joint venture activity. this represented 17.3 percent ofrevenue that year. microsoft research, the part of the company that looks more than one or twoproduct cycles out, has around 600 employees and a budget of roughly $200 million, less than5 percent of the $4.38 billion, or less than 0.8 percent of total revenue.3the loss of faculty to commercial endeavors was limited in time and to only a few programs.data from the most recent taulbee survey of computer science and computer engineering departments indicate that faculty numbers have grown and are anticipated to grow through 2004. thesurvey also indicates that faculty departures have ranged from 2.3 to 2.6 percent over the last severalyears (bryant and vardi, 2002).4economists have long acknowledged òexternalities,ó factors that alter the value of a good viewedin isolation. shapiro and varian (1998) applied the idea to networks, socalled ònetwork effects.órobert metcalfe, a popular speaker on the value of networks, has often said that the usefulness, orutility, of a network equals the square of the number of users. this observation has been dubbedòmetcalfeõs lawó (gilder, 1993).referencesat&t and the international computer science institute. 1998. at&t labs, icsi establish internetresearch center. press release october 8, 1998. available online at: http://www.icir.org/aciri.html. [june 24, 2003]bailey, d.e., f.s. settles, and d. sanrow. 1998. designing, controlling, and improving src research quality. presentation at the naecommittee on science, engineering, and public policyworkshop on the role of human capital in capitalizing on research, beckman center, irvine,california, january 21, 1998.bankboston. 1997. mit: the impact of innovation. special report of the bankboston economicsdepartment. available online at: http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/founders. [june 24, 2003]bell, d.g., d.g. bobrow, o. raiman, and m.h. shirley. 1997. dynamic documents and situatedprocesses: building on local knowledge in field service. pp. 261ð276 in information andprocess integration in enterprises: rethinking documents, t. wakayama, s. kannapan, c.m.khoong, s. navathe, and j. yates, eds. norwell, mass.: kluwer academic publishers.bryant, r.e., and m.y. vardi. 2002. 2000ð2001 taulbee survey: hope for more balance in supplyand demand. computing research news 14(2): 4ð11.brynjolfson, e. 1991. information technology and the òproductivity paradoxó: what we know andwhat we donõt know. cambridge, mass.: mit sloan school of management.bureau of labor statistics. 2001. table 3b. fastest growing occupations, 2000ð10. available onlineat: http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ecopro.t06.htm. [june 24, 2003]card, s.k., t.p. moran, and a. newell. 1983. the psychology of humancomputer interaction.hillsdale, n.j.: l. erlbaum assoc.cerf, v., and r. kahn. 1974. a protocol for packet network intercommunication. ieee transactionson communications 22(5): 637ð642.cohen, w.m., and d.a. levinthal. 1990. absorptive capacity: a new perspective on learning andinnovation. administrative science quarterly 35(1): 128ð152.ctia (cellular telecommunications and internet association). 2003. ctiaõs semiannual wireless industry survey. available online at: http://www.wowcom.com/pdf/ctiasurveyyearend2002.pdf. [june 24, 2003]the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry69ctis (corporate technology information services, inc.). 1999. spotlight. woburn, mass.: corporate technology information services, inc.cusumano, m. 1991. japanõs software factories: a challenge to u.s. management. oxford, u.k.:oxford university press.de sola pool, i., ed. 1977. the social impact of the telephone. cambridge, mass.: mit press.earl, m., ed. 1988. information management: the strategic dimension. oxford, u.k.: clarendonpress.gilder, g. 1993. metcalfeõs law and legacy. forbes asap, september 13. available online at:http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~gaj1/metgg.html. [june 24, 2003]hill, s. 2001. science and engineering degrees: 1966ð1998. arlington, va.: division of scienceresources studies, national science foundation.intel. 2003. intel research network of laboratories. available online at: http://www.intelresearch.net.[june 24, 2003]internetweek. 2001. report: dsl market to rebound next year. october 24, 2001. available onlineat: http://www.internetweek.com/story/inw20011024s0005. [june 24, 2003]kahn, a. 1970. the economics of regulation, vol. 1. new york: john wiley & sons.kahn, a. 1971. the economics of regulation, vol. 2. new york: john wiley & sons.keen, p.g.w., and m.s. scott morton. 1978. decision support systems: an organizational perspective. reading, mass.: addisonwesley.kraut, r., w. scherlis, t. mukhopadhyay, j. manning, and s. kiesler. 1996. the homenet field trialof residential internet services. communications of the acm 39(12): 55ð63.lazowska, e. 1998. remarks made during panel session on changing the interaction between academic research and industry: university, industry, and government perspectives. presented atthe workshop how can academic research best contribute to network systems and communications?, national academy of engineering, washington, d.c., october 30, 1998.malone, t. 1998. remarks made during panel session on contributions and impact of academicresearch: social, management, and policy sciences. presented at the workshop how canacademic research best contribute to network systems and communications?, nationalacademy of engineering, washington, d.c., october 30, 1998.malone, t.w., k. crowston, j. lee, b. pentland, c. dellarocas, g. wyner, j. quimby, c.s. osborn,a. bernstein, g. herman, m. klein, and e. oõdonnell. 1999. tools for inventing organizations:toward a handbook of organizational processes. management science 45(3): 425ð443.markus, m.l. 1987. toward a òcritical massó theory of interactive media: universal access, interdependence, and diffusion. communications research 14: 491ð511.mcknight, l.w., and j.p. bailey, eds. 1997. internet economics. cambridge, mass.: mit press.messerschmitt, d.g. 1996. the convergence of telecommunications and computing: what are theimplications today? ieee proceedings (august). available online at: http://www.informatik.tudarmstadt.de/vs/lehre/ws9798/javatk/convergence.html. [june 24, 2003]micro. 2002. university of california microelectronics innovation and computer research opportunities. available online at: http://www.ucop.edu/research/micro/. [june 24, 2003]moore, g.e. 1965. cramming more components onto integrated circuits. electronics 38(8): 114ð117. available online at: http://www.cybraryn.com/news/documents/moorepaper.pdf. [june 24,2003]morgan, r.p., and d.e. strickland. 2000. u.s. university research contributions to industry: findingsand conjectures. science and public policy 28(2): 113ð121.morris, j. 1998. remarks made during panel session on changing the interaction between academicresearch and industry: university, industry and government perspectives. presented at theworkshop how can academic research best contribute to network systems and communications?, national academy of engineering, washington, d.c., october 30, 1998the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70the impact of academic research on industrial performancenrc (national research council). 1995. evolving the highperformance computing and communications initiative to support the nationõs information infrastructure. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nrc. 1996. cryptographyõs role in securing the information society. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.nrc. 1999. funding a revolution: government support for computing research. washington,d.c.: national academy press.nrc. 2000. making it better: expanding information technology research to meet societyõsneeds. washington, d.c.: national academy press.nrc. 2003. innovation and information technology. washington, d.c.: national academies press.nsf (national science foundation). 2001. survey of federal funds for research and development:fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001. arlington, va.: national science foundation.orr, j. 1990. sharing knowledge, celebrating identity: war stories and community memory in aservice culture. pp. 169ð189 in collective remembering: memory in society, d.s. middletonand d. edwards, eds. beverly hills, calif.: sage publications.parker, l. 1997. the engineering research centers program: an assessment of benefits and outcomes. arlington, va.: national science foundation.qualcomm corporation. 1999. ericsson and qualcomm reach global cdma resolution.press release. march 25, 1999. available online at: http://www.qualcomm.com/press/pr/releases1999/press457.html. [june 24, 2003]rockart, j.f. 1981. the changing role of the information systems executive: a critical success factorsperspective. sloan management review 22(2): 15ð25.roessner, d., r. carr, i. feller, m. mcgeary, and n. newman. 1998. the role of nsfõs support ofengineering in enabling technological innovation: final reportphase ii. arlington, va.: sriinternational. available online at: http://www.sri.com/policy/stp/techin2/. [june 24, 2003]schofield, j.w. 1995. computers and classroom culture. new york: cambridge university press.shapiro, c., and h. varian. 1998. information rules: a strategic guide to the network economy.cambridge, mass.: harvard business school press.siegel, j.l., v. dubrovsky, s. kiesler, and t. mcguire. 1986. group processes in computermediated communication. organizational behavior and human decision processes 37:157ð187.sirbu, m. 1998. remarks made during panel session on contributions and impact of academicresearch: social, management, and policy sciences. presented at the workshop how canacademic research best contribute to network systems and communications?, nationalacademy of engineering, washington, d.c., october 30, 1998.sproull, l., and s. kiesler. 1991. connections: new ways of working in the networked organization. cambridge, mass.: mit press.sri international. 1997. the role of nsfõs support of engineering in enabling technologicalinnovation. iv. the internet. available online at: http://www.sri.com/policy/stp/techin/inter1.html. [june 24, 2003]stanford university corporate guide. 2001. top 10 stanford inventions. available online at: http://corporate.stanford.edu/innovations/invent.html. [june 24, 2003]tennenhouse, d. 1998. diagram presented during panel session on changing the interaction between academic research and industry: university, industry and government perspectives atthe workshop how can academic research best contribute to network systems and communications?, national academy of engineering, washington, d.c., october 30, 1998.turkle, s. 1984. the second self: computers and the human spirit. new york: simon & schuster.u.s. bureau of the census. 2002. statistical abstract of the united statesð2002. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office. available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statisticalabstract02.html. [june 24, 2003]the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71addendumemail questionnairethe following questionnaire was sent to individuals selected from variousparts of the network systems and communication industry, some of whom attended the october 1998 workshop. included among the questionnaire respondents were senior executives at at&t laboratories, bell atlantic, bellcore,mci, and motorola, and professors with expertise in computer science and engineering, network systems, and telecommunications from stanford university,university of delaware, university of californiaberkeley, university of california, los angeles, university of virginia, and university of washington.the impact of academic research on industrialperformancenetwork systems and communications panelwe invite your responses to the following questions. your responses will beused by our panel as background information for our report. any material usedverbatim will not be attributed to you without seeking your permission.1. could you describe briefly significant academic research contributions tothe network systems and communications industry? (if possible, please supplyreferences to published information that outlines the contributions.)2. overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrialperformance in the network systems and communications industry as (please putan x in one box): 1. very large 2. large 3. medium 4. small 5. very small/nonexistent3. what is the role of academic research in educating people who work inyour industry? (please focus on university research activities, rather than university education generally.)4. what structural forms of universityindustry collaboration lead to goodresults in your industry? an example of such a structure might be a discipline orindustryoriented òcenteró that solicits industry sponsors for a collection ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72the impact of academic research on industrial performanceprojects that span a varied research program. what seem to be the essentialdeterminants of success of such structures?5. what are significant emerging trends or problems that the network systems and communications industry will face in the future that could benefit fromacademic research?6. what changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to beresponsive to these industrial trends and problems?7. what single step could be taken by universities to enhance the impact ofacademic research on the industry?8. what single step could be taken by companies to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry?9. what single step could be taken by government to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry?10. do you see any downside to enhanced universityindustry research collaboration? things to be avoided?11. other comments? any comments, pointers to other studies, or suggestions would be appreciated.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry73workshop agendahow can academic research best contribute tonetwork systems and communications?october 30, 1998national academies building2101 constitution avenue n.w.washington, d.c.9:00 am welcoming remarks and selfintroductionswm. a. wulf, president, national academy of engineering9:15 am overview of the work of the network systems and communicationspanel and description of the wider nae studybob sproull, panel chair10:00 am break10:15 am session i. contributions and impacts of academic research onperformance in the network systems and communications industry: engineering and the physical sciencesdavid forney, ambuj goyal, robert kahn, h.t. kung, david mills11:45 am lunch in meeting room12:30 pm session ii. contributions and impacts of academic research onperformance in the network systems and communications industry: design, social, management, and policy sciencesdan atkins, walter bender, robert kraut, tom malone,marvin sirbu1:30 pm session iii. structures for universityindustry collaborationjames flanagan, stewart personick, david roessner,donald strickland, stephen wolff2:30 pm breakthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74the impact of academic research on industrial performance2:45 pm session iv. changing the interaction between academic researchand industry: university, industry, and government perspectiveshamid ahmadi, ed lazowska, james morris, rick rashid,george strawn, david tennenhouse4:30 pm discussion, conclusions and recommendationsbob sproullthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications industry75robert sproull, chair *vice president and sun fellowsun microsystems, inc.hamid ahmadiat&t labsalfred v. aho *associate research vice presidentcommunications sciencesresearch divisionlucent technologiesbell labs innovationsdaniel atkinsschool of informationuniversity of michiganwalter bendermit media labjohn cioffi *associate professordepartment of electrical engineeringstanford universitydavid j. farber *alfred fitler moore professor oftelecommunicationsuniversity of pennsylvaniajames flanagancenter for computer aidsrutgers universityg. david forney, jr.motorola, inc.workshop attendeesambuj goyalibm corporationt.j. watson research centergeorge h. heilmeier *chairman emeritusbellcorerobert kahncorporation for national researchinitiativesrobert krautdepartment of social and decisionsciencescarnegie mellon universityh.t. kungdepartment of electrical engineeringand computer scienceharvard universityed lazowskadepartment of computer science andengineeringuniversity of washingtontom malonesloan school of managementmassachusetts institute of technologydavid millsdepartment of electrical andcomputer engineeringuniversity of delaware*panel memberthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76the impact of academic research on industrial performancejames morrisschool of computer sciencecarnegie mellon universitystewart personickdrexel universityrichard rashidadvanced technical researchmicrosoftj. david roessnerschool of public policygeorgia institute of technologyjerrard sheehannational research councilmarvin sirbuinformation networking institutecarnegie mellon universitygeorge strawnnational science foundationdonald e. stricklandchair, management departmentsouthern illinois universitydavid tennenhousedefense advanced research projectsagencystephen wolff *executive directoradvanced internet initiatives divisioncisco systems, inc.wm. a. wulfpresidentnational academy of engineeringnae program office stafftom weimer, directorproctor reid, associate directornathan kahl, project assistantrobert morgan, nae fellow and senior analyst*panel memberthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3report of the panel on the medical devicesand equipment industryrapid changes in the financing and delivery of u.s. health care may have asignificant effect on the incentives for universities and industrial firms to generate, evaluate, and introduce new medical devices. this report examines the interactions of these two critical participants in technological changes, specifically thecontributions of academic research to the medical device industry. the panel onmedical devices and equipment, one of the five panels formed by the committeeon the impact of academic research on industrial performance of the nae,hopes this report will provide a starting point for further research on critical,but often neglected, institutional interactions in the medical device innovation process.the panel on medical devices and equipment comprised six members: onenational academy of sciences member from academia, one institute of medicinemember from industry, one other member from academia, and three more fromindustry. three of the panel members were also members of the parent committee. the panel assessed the contributions of academic research, which may include new knowledge, inventions, and the training of people in modern researchtechniques, to the medical device industry and recommended ways of improvingsuch contributions in the future. this assessment is especially timely in view ofthe fundamental changes occurring in the american healthcare system, including academic medicine, and american higher education, which are putting unprecedented pressures on both academic medical centers and medical devicefirms. in the course of this study, the panel reviewed the literature, developedseveral case studies, and sent a questionnaire to individuals in academia, themedical device industry, and government. this questionnaire was followed by a77the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78the impact of academic research on industrial performanceworkshop attended by approximately 35 senior individuals in the medical devicesector (see addendum).there are several compelling reasons for undertaking a close examination ofthe interface between firms and universities in the medical device sector. first,although this industry, like the pharmaceutical industry, develops and marketsproducts that contribute to human health and wellbeing, it has received far lessattention than the pharmaceutical industry. second, the number and variety ofinteractions between universities and industrial firms has increased significantly.third, a common misperception of the relationship between industry and universities assigns to universities the role of generating fundamental (basic) knowledge and to industry the role of performing applied research and developingmedical technologies. a closer look at the ways medical innovations arise andspread suggests that both parties perform much more complex, subtle, and wideranging roles than conventional wisdom suggests.this report addresses two sets of questions:¥what role has universitybased research played in technological advancesin the medical device industry? what impact has academic researchhad on the industryõs performance? are the current mechanisms foruniversityindustry collaboration, both formal and informal, adequate?¥how might academic research contribute more effectively to the medicaldevice industry in the future? are there new modes of universityindustrycollaboration that would increase the payoffs without compromising thecore mission of either sector? what specific actions might increase thecontributions of academic research to the industryõs performance?whereas the focus of the report is on the contributions of academic researchto industry, important contributions also flow in the other direction. industry,among others, contributes resources for conducting university r&d and for training students. both academic and industrial institutions are involved in the wholeinnovation cycleñresearch, development, manufacturing, evaluation, marketing,and product modification. industry and universities have distinctive, complementary skills, as well as overlapping competencies. in fact, one characteristic ofinnovations in medical devices is close collaboration, even codependency, between universities and industry firms.the first part of this report is a review of the main components and a definition of the boundaries of the medical device industry. following a brief overviewof the structural and performance characteristics of the industry, the main playersin the innovation system for medical devices are identified, and the multifacetednature of research relations between academia and the medical device industryare analyzed. sweeping changes are occurring in the healthcare environment,including the introduction of market forces and the widespread diffusion of managed care into the delivery of health care, modifications in food and drugthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry79administration (fda) regulations, and new policies and practices regarding intellectual property rights. this report attempts to weigh the effects of thesechanges on universityindustry relations and consider how university contributions to the medical device industry in this rapidly changing environment couldbe enhanced.definition of the industrymain componentsmedical devices encompass a heterogeneous group of products, ranging fromlowtech, inexpensive devices, such as tongue depressors and disposable needles,to sophisticated devices, such as implanted therapeutic devices, lithotripters, andmagnetic resonance imaging (mri) machines. the u.s. department of commerce currently groups medical devices into five categories, according to northamerican industrial classification system (naics) codes:¥surgical and medical instruments (naics 339112) include medical, surgical, ophthalmic, and veterinary instruments and apparatuses. examplesare syringes, hypodermic needles, anesthesia apparatuses, blood transfusion equipment, catheters, surgical clamps, and medical thermometers.¥surgical appliances and supplies (naics 339113) include orthopedicdevices, prosthetic appliances, surgical dressings, crutches, surgical sutures, and personal industrial safety devices (except protective eyewear).¥dental equipment and supplies (naics 339114) include equipmentand supplies used by dental laboratories and dentists offices, such aschairs, instrument delivery systems, hand instruments, and impressionmaterials.¥irradiation apparatuses (naics 334517) include apparatuses used formedical diagnostic, medical therapeutic, industrial, research, and scientific evaluations.¥navigational, measuring, electromedical, and control instruments(naics 334510) include electromedical and electrotherapeutic apparatus,such as mri equipment, medical ultrasound equipment, pacemakers, hearing aids, electrocardiographs, and electromedical endoscopic equipment.this report focuses mainly on the hightech, innovationdriven segments ofthe industry, such as implantable devices, bioengineered devices, optical instruments, surgical staplers, and surgical miniaturization, in which the contributionsof academia are likely to be most apparent. most fda class 3 devices, forwhich sponsors are required to demonstrate safety and efficacy before the fdagrants marketing clearance, are included in this category. it also includes socalled ò510(k) devices,ó which are òsubstantially equivalentó to devices thatwere on the market before the 1976 medical device amendments took effectthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80the impact of academic research on industrial performanceand, therefore, are subject to less stringent regulatory review. this study alsoexamines emerging market segments that are expanding the boundaries of thetraditional device industry, such as tissue engineering and health informationsystems intended to improve the quality and efficiency of healthcare delivery systems.the global market for medical devices was $138 billion in 1999. the u.s.market accounts for 37 percent of global demand, and the u.s. industry supplied40 percent of the global market with shipments of $55 billion in 1999 (mcgrawhill and u.s. department of commerce, 2000). the united states traditionallyruns a positive balance of trade in medical device products (estimated to be$7 billion in 2000), and several american firms have strong market shares ineurope and japan (advamed, 2001). all major firms throughout the world participate in the u.s. market; most leading foreign firms have u.s. sales subsidiaries, and many also have extensive research and manufacturing activities in theunited states. as of 1999, both domestic and foreign medical device firms operating in the united states employed almost 300,000 workers, and the medicaldevice industry was one of the fastest growing manufacturing sectors in the u.s.economy (u.s. bureau of the census, 2001).companies in this industry capture relatively few sales from any singleproduct. the norm for important therapeutic tools (e.g., vascular grafts) is a totalglobal market of $70 million (wilkerson group, 1995). even òblockbusteró products rarely surpass $100 million. the johnson & johnson palmazschatz stent forcoronary heart disease was unusually successful in garnering sales of almost$400 million annually in its early years. but despite the purported strength of thejohnson & johnson patent and its headstart in the market, new companies continued to improve stent designs for opening coronary arteries. as a result, johnson& johnson lost more than 70 percent of its market share in five years to newentrants. johnson & johnson is expected to make a comeback, however, becauseof sharply reduced restenosis with its new drugcoated stents.in short, this is a dynamic industry driven by intense competition. productsthat briefly capture sales are swept away within a few years by more innovativereplacements. consequently, research activity is intense; publicly traded devicefirms invest 12.9 percent of sales in r&d, and the most innovative firms reinvestas much as 23 percent of sales revenues in r&d. this figure is comparable toinvestments by aggressive pharmaceutical companies (lewin group, 2000).the roles of large and small firmsthe extremely diverse medical device industry includes small startup companies and giant corporations. in 1999, 65 percent of firms had fewer than20 employees, and only 12 percent had more than 100 (u.s. bureau of thecensus, 2001). the correlation between the size of a firm and its role in themarket is not entirely clear, but it is widely believed that small firms play athe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry81disproportionate role in initial innovation and that large firms determine thecommercial success of new products.large firmsthe underlying economics of the industry drive product development towardlarger firms that have the sophisticated assets to exploit the commercial potential ofinnovations and can navigate the complex regulatory requirements for the introduction of new healthcare products. first, as a result of multiple filings, large firmshave developed the capability of managing clinical trials to meet regulatory requirements. an excellent example is the development of the home hiv test. although the technology was relatively simple, numerous startup companies hadfailed to demonstrate their ability to collect and test potentially contaminated bloodin the home setting. johnson & johnson, which has extensive knowledge of theregulatory process, was able to shepherd the first successful home hiv diagnostictest to market. second, large companies often have considerable skills in manufacturing and marketing. the history of diagnostic imaging, for example, clearly showsthat firstmover advantages are not always a key to success in the marketplace ofnew technologies that have significant commonalities with earlier technologies(e.g., mri with ct). although large multinational companies were often late entrants, their skills in marketing and servicing and their established reputations oftenenabled them to assume dominant positions (gelijns et al., 1998). third, large,experienced companies understand the purchasing patterns of multiple stakeholders in a complex hospital environment. because buyers prefer to contract witha limited number of suppliers, successful device companies offer a full product lineof compatible products. small companies with the most innovative devices maygain a foothold but can rarely maintain it.finally, the most successful companies plan for short product life cycles, andthey swiftly introduce incremental enhancements developed by internal r&d.these companies rarely invest in basic research because the direct returns onbasic science are relatively low during the short payback time for internalizingand commercializing product concepts. consequently, larger firms invest in sophisticated market scanning and acquisition capabilities to identify new ideas forinternal development and tend to leave òbreakthrough innovationsó to others. tobe sure, large companies do produce pioneering innovations from internal research, but these breakthroughs often leverage technologies from preexistingproducts. in addition, large companies can exploit the experiences of users toproduce nextgeneration products.innovative small firmsthe existence of numerous small, innovative startup companies in the medical device industry has been well documented. a study of publicly traded medicalthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82the impact of academic research on industrial performancedevice firms found that in 1997, 65 percent of firms had fewer than 50 employees. firms with less than $5 million in revenue spent an average of252 percent of sales revenue on r&d (lewin group, 2000). these researchfocused companies specialize in the òfront endó of r&d, and perhaps not surprisingly, a study by the wilkerson group concluded, ònearly all significant new andinnovative products and procedures were pioneered by startup companies.ó indeed, in their survey they cite 29 major therapeutic advances, all of which couldbe attributed to startups (wilkerson group, 1995).according to gelijns and colleagues (1994):attempts to measure the innovative activity of [medical device] firms as afunction of their size have long been handicapped, not only by methodologicalbut by conceptual difficultiesñfor example, the absence of an unambiguouscriterion for recognizing and, therefore, for measuring innovations, or for distinguishing between òmajoró and òminoró innovations. one study conducted inthe early 1980s by the futures group defined large firms as having more than500 employees and small firms as having fewer than 500 employees (ota,1984). the same study reviewed more than 8,000 innovations published intrade journals in 1982 (which were likely to have overstated the contributions oflarge firms and understated the contributions of small firms) and calculatedrates of innovation per employee for each of the 5 sic (now naics) codemedical device categories. the study concluded that, with the exception of thesmall ophthalmic goods category, small firms were more than twice as innovative per employee as large firms (ota, 1984). this conclusion reflects thelikely differences in the workforces of small and large firms; small firms areoften òr&d boutiquesó that do not have large numbers of personnel in, forinstance, regulatory affairs, marketing, or distribution infrastructure that largefirms have.the medical device industry also relies on individual inventors for ideas for newproducts. once a working prototype or proofofconcept device has been produced,the inventor is in a position to negotiate with large companies for a license or to createa startup company. besides individual initiative, small companies capable of demonstrating product potential require venture capitalists, highrisk/highreturn investorswilling to bankroll entrepreneurs with unproven technology.innovation systemthe medical device industry depends heavily on an infrastructure of institutions and activities outside the industry. traditionally, both large and small firmshave depended heavily on nonmedical industry sectors (e.g., those that delivercustomized components or highly specialized materials), as well as researchuniversities, especially academic medical centers (amcs).government policies have also had a strong impact on innovation practicesand universityindustry relationships. first, although only a modest percentage ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry83the federal budget is allocated directly for r&d on medical devices, the federalgovernment is a major source of r&d funding. second, the federal governmentinfluences the development process through the fdaõs premarketing approvalsand policies for medical devices. third, the government has become a majorsource of payments to the providers of medical care (e.g., medicare). for example, by including endstage renal disease as coverable by medicare, the government assured a market, which led to significant innovations in exchange devices, biocompatible materials, and other technologies necessary for dialysis.government decisions have a decisive influence over how existing technologiesare used. in addition, government decisions have a powerful impact on the financial incentives for private industry to undertake r&d.government is not the only payer that influences the market for medicaldevices. in recent years, managed care, ranging from classic health maintenanceorganizations (hmos) to modified feeforservice programs, has grown rapidly.managedcare purchasers are taking a more critical and more independent stanceabout which technologies they will cover and the level at which they will reimburse providers; thus, they too influence the demand for new technologies.research universities and academic medical centersresearch universities are key players in the medical device innovation system. basic advances in physics, materials sciences, optics, analytical methods,and computer science have resulted in many new device capabilities. bioengineering research has emerged as a separate discipline in the last few decades; in1998, 70 universities and colleges offered degrees in bioengineering.a typical amc generally comprises a medical school, a teaching hospital, anetwork of affiliated hospitals, and a nursing school. some amcs also have schools ofdentistry, schools for allied health professionals, and schools of public health. thesecomplex, multifunctional organizations have a threepronged mission: (1) training clinicians and biomedical researchers, thereby ensuring the distribution of medical skills andspecialties; (2) providing advanced specialty and tertiary care and therefore adopting thelatest technologies; and (3) conducting biomedical research, ranging from laboratorybased fundamental research to populationbased clinical studies.in the united states, amcs, and biomedical research in particular, have beenmajor beneficiaries of postworld war ii science policy. total national investment in healthrelated r&d (public and private) has increased dramatically in thepostwar period, more than threefold since 1985 to more than $42 billion in 1998(commonwealth fund task force on academic health centers, 1999). at thesame time, health insurance coverage was expanded, and medicare was established. medicare pays amcs for patient care and educational activities.these financial incentives encouraged the spectacular growth of americanacademic medicine. between 1960 and 1992, the average medical school budgetin the u.s. expanded nearly 10fold in real terms (see table 31). the table showsthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84the impact of academic research on industrial performancethat basic science faculty increased from 4,023 to 15,579, and clinical facultyincreased far more rapidly from 7,201 to 65,913 over the threedecade period(iglehart, 1994). as of the late 1990s, about 30 percent of all healthrelated r&din the united states took place at amcs (commonwealth fund task force onacademic health centers, 1999). clinical specialists are major participants in theclinical testing and advancement of devices.the financial support structure for amcs, which is quite different from thesupport structure for other components of universities, contributed significantly totheir past research success; amcs have also developed a separate culture (keller,1998). amc research activities are funded by a variety of sources. the federalgovernment has funded the majority of amc research (nearly 70 percent), especiallyfor basic biomedical research. in 1996, the government funded more than 70 percentof new amc research projects and more than 60 percent of all new nonclinicalresearch or research on nonhuman subjects (directorõs panel on clinical research,1997). in recent years, funding for academic research has increased under a variety ofarrangements. foundations and philanthropical organizations are also importantsources of research funding. a substantial portion of academic research is fundedinternally; revenues from faculty practice plans, for example, are often used to underwrite research (they support about 9 percent of research, mostly clinical, in amcs).an analysis in 1999 of six amcs showed that, on average, clinical enterprises transferred about $50 million a year to medical schools for academic purposes. universities also provided institutional funding to support the direct costs of research (commonwealth fund task force on academic health centers, 1999).federal agenciesfederal support for r&d in medical devices flows through multiple institutional and disciplinary channels. although the majority of medical devicerelatedtable 31 the growth of u.s. academic medicine, 1960ð1992 (in 1992dollars)1960197019801992support from1,3203,0285,4198,407nih ($ millions)average medical24.164.691.9200.4school budget($ millions)fulltime medicalschool faculty (no.)basic4,0238,28312,81615,579clinical7,20119,25637,71665,913matriculated medical30,28840,48765,18966,142students (no.)source: adapted from iglehart, 1994.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry85r&d funds is spent in amcs, federal agencies also fund basic and appliedresearch in academic science departments and engineering schools, federal laboratories, and industry proper.the united states spends a larger percentage of its federal research budgeton research in the life sciences than any european country (nsf, 2000). between1985 and 2001, federal obligations for research in the life sciences more thandoubled, totaling more than $18 billion in 2001 (nsf, 2001). most of nihõsoverall budget of more than $13 billion a year is spent on extramural research atamcs, particularly in basic (nonhuman subjects) research. only a small portionof nihõs budget is allocated specifically to create opportunities for the development of devices. for example, in 1964 the national heart, lung, and bloodinstitute (nhlbi) created the artificial heart program to support the developmentof a family of devices to assist patients with failing hearts and to rehabilitatepatients with heart failure (watson et al., 1994). nhlbi has also invested inclinical trials of cardiac devices, for example, to determine the effectiveness ofdefibrillators in highrisk patients with coronary artery disease and in the leftventricularassist device for endstage patients with heart failure.determining the portion of the nih budget directly related to r&d on medicaldevices, however, is problematic. a congressional study in 1992 estimated that thegovernment had invested about $422 million in r&d on medical devices (littell,1994). a 1998 report in science estimated that nih funding of bioengineeringrelated research projects, including biomaterials, prosthetic devices, and artificialorgans, amounted to $417 million in 1996 (agnew, 1998); this figure increased to$500 million in 1998 (chronicle information resources, 1999). in 2000, nihcreated the national institute for biomedical imaging and bioengineering (nibib)to òimprove health by promoting fundamental discoveries, design and development, and translation and assessment of technological capabilities. the institutewill coordinate with biomedical imaging and bioengineering programs of otheragencies and nih institutes to support imaging and engineering research withpotential medical applications and will facilitate the transfer of such technologies tomedical applicationsó (p.l. 106580). nibibõs fy02 budget was $112 million.in addition, the government supports some applied research in industry settings. in the early 1980s, for example, the federal government established thesmall business innovation research (sbir) program; and in 2000, 10 federalagencies awarded $1.1 billion in sbir grants. since the programõs inception in1983, the life sciences, which include medical devices, have received more than$2 billion in awards from nih. nihõs sbir awarded $435 million in 2001(goodnight, 2002).food and drug administrationthe introduction of new or modified medical devices is subject to stringentand complex regulations. the medical device amendments of 1976 werethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86the impact of academic research on industrial performanceintended to ensure that new devices are both safe and effective before they aremarketed. these amendments divide medical devices into three classes, depending on their potential risks to patients.approximately 30 percent of all medical devices are grouped in class 1, whichcomprises instruments (e.g., stethoscopes) that do not support or sustain human lifeand do not present an unreasonable risk of illness or injury. class 1 devices aresubject to the general controls used before passage of the medical device amendmentsñfor example, regulations regarding registration, premarketing notification,record keeping, labeling, and good manufacturing practices. about 60 percent ofdevices fall into class 2, which includes xray devices and other devices that posesome risk. class 2 devices are subject to federally defined performance standards.class 3 devices include all lifesupporting or lifesustaining devices that substantially prevent health problems or that could pose a risk of injury or illness. for class3 devices, the sponsor must demonstrate safety and efficacy before the fda grantsmarketing approval. approximately 10 percent of medical devices fall into class 3;examples include leftventricular assist devices and laser angioplasty devices. since1976, all new devices are automatically placed in class 3 unless the sponsor successfully petitions the fda to reclassify them as òsubstantially equivalentó to adevice that was on the market before the amendments took effect. demonstration ofthis equivalence, called a 510(k) submission, is provided by descriptive, performance, and even clinical data.to support a marketing approval decision, or in some instances a 510(k)submission, a sponsor must conduct clinical studies. if a device poses a significant risk, the sponsor submits a request for an investigational device exemption(ide) to the fda. following clinical studies, the device may be approved formarketing through a socalled premarket approval (pma) decision. most pmasare individual licenses secured by the developer for particular devices and specific clinical uses or indications. other developers of similar kinds of devicesmust submit separate pmas and clinical data.in the 1990s, fda regulation of medical devices changed significantly withthe passage of the safe medical devices act of 1990. under new requirementsfor premarketing studies, manufacturers are required to conduct more rigorousstudies with appropriate, and where possible randomized, controls. postmarketingsurveillance now provides a number of separate mechanisms for collecting data.both device manufacturers and healthcare providers must report informationindicating if the device may have caused or contributed to a death or seriousinjury. for highrisk devices, companies must keep track of patients, and, incertain cases, must conduct postapproval clinical studies to detect possible risksassociated with the use of the device, as well as information on its effectiveness.these changes should improve the quality of evaluations and provide more information about safety and efficacy. at the same time, they have slowed the pace ofintroductions of new medical devices and increased the risk and cost for medicaldevice firms.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry87in the early 1990s, the fda had long review times for ides, pmas, and510(k) submissions, and the agency had accumulated a considerable backlog.subsequently, the fda reorganized its device branch, and then, in 1997, the fdamodernization act (also known as fdama) was passed. this wideranginglegislation attempts to shift resources in the agency from relatively lowrisk torelatively highrisk areas and to specify the requirements for trials of clinicaldevices. as a result of these changes, the backlog was diminished substantiallyand review time was shortened considerably; in 1998, for instance, the averagereview time for a 510(k) submission decreased by 12.3 percent from the preceding year.venturecapital industrythe united states has a mature venturecapital industry that provides accessto liquid capital markets for the financing of highrisk ventures. venture capitalhas been pivotal to the development of the industry, because the development andcommercialization of medical devices can be a prolonged process, and few inventors can survive with debt financing alone. venture capital allows the originator to obtain operating funds and to share financial risks.small firms with no track records often need multiple sources of funding fora substantial period of time, usually beginning with private financing and proceeding to the equity markets. venture capitalists fund these companies whenrevenues are small or even nonexistent. as recently as 15 years, ago, the venturecapital market was small, but in 2001, health care, principally biopharmaceuticalsand medical devices, received $5.6 billion in venture capital, 17 percent of totalventure capital investments for the year (zemel, 2002). in addition, the initialpublic offering (ipo) market expanded in the 1990s, which allowed venturecapitalists to exit projects and thereby reap rewards for the risk they had borne;small companies subsequently had access to large pools of liquid capitalfor future expansion. ipo investment in the medical device industry rose from$410 million in 1995 to $1.268 billion in 1996; much of this growth was in thecardiovascular device sector. in recent years, with the economic downturn,venturecapital investment in medical devices has declined sharply, and iposhave come to a virtual standstill. in 2001, there were only eight ipos of medicaldevice firms, raising roughly $741 million.thirdparty payersin the last 20 years, dramatic changes have been made in the financing anddelivery of u.s. health care. changes include the rapid growth of managed careinitiatives and the consolidation of hospitals and clinics into large integrateddelivery systems. managed care organizations increasingly reimburse healthcareproviders on a capitated basis (i.e., fixed reimbursement per patient per month),the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88the impact of academic research on industrial performancepromote costconscious purchasing by negotiating price discounts on highvolume procedures, and may use selective contracting to concentrate sophisticated devices and related procedures in a smaller number of institutions. as aresult, the incentives for industrial firms to generate new medical devices hasalso changed.these changes have had many consequences for amcs and universityindustry interactions. first, the pressures to contain the costs of medical care havereduced the resources in amcs for crosssubsidizing research. second, researchers in amcs in areas with high managed care penetration are less likely to obtainnih grants or to publish than investigators in areas with less managed carecompetition (griner and blumenthal, 1998). the decrease is especially apparentin clinical research, raising questions about whether the necessary level of clinical research for the medical device enterprise can be sustained. finally, the payment for treatment of patients in clinical trials is becoming increasingly contentious, which could inhibit the refinement of devices and the collection of data onmedical devices.traditionally, industry has supported the evaluation of medical devices, government has supported the evaluation of major clinical procedures and offlabeluses, and payers have supported (often unknowingly) the treatment costs of patients enrolled in clinical trials. however, managed care organizations have become increasingly reluctant to do so, and they are coming under increasing pressure to support these trials. every sectorñthe federal government, industry,amcs, and managed careñwould obviously prefer that others shoulder more ofthe burden, but as both the number of evaluations and their complexity andsophistication have increased, the need for partnerships to pool resources hasbecome evident. conditional coverage, in which payers cover the costs of patienttreatment in a predetermined research protocol while government and industrycover the costs of doing the research, is one option for intersector funding. in1995, an interagency agreement between the fda and the healthcare financingadministration made certain category b nonexperimental/investigational deviceseligible for medicare payment during clinical trials. more than 90 percent ofinvestigational device exemptions (ides) have been made eligible for medicarepayment in this manner. legislation introducing conditional coverage for allmedicare enrollees was enacted in september 2000 (42 cfr411.1).contributions of academic researcheducation and trainingone of the most important longterm contributions of academia is the training of people skilled in research techniques. universities train people in manydisciplinesñbiological, behavioral, and physical sciences, as well as engineering. advances in the biological sciences, biomaterials sciences, and in biologicalthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry89information processing and analysis have ushered in a new era of progress andinnovation in medical devices and bioengineering. in the 1990s, bioengineeringwas the fastest growing specialty at engineering schools that offer these programs(agnew, 1998). to meet the growing need for multidisciplinary education inengineering, biology, and medicine, beginning in the late 1960s various educational programs have been developed to integrate engineering and clinical medicine. the university of pennsylvania, johns hopkins university, purdue university, and rice university are some of the institutions that had earlymultidisciplinary programs. nih and nsf have funded the development of moreof these programs.medical schools train clinicians in a wide range of specialties, as well asscientists in laboratoryoriented basic research, translational (applied) research,and clinical evaluative sciences. in the 1970s and 1980s, nih funding was increased for basic, laboratoryoriented research, which was reflected in an increase in the number of ph.d.s receiving nih awards and a decrease in thenumber of physician/scientists receiving awards. since then, the ratio of ph.d.applicants to physician applicants has remained constant at 3:1 (commonwealthfund task force on academic health centers, 1999). between 1994 and 1996,as pressures to contain costs increased and demands on physicians to maintain acertain volume of clinical care mounted, the number of firsttime physician applicants to nih dropped by 30 percent, raising concerns that the number of clinicalresearchers might be permanently diminished. as a result, nih created newtraining (and research) initiatives for clinical researchers, in both translationaland clinical evaluative research (e.g., biostatistics, clinical epidemiology, andoutcomes research, fields that were traditionally covered by schools of publichealth). the number of training programs leading to joint md/masters of publichealth (mph) degrees have increased as a result.schools of public health train people in sociomedical, health management,and policy sciences. as device production, evaluation, and marketing becomemore difficult, industry demand for people trained in outcomes analysis, biostatistics, health economics, and medical decision analysis has increased. although educational programs in these areas have been established around thecountry, many of them are small, have insufficient clinical involvement, and arenot geared toward the assessment and regulatory approval of medical devices.business schools, which train people in the management sciences, have expandedprograms that offer md/mba programs.research in the physical sciences and engineeringbecause markets for medical devices are often fragmented and relativelysmall, the medical device industry historically has not invested heavily in basicresearch but has depended heavily on scientific and technological capabilitiesdeveloped in other sectors. medical devices have exploited research and newthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90the impact of academic research on industrial performancetechnological capabilities and components developed by universities, the military, the electronics industry, and firms that manufacture specialized materials,such as highquality glass for fiber optics and special materials for prosthetic devices.arguably, there have been two very distinct patterns to the collaborationsbetween physical scientists and engineers on the one hand and clinical researchers on the other. one is in the field of instrumentation where electrical engineersand physicists either had separately developed a technology that could be used ina device or instrument or, working on a problem defined by a clinical researcher,had come up with a device or instrument that would solve the problem. earlbakkenõs development of the pacemaker is an example of the latter.however, a very different kind of collaboration developed between mechanical and chemical engineers and clinical researchers, in which the engineersbecame directly involved in defining the problem, not merely helping to find thesolution. this manifested itself in studies of fluid mechanics and transport phenomena in blood flow, and in the many studies aimed at characterizing the interactions between biological fluids and synthetic materials. these collaborationsled to insights that have been key to understanding the effect of flow patterns incertain diseases, like atherosclerosis, but also to understanding the importance offlow patterns in prosthetic devices in promoting or inhibiting thrombosis orhemolysis. in these cases, engineers did not borrow from other fields but becameinvolved in direct research in the biological systems to understand the uniquephenomena of those systems.in a 1998 study of trends in medical device technology conducted by thefda, a survey revealed six somewhat overlapping òtrend categoriesó: computerrelated technology; molecular medicine; home care and selfcare; minimally invasive procedures; combination drug/device products; and organ replacementsand assist devices (herman et al., 1998). most of these categories reflect contributions either from universities or other industry sectors. for example, computerrelated technologies, which include computeraided diagnosis, intelligent devices,biosensors and robotics, and networks of devices, all depend on the results ofr&d in computers and communications, which, in turn, interact with and buildon advances in mathematics, computer science, electrical engineering, and otherdisciplines. minimally invasive procedures include minimally invasive instruments, medical imaging, microminiaturized devices, laser diagnosis and therapy,robotic surgical devices, and nonimplanted sensory aids, all of which make use ofdevelopments in physics, mathematics, electrical engineering, and computer science. organ replacements and assist devices depend on advances in the materialssciences and, increasingly, on the interface between biology and the physical andengineering sciences.universities play an important role in the evolution of medical devices.university research may lead to the discovery of new scientific or technologicalprinciples, new designs, new materials, and advances in computer sciences. examples of academic contributions and universityindustry collaborations can bethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry91found in the development of lasers, endoscopy devices, and medical imagingmachines. for instance, work by charles townes at columbia university in theearly 1950s resulted in the invention of the maser, a device that creates a focusedmicrowave beam using stimulated emission (rosenberg, 2000). townes latercollaborated with arthur schawlow of bell laboratories on a paper that outlinedhow stimulated emission might work at the wavelength of visible light. belllaboratories received a patent for the resulting invention, the laser, in 1960(spetz, 1995).medical uses of the laser quickly became apparent, especially after the invention in 1964 of the argon laser, a light source that promoted photocoagulation.ophthalmologists and dermatologists were the first and most frequent users oflasers, which enabled retinal reattachment, treatment of glaucoma, and the removal of disfiguring portwine stains. however, other uses of the laser techniqueproceeded more slowly. although clinicians recognized that the wavelength,duration, and energy intensity of a laser beam could be manipulated, fundamentalquestions about the optical, thermal, and physical properties of tissue had to beanswered before lasers could be used to treat other clinical conditions. by the1980s, many of these uncertainties had been overcome, and lasers were soon usedin a wide range of clinical specialties, including gynecology, gastroenterology,and cardiology.flexible gastrointestinal endoscopy was first developed in the early 1960swith significant academic contributions by physicists van heel in holland andhopkins and kapany in the united kingdom (gelijns and rosenberg, 1999).their work, reported simultaneously in nature in 1954, laid out the principles ofcoherent image transmission for sending images along an aligned bundle of flexible glass fibers (hopkins and kapany, 1954; van heel, 1954). van heel presented the concept of the coated glass fiber and the possibility of plastic coatings,which later turned out to be unworkable. both papers described the conveyanceof optical images along a glass fiber, a concept that had been developed earlier.hopkins and kapany also elucidated the basic principles of fiber alignment.upon reading their work in nature, hirschowitz, a gastroenterologist at the university of michigan, peters, an optical physicist, and curtiss, an undergraduatestudent, undertook research to develop a workable fiberoptic instrument forvisualizing the upper gastrointestinal tract (gelijns and rosenberg, 1999).hirschowitz tested the first operating gastroscope on himself in february 1957.the academic trio subsequently licensed the technology to american cystoscopemakers, inc., and collaborated with the firm to develop the first commercialflexible endoscopes.basic advances in physics were essential to the development of all imagingtechnologies (gelijns and rosenberg, 1999). these advances were typically generated in departments of physics at universities in europe and the united states;they can be traced all the way back to roentgen, a professor of physics at theuniversity of wrzberg in the nineteenth century.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92the impact of academic research on industrial performanceas these examples illustrate, collaboration between amcs and physical science and engineering departments has been a consistent pattern in the medicaldevice industry. in some cases, collaborations date back many years. currentcollaborative efforts often are continuations of longstanding cooperation between engineers, scientists, and medical faculty. tissue engineering is an example. one of the most productive collaborations was between joseph vacanti, apediatric surgeon at massachusetts general hospital in boston, and robertlanger, a professor of chemical engineering at mit. basically, tissue engineeringinvolves creating a scaffold of an artificial, biodegradable polymer, which is thenseeded with living cells and immersed in growth factors. as the cells multiply,they fill up the scaffold and grow into a threedimensional tissue. r&d wasfocused on creating organs and body parts, such as bone, skin, pancreas, teeth,breast, heart valves, arteries and veins, urinary tract, and cartilage. this research,and the involvement of academic faculty in the creation of startup firms, spawnedan entirely new industry. lysaght et al. (1998) documented the creation of40 startup firms in tissue engineering, 10 of which had gone public at a marketcapitalization of $1.7 billion in january 1998.the increase in interdisciplinary research collaborations has also been stimulatedby several federal funding initiatives. for instance, several engineering research centers funded by nsf perform research relevant to medical devices. these include thecenter for the engineering of living tissues at georgia institute of technology andthe emory school of medicine, the engineering research center for computerintegrated surgical systems and technology at johns hopkins university, the engineered biomaterials engineering research center at the university of washington,and the engineering research center in bioengineering educational technologies atvanderbilt university. other agencies have also funded interdisciplinary researchcenters. the center for integration of medicine and innovative technology (cimit),established with funding from the massachusetts general hospital and dod, involves various clinical specialties in the partners health care system in boston, mit,and draper laboratory, as well as industrial partners in the partners health caresystem in boston (parrish, 1998). cimit is devoted to the development and evaluation of innovative diagnostic and therapeutic devices.case study: center for integration of medicineand innovative technologycimit was founded in 1993 to accelerate the generation, development, andtimetopractice of innovative and highimpact concepts in minimally invasivetherapy that improve the quality and lower the cost of healthcare delivery. cimitoperates as a consortium that includes massachusetts general hospital and thebrigham and womenõs hospital, both of which provide clinical expertise,and mit and draper laboratory, which provide basic technical and engineering expertise.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry93in 1998, with the consortium structure in place, cimit won a competitivefederal award for minimally invasive healthcare technologies, administeredthrough the u.s. army. this unconventional funding source allows cimit toundertake highrisk, highreward research that spans a wide range of scientificand technical fields. army funding allows cimit to pursue shortterm, unconventional, developmental, integrative, and sometimes speculative research, inaddition to longer term, clinical, and basic science projects.to maximize the potential for interdisciplinary collaborations, cimit isorganized as a matrix, with clinical focus areas: cardiovascular; stroke; traumaand critical care, supported by a technological infrastructure comprised of technology teams; biomaterials; endoscopic tools; endovascular tools; energy delivery; medical imaging; microsensors; simulation and modeling; surgical planning;and tissue engineering. cimit also has an outcomes and technology assessmentprogram to analyze the cost effectiveness of new therapies and devices. researchactivities are supplemented by a broad industry collaboration initiative, afundraising initiative, and an education/outreach initiative.industry collaboration is a major component of cimit, which uses a hierarchical mechanism for industryfunded research. cimit conducts projectspecific research funded or performed in conjunction with industry. at the next level, companies interested in multiple areas of cimit research may join the cimit industrialpartnership program in order to gain access to physician consultation, prepublicationreports, and symposiums. lastly, corporations with a business interest in integrative technologies that would otherwise have to negotiate multiple research agreements with multiple departments can become strategic alliance partners of cimit,thereby making a longterm commitment to research in minimally invasive therapyand ancillary technologies. industry gains early access to opinion leaders, noveltechnologies, and interdepartmental expertise. for cimit, industry collaborationprovides a research focus as well as additional research dollars. cimit enables thearmy to leverage research dollars and provides a conduit for transitioning researchand technology into clinical practice or the device industry.academic medical centersamcs conduct research that contributes to the development and diffusion ofmedical devices. amcs have been involved in: (1) generating knowledge abouthuman physiology and pathophysiology; (2) developing product ideas, deviceprototypes, and manufacturing methods; (3) clinical testing and feedback;(4) modifying existing products; and (5) discovering new indications of use.physiology and pathophysiologyamcs are an important source of knowledge concerning human physiologyand pathophysiology. understanding the electrophysiology of the heart, forthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94the impact of academic research on industrial performanceexample, is critical for designing a pacemaker or implantable defibrillator, as iscirculatory physiology for designing artificial hearts and circulatory assist devices. similarly, knowledge of renal physiology, which has been crucial in elucidating the pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics of hemodialysis, has contributed to the development of improved dialysis machines. research increasinglyinvolves collaborations between basic science departments (e.g., physiology andpharmacology), engineering departments (e.g., mechanical, electrical, and chemical), and clinical departments (e.g., surgery and medicine).another important research focus is health information systems. comparedto other service industries, especially financial services, the diffusion of information technology in health care has been slow. the role of university faculty indeveloping and commercializing health information systems is reviewed in thefollowing case study.case study: development of the medical informationsystem industry in the united statesthe advent of medicare and medicaid in the mid1960s marked the beginningof the transformation of the healthcare delivery system. these federal programsprovided enormous new resources for medical care, but also initiated significantnew reporting requirements for receiving institutions. the combination of increasedpatient demand and the need for a more sophisticated administrative infrastructurecreated a demand for information. at the same time, the development and industrialuse of information technology developed to the point that it could be adapted to thehealthcare industry. one of the major barriers to the transfer and growth of information technology was the absence of industrial organizations capable of financing, absorbing, and adapting the technology. in the 1960s, most hospitals werecharitable institutions, and most physicians were in solo practices.research in medicine (carried out in medical schools and amcs) has beenconcentrated in the scientific and practice arenas, focused on basic causes ofdisease and the drugs, devices, and procedures to treat them. however, with theentry by the federal government into the direct delivery of medical care, congressprovided funds for research into medical computer applications, mainly throughnih, but also through a number of directed programs in other federal organizations and the newly created national library of medicine.by the 1970s, two strategies emerged. the first, derived from the researchsupport of nih and other agencies, was a new specialtyñmedical informaticsñin a relatively small number of institutions and mainly federally supported. thesecond, the business needs of hospitals and doctors, spawned the development ofa growing number of commercial enterprises, often as outgrowths of ibm, whichdominated the field of business applications for hospitals. information technology rapidly expanded from purely business applications to more clinical areasand, more recently, into decision support areas.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry95compared to other service industries, especially financial services, the dispersion of information technology in health care has been slow. in 2001, almost38 years after medicare and medicaid were introduced, healthcare informatics,which lists the top 100 medical information technology companies by revenue,found only four that had exceeded $1 billion in revenue; the next highest was$523 million, and the next $435 million. number 100 was $3.7 million. the totalmarket is estimated to be as much as $50 billion (in a healthcare industry of morethan $1 trillion). the direct, traceable transfer of academically developed systemsto commercial use has followed two tracks: (1) direct transfer of results of government and/or institutionsponsored programs; and (2) the results of privatelyfunded programs.in the late 1960s, government agencies gave grants to academic institutionsfor r&d on computer systems. in almost every case, funds were matched byinternal institutional funds because it was believed that these projects would alsobe beneficial to the operation of the hospital. after initial development, the hospital either gave or sold the programs to a company to develop systems for otherhospitals. the second track was university personnel who left and began startupcompanies that have become significant commercial enterprises.an example of a major academic contribution began with research at thelaboratory of computer science at the massachusetts general hospital(mgh), one of the principal teaching hospitals of harvard medical school.governmentsponsored research resulted in important commercial outcomes,such as the language mumps (mgh utility multiprogramming system), whichwent on to be used in many applications and was supported by both a mumpsusers group and the mumps development committee, which managed themumps ansi standard.one early example of an institutionsponsored transfer was the work ofhomer warner of the latter day saints (lds) hospital, the principal teachinghospital of the university of utah medical school (later named intermountainhealth system), in the development of computerized hospital information systems. lds developed both medlab and health evaluation through logicalprocessing (help). in the 1980s, the rights were acquired by the 3m companyand commercialized as a leading clinical information system.another example, which resulted from research funded directly by government that was spun off into a private company, is public health automatedmedical information system (phamis). initially, a government contract to automate the records of the public health hospitals was given to malcolm glaser at theuniversity of washington. in the 1980s, the government closed the hospitals andtransferred ownership of the resulting information system to glaser who startedthe commercial company. the phamis hospital information system was namedlastword. the company went public and was acquired by the idx company in1997. the combined company was the tenth largest in the health informationtechnology industry in 2001.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96the impact of academic research on industrial performancea second spinoff of mgh was meditech, now the twentieth largest healthinformation technology company. the principals who developed mumps leftmgh to form meditech and it has developed several generations of proprietarylanguages following mumps (mis and magic) and used them to develophospital information systems that are now installed in more than one thousand hospitals.a final example relates to two efforts at the beth israel and peter bentbrigham hospitals (pbbh), also principal teaching hospitals of harvard medicalschool. a program begun in 1976 under the leadership of warner slack andhoward bleich, both professors at harvard medical school, sponsored mainly bygovernment grants, expanded from research on medical informatics to operational systems for laboratories, pharmacies, other laboratories, and routine services. a second project (known as bics) at pbbh focused on order entry andother operational functions. commercial spinoffs resulted from both projects.a related example involves the work of dr. dennis gillings, a statistician andepidemiologist from the university of north carolina school of public health. dr.billings started a company that grew into quintiles, a major corporation that supports clinical trials, pharmacoeconomics, and the health service research needs ofthe pharmaceutical, biotechnology, and medical device industries.examples of privately funded research that have contributed to the industryalso abound. one example of the direct translation of an amc product development project funded by private dollars to a public company is transition systems, inc. the system was originally developed as an internal clinical costaccounting system for the growing managed care market. new england medicalcenter received private foundation support in 1981 to develop a managementcontrol system that combined clinical and financial data. when medicare shiftedfrom costbased reimbursement to prospective payments to providers based ondiagnosisrelated groups (drgs) in 1984, there was a widespread demand forcostaccounting systems, and new england medical center transformed theproject team into a corporate spinoff, retaining the majority ownership. thecompany prospered and went public in conjunction with an investment grouppartnership 10 years later.a second example is a company whose products were developed by thehealth policy institute at boston university. health payment review was formedwith venture capital funding to market products that added clinical appropriateness to the payment methods of managed care companies. after going public, thecompany was acquired by hbo, inc., which, in turn, was acquired by mckessonin 1999, the third largest health information technology company in 2001.the flow of researchers forming new commercial startup companies continues. the managers of many companies that serve niche markets, such as electronic medical records and disease management, started as participants in academic research teams. thus, the array of information technology, which isbecoming critical to the success of managed care, is likely to be infused with athe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry97continuing stream of developments from amcs to industry. however, as amcsbecome more insistent on retaining value from the results of their research, theyare beginning to take equity positions in companies willing to commercializetheir research. for example, the pbbhõs bics system has been incorporated intothe public company, eclypsis, in which partners health care system, the parentof the pbbh, holds an equity position.in conclusion, it appears that the greatest impact of amc research on information technology development has come from entrepreneurs who leave academicenvironments with research experience and ideas of how that experience can betransformed into commercial products. successful individuals have garnered venture capital and eventually either consolidated companies into larger health information companies or made public offerings as independent companies.ideas, prototypes, and manufacturing methodsclinicians/academic researchers not only identify the need for new devicesor improvements in existing devices, but, because they are also the eventual usersof their devices, they are often the innovators and builders of original prototypes.von hippel and finkelstein (1979), for example, described how users were involved in the invention of the automated clinical chemical analyzer. other studiesin the area of renal dialysis, intrauterine devices, catheters, and mri machineshave presented similar findings (shaw, 1987, gelijns 1991, gelijns androsenberg, 1995; gelijns et al., 1998). however, academic researchers are oftenunable to advance projects beyond a certain point because critical enabling technologies are missing or are too specialized to be developed in the laboratory orelsewhere in the university. to overcome this hurdle, researchers often formpartnerships with industrial firms with the applicable technological expertise andinterest in the proposed application.the contributions of academic faculty in the development of device prototypes can be documented for the whole clinical spectrum of medical devicecategories, ranging from diagnostic devices to therapeutic devices. in diagnosticdevices, for example, robert ledley, professor of physiology, biophysics, andradiology at georgetown university medical center, developed the first prototype for a whole body ct scanner, patented the device, and created a company,digital information systems, to commercialize it. pfizer ultimately licensed thedevice and introduced it into clinical practice in 1975.in therapeutic devices, numerous examples show the central role of clinicalfaculty in the development of new or modified devices. in gynecologicallaparoscopy, for example, the gynecologist kurt semm at the university of kielworked with the device company storz to develop a whole range of instrumentsthat could be moved through the operative channel of the endoscope or any othercannula (gelijns and rosenberg, 1999). through storzõs close collaborationswith semm and hopkins, this firm became the leading manufacturer ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98the impact of academic research on industrial performancegynecological laparoscopes worldwide. the cardiologist andreas gruentzig,then at the university of zurich, collaborated with the device firm schneider todevelop the first percutaneous, transluminal, coronary angioplasty catheter. therole of amcs in the development of focused ultrasound therapies is another casein point.case study: development of focused ultrasound therapiesclinical ultrasound works much the same way as radarñenergy is producedby a transducer, and the reflected energy is received and processed by a receiver.the time between signal transmission and reception correlates directly with distance, and the amplitude of the return indicates the material properties of thereflecting surface. when an array of acoustic transducers is used, the resultingfanbeam image shows distance and amplitude as a function of the placement ofthe transducer along the array. in this mode, ultrasound is used primarily fordiagnostic purposes, such as cardiovascular or fetal imaging. just as optical lensescan focus light on a single spot, however, acoustic lenses can focus ultrasound ona single spot. in this mode, ultrasound becomes a therapeutic tool, rather than astrictly diagnostic tool.the principles behind using acoustic energy for diagnostic purposes havebeen known since at least 1942, when researchers at columbia university demonstrated the operation of a focused ultrasound generator capable of producingfocal heating in paraffin blocks, liver tissue, and inside the brains of animals(lynn et al., 1942). subsequently, significant advances were made at the university of illinois, as well as the massachusetts general hospital and harvard medical school. these early applications of focused ultrasound were used to examinecentral nervous system tissue (fry et al., 1955) and the brain (basauri and lele,1962; fry and fry, 1960; lele, 1962). by the late 1970s, the broader use ofultrasound in surgery was considered a viable treatment modality (fry, 1978;lele, 1975).by the 1970s, the dominant obstacle to the use of focused ultrasound fortherapy was no longer the delivery of acoustic energy, but the inability to monitorthe extent of the therapy. there are two aspects to this obstacle. first, becausefocused ultrasound must operate with a relatively small focus spot to deliversufficiently high energy, realtime monitoring of the focus location is necessaryto ensure that the entire target zone has been treated. monitoring is particularlyimportant to determine the duration of the therapyñsometimes up to severalhours. second, because the purpose of focused ultrasound therapy is to induceeither coagulation or tissue necrosis, the inability to monitor the induced temperature changes in the targeted tissue meant that it was nearly impossible toestablish rigorous treatment protocols. for these reasons, advances in magneticresonance (mr) physics, which led to an understanding of how mr can be usedto monitor temperature, and the integration of magnetic resonance imaging (mri)the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry99with focused ultrasound therapy for imagebased guidance became key enablingtechnologies for using focused ultrasound for therapy. based on the interrelationship between focused ultrasound therapy and mr, companies with significantbusiness interests in highend imaging equipment, such as ge, began to invest insponsored research in focused ultrasound. ge sponsored the brigham andwomenõs hospitalñan amc affiliated with harvard medical schoolñto further develop this technology. indeed, the collaboration between brigham and gewas so complete that ge researchers were contributing, or even leading, authorsof several of the major papers on the topic of focused ultrasound (e.g., cline et al.,1992, 1994).by the early 1990s, the potential for focused ultrasound was beginning to berealized. numerous studies on the use of focused ultrasound for prostate hyperplasia were conducted at various amcs; focused ultrasound therapy on braintissue without prior removal of a section of the skull was initially demonstrated atbrigham (hynynen and jolesz, 1998), as well as new treatment options for theablation of breast fibroadenomas (hynynen et al., 2001). as of the late 1990s,numerous research activities in focused ultrasound were under way at the university of michigan, the mayo clinic, and elsewhere (spera, 1998).although the market demand for focused ultrasound technology remainslow, many clearly believe in its potential. focus surgery, inc., for example, hassecured licenses for therapeutic applications of focused ultrasound in a number oforgan systems, including the prostate, brain, liver, kidney, pancreas, and breast.mri manufacturers, including ge, siemens, and phillips, are all believed to beactively pursuing this technology (spera, 1998). like other imaging technologies(e.g., ct, mr), focused ultrasound is a technology that was born in academicresearch settings and has gained commercial interest. industry is now turning toamcs for both new insights and clinical validations.clinical testing and feedbackimprovements in product design depend in large measure on extended clinical testing that requires close collaborative relationships between industry andacademia, sometimes involving several major medical schools and their teachinghospitals (gelijns and rosenberg, 1999). the clinical data generated by testingnot only provide feedback for altering product designs, but also provide a basisfor obtaining fda premarketing and payer coverage approval, and thereby leadto widespread market access. in recent years, spending on clinical trials by industry has increased substantially.amcs have traditionally been involved in the testing of prototype devicesand have been the source of patients for extensive clinical trials. amcs have beenthe venue of care for patients who need implantable devices and invasive procedures. amc faculty members were often involved in designing, conducting, andanalyzing clinical trials, but in the last decade contract research organizationsthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100the impact of academic research on industrial performance(cros) have captured part of this market (moskowitz and thompson, 1997).cros are private, forprofit organizations engaged in the management of clinicaltrials, including protocol design, patient recruitment, data collection, data management, monitoring, and analysis. in the medical device industry, cro useis not common; only 13 percent of medical device firms use cros (whereas90 percent of drug firms use cros) (centerwatch, 2001).only a small percentage of devices (i.e., class 3 fda devices and a smallsubset of 510(k) devices) must undergo rigorous safety and efficacy evaluation.as a result, the overall number of randomized controlled trials for devices is low.the number is slowly increasing, however, as the fda grapples with changingits policies about which devices require rigorous evaluation. the fda mustensure that device trials take into account ethical, technical, and methodologicalchallenges at various stages of the evaluation process.to begin with, choosing the optimal time to initiate a device trial is more ofa challenge than the same decision for a pharmaceutical. a pharmaceutical compound generally does not undergo substantial changes as it progresses from animal to human studies. devices, however, undergo extensive modifications andrefinements during the development phase, and early evaluations run the risk offailure or, at least, the need for redesign and retesting, which entails time andmonetary expenses that few startup companies can afford.once the optimal time to begin a clinical evaluation is established, decisionsconcerning which venue and which clinicians to engage to test the device can havea major effect on how the results of the trial will be interpreted and whether thedevice is widely adopted. in contrast to pharmaceuticals, the efficacy of a surgicallyimplanted device can be linked to the skill of the implanting surgeon. thus, conducting a trial in a highly specialized medical center that has unique surgicalexpertise may result in a successful trial but may not lead to widespread use.blind studies, an important technique for controlling observational bias inevaluating the safety and efficacy of new clinical interventions, is also problematic in trials of invasive or implantable devices. the clinician who implants adevice cannot implant placebos; blind studies are not possible when the comparative therapy is not a device. randomization is also a problem in device trials,especially in the case of a lifethreatening illness, in which case both patient andphysician expect that the device is their best hope and would be devastated tolearn, up front, that they would not receive the preferred therapy. this deterssome patients and physicians from entering into device trials; others might enrollbut seek treatment outside the protocol if they donõt receive the therapy theywant. this might lead to a losstofollowup or outofprotocol crossover, whichcould ruin a smallscale trial. the ethical dilemma is heightened when there areno alternative therapies and assignment to a control group means essentially notherapy (moskowitz and thompson, 1997).measuring survival in trials that compare devices and medical therapiesposes methodological challenges. when device therapy involves a high upfrontthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry101operative risk, but subsequently a reduced mortality compared to the controltherapy, the survival curves are likely to cross. analyzing the differences dependson the analytical method chosen and the time frame of the analysis. most analytical methods (e.g., logrank, wilcoxon test) average risk over the followupperiod. so, extending or reducing the followup time can potentially reverse theordering of relative efficacy because less or more weight, respectively, will begiven to mortality in the perioperative period (rose et al., 1999).another technical constraint is the limitation of patient recruitment. devicesoften have small numbers of potential users and, therefore, few eligible candidates for clinical trials. also, device implantation and monitoring usually requirespecialized training or skills that may not be available in large enough numbers toconduct trials at several amcs.university research could make significant contributions to evaluative research for medical devices by addressing some of the methodological challengesof device randomized control trials (rcts). moreover, academic analysis couldclarify the bases for policy changes at the fda, for example, with respect to thestrength and limitations of rcts, and the implications of expediting the approval process (e.g., shifting some of the premarketing research to the postmarketing setting).product modification and discovery of new indications of useof course, the development process does not end with the widespread introduction of new products into practice. their eventual uses depend on an extensiveimprovement process that vastly increases their practical applications. users,often clinicians in amcs, provide necessary feedback about the shortcomings ofnew devices. consider, for instance, the evolution of endoscopes. todayõs òcoldlightó videoendoscope, with a computerchip camera at its tip that can be usedboth for diagnosis and therapy, is a world apart from its predecessor in the 1950s.during those years, for instance, the lamp at the tip of the endoscope could causeserious burns, vision was often restricted, the quality of images was poor, therapeutic applications were essentially nonexistent, and obtaining permanent documentation of the images was highly problematic. feedback from users encouraged manufacturers to develop subsequent generations of endoscopes. whereasthe evolution of endoscopic technology did indeed require a few major improvements, such as the introduction of fiber optics and video capabilities, its currentcharacteristics are the result of a continuous flow of refinements that have resulted in increased flexibility, miniaturization, and improved visibility, whichhave vastly expanded the therapeutic possibilities of endoscopy (gelijns androsenberg, 1999).in addition, clinicians can expand the applications of a device to new clinicaluses. in the case of gi endoscopy, for instance, academicians expanded the use offiberoptic endoscopes from the upper gi tract to gastroenterological areas, suchthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102the impact of academic research on industrial performanceas the esophagus, duodenum, and colon. lasers were originally introduced forophthalmologic and dermatologic purposes but are currently being used for awide variety of indications in gynecology, cardiac surgery, and oncology, toname but a few. the identification of new applications, sometimes totally unexpected, is an important contribution of academic researchers to the medicaldevice industry (rosenberg, 1996; gelijns et al., 1998).mechanisms of transfer from academia to industryadvances have been transferred to industry by various routes. traditionally,research advances were placed in the public domain either through publicationsor presentations at conferences. another common practice was to hire academicresearchers as consultants or researchers, sometimes after firms had sponsoredtheir research. another pathway that has expanded very rapidly in recent decadesis university patenting and licensing practices. pfizer licensed georgetownõswhole body scanner, whereas syntex, varian, and ge all entered the ct field bylicensing important technical improvements from research at stanford university. university faculty members have also been active in the creation of startupfirms to develop and market their inventions.impact on industrial performancepast and present contributionsone of the defining characteristics of the medical devices and equipmentsector is a strong dependency between universities and industry. based on theresults of its factfinding efforts, the panel concludes that academic researchhas had a substantial impact on the industryõs performance. the contributionof universities goes well beyond educating new generations of employees andmaking fundamental advances in scientific and technological knowledge thatmay contribute to the development of new medical devices. it includes a highdegree of involvement in product development, product evaluation and introduction, and product modification.in making this observation, the panel does not wish to diminish the longterm importance of training people in research techniques or making fundamental advances in the scientific and technological knowledge base. in fact,basic advances in physics, mathematics, and chemistry have directly contributed to a whole range of medical devices and equipment. moreover, with theintegration of the biological sciences and the engineering sciences, as in tissueengineering, the contributions of university research may be even greater in thefuture. nevertheless, the panel wants to highlight the role of amcs in thedevelopment, clinical testing and evaluation, modification, and extensions ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry103use of prototype devices. the case studies above represent just a few illustrations of their importance.trends, opportunities, challenges, and gapsalthough university research has made substantial contributions to the medical devices and equipment industry in the past, the rapidly changing healthcare environment is creating both new opportunities and new challenges foruniversityindustry interactions. in recent years, the nih budget has grown, allowing for an increase in research on the biological bases of health and disease.the increase in nih funding does not, however, obviate the need to addressquestions about the allocation of these funds for different types of research.traditionally, nih support for research closely coupled to the development ofmedical devices has been limited. recently, nih, as well as nsf, created newinitiatives to encourage bioengineering research to compensate for the plannedclosing in 2006 of the whitaker foundation, which has provided significantsupport for bioengineering research in the past (whitaker foundation, 2001).moreover, most federal investment in biomedical research goes to supportlaboratoryoriented (or nonhuman subjects) research; much less support is allocated for studies of the very diverse activities that come under the rubric ofclinical research. the latter have traditionally depended heavily on internal funding from academic health centers, particularly crosssubsidies from patient carerevenues. as pressures for cost containment increase and clinical faculty competefor contracts with managed care organizations, however, clinical income hasdecreased substantially, which means less money is available to crosssubsidizeresearch. in addition, recent studies have shown that academic faculty in regionswith high managed care penetration publish fewer papers and are less likely to beawarded nih grants (griner and blumenthal, 1998). thus, although nih fundscontinue to increase, changes in the financing of medical care are creating seriousuncertainties in the funding flow that sustains clinical research.various disciplines and various schools in universities contribute to the development of medical devices. however, establishing interdisciplinary links inthe university between faculty in the natural sciences and engineering with faculty in medicine has been difficult in the past. with the emergence of new fieldsof research, such as tissue engineering, and encouraged by interdisciplinary research funding initiatives by both nih and nsf, creating interdisciplinary linkages may be easier in the future.although there has been a strong interdependency between universities andmedical devices and equipment firms in the past, opportunities are being createdfor more systematic interactions. with the rapid increase in the costs of conducting research, for example, universities and companies may look for ways to sharebasic facilities, such as animal laboratories or expensive equipment (e.g., a protonbeam unit) (their, 1998). another mechanism for improving universityindustrythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104the impact of academic research on industrial performancerelations may be the creation of more systematic research partnerships. oneinteresting model is the center for innovative minimally invasive therapy, whichinvolves faculty from amcs and the physical and engineering sciences, as wellas industry partners (parrish, 1998).systematic partnerships may also have considerable payoffs in product modification and the discovery of new indications of use. for most medical devices,new uses result from application to other organ systems, although these transfersoften require design modifications. the first endoscopes, for example, were usedfor cystoscopy early in this century. in the 1960s, after the development andintroduction of fiber optics, gi endoscopy and gynecological laparoscopy became well established. it took nearly four decades to transfer laparoscopy fromgynecology to general surgery, where it transformed gallbladder surgery. earlieridentification of such secondary indications may have substantial benefits, forsociety and for industry.universities are an important location for clinical testing. universities, aswell as private cros in recent years, have been active in designing, conducting,and analyzing clinical trials. major questions, however, remain about the appropriate evaluation of new devices, especially innovative and implantable devices.these questions differ significantly from questions about the evaluation ofpharmaceuticals.traditionally, the research results of amcs that have been most important inthe development of medical devices were not patented but were placed in the publicdomain through open publication. in recent years, as a result of a number of changesin federal policy, there has been a major upsurge in university patenting and licensing. the panel has little doubt that this increase in patenting has strengtheneduniversityindustry interactions, to the benefit of both the economy and the university. despite these benefits, however, the panel believes some hard thinking andempirical research should be done to assess the consequences of these changes onthe role of universities in the innovation system. have these developments indeedincreased the effectiveness of technology transfer from universities to industry? orwould the licensed technologies have been picked up by industry anyhow? andwhat are the unintended consequences? are universities changing the nature oftheir research activities from fundamental, longrange research to applied research?has the upsurge in university patenting increased the transaction costs of science?are universities licensing inventions that can be classified exclusively as researchtools? all of these questions should be addressed.recommendationsthe panel was asked to examine the contributions of academic research tothe medical devices and equipent industry and to delineate ways of improvingsuch contributions in the future. this report provides evidence that academicthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry105research has contributed strongly to industrial performance in the medical devices and equipment sector; at the same time, steps can be undertaken to improvethese contributions.recommendation 31. the panel concurs with recent recommendations by thecommonwealth task force on academic health centers that the national institutes of health and other institutions should recognize the importance and vulnerability of clinical research by increasing support for clinical research at academicmedical centers.recommendation 32. optimizing the contributions of university research willrequire creating effective linkages between faculty in engineering schools andfaculty in medicine. the panel recommends that universities invest in interdisciplinary centers to generate new knowledge for advancing medical devices and todevelop new diagnostic and therapeutic modalities. universities are also encouraged to decrease barriers to conducting interdisciplinary research. funding agencies should carefully evaluate new interdisciplinary programs and initiatives inbiology/medicine and engineering and encourage the growth of the most promising ones.recommendation 33. universities and medical device firms should exploreways of creating more systematic partnerships between universities (especiallyacademic medical centers) and industrial firms for the development and evaluation of new, costeffective medical devices. models worth contemplating includeinterdisciplinary centers for the development and evaluation of medical devicesthat include industrial partners, the sharing of expensive facilities (e.g., animallaboratories), exchange fellowships, and the teaching of joint courses. moreover,the panel believes that both society and the medical device industry would benefitsubstantially if new indications of use could be identified sooner after the development of a device. to expedite the discovery of new indications, device manufacturers might draw more fully on interdisciplinary panels of academic expertswho would consider how a new technological capability (e.g., lasers or positronemission tomography) that is useful for one purpose might also be useful (modified as necessary) in another field.recommendation 34. federal agencies that fund academic research relevant tothe medical device industry should support research on the effectiveness of current incentives for transferring research findings to the industry and ways ofimproving the transfer process. given the short product life cycles of manymedical devices, the timing of decisions and processes pertaining to transferaffects the short windows of commercial opportunity.recommendation 35. academic researchers should bring together industry,regulatory, and clinical panels to discuss requirements for device evaluations.discussions should include regulatory requirements (e.g., market clearance bythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106the impact of academic research on industrial performancethe food and drug administration), thirdparty payment eligibility, market research, and information dissemination/marketing issues (e.g., directtoconsumeradvertising). regulation, payment/reimbursement systems, and marketing all haveprofound effects on the pathway for getting device concepts to users. therefore,anticipating and understanding regulatory, payment, and marketing needs shouldbe incorporated and fed back into device design and refinement. academic centers (including business schools) and industry can share considerable insight andexpertise in all of these areas.recommendation 36. given that all partiesñphysicians, patients, manufacturers, and payersñbenefit from the rigorous information on the value of new andimproved medical devices, the panel recommends that payers, national institutesof health, and medical device firms define the circumstances under whichpublicprivate support for device trials is appropriate.referencesadvamed (advanced medical technology association). 2001. u.s. medical technology industrystatistics. washington, d.c.: advamed.agnew, b. 1998. multidisciplinary research: nih plans bioengineering initiative. science 280(5369):1516ð1518.basauri, l., and p.p. lele. 1962. a simple method for production of trackless focal lesions withfocused ultrasound: statistical evaluation of the effects of irradiation on the central nervoussystem of the cat. journal of physiology 160(3): 513ð534.centerwatch. 2001. assessing change in cro usage practices. centerwatch newsletter 8(1): article 201.chronicle information resources. 1999. the chronicle of cardiovascular and internal medicine.mississauga, ontario: chronicle information resources ltd.cline, h.e., k. hynynen, c.j. hardy, r.d. watkins, j.f. schenck, and f.a. jolesz. 1994. mr temperature mapping of focused ultrasound surgery. magnetic resonance in medicine 31(6):628ð636.cline, h.e., j.f. schenck, k. hynynen, r.d. watkins, s.p. souza, and f.a. jolesz. 1992. mrguidedfocused ultrasound surgery. journal of computer assisted tomography 16(6): 956ð965.commonwealth fund task force on academic health centers. 1999. from bench to bedside:preserving the research mission of academic health centers. boston, mass.: the commonwealth fund.directorõs panel on clinical research. 1997. report to the advisory committee to the nih director.bethesda, md.: national institutes of health.fry, f.j., ed. 1978. ultrasound: its applications in medicine and biology. part i. new york: elsevierpress.fry, w.j., j.w. barnard, f.j. fry, r.f. krumins, and j.f. brennan. 1955. ultrasonic lesions in themammalian central nervous system. science 122(3168): 517ð518.fry, w.j., and f.j. fry. 1960. fundamental neurological research and human neurosurgery usingintense ultrasound. ire transactions on medical electronics 7: 166ð181.gelijns, a.c. 1991. innovation in clinical practice: the dynamics of medical technology development. washington, d.c.: national academy press.gelijns, a.c., and n. rosenberg. 1995. from the scalpel to the scope: endoscopic innovations ingastroenterology, gynecology, and surgery. pp. 67ð96 in medical innovation at the crossroads. volume vi. sources of medical technology: universities and industry, a.c. gelijnsand n. rosenberg, eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry107gelijns, a.c., and n. rosenberg. 1999. diagnostic devices: an analysis of comparative advantages. pp. 312ð358 in the sources of industrial leadership in seven industries, d. moweryand r. nelson, eds. boston: cambridge university press.gelijns, a.c., n. rosenberg, and g. laubach. 1994. medical device innovation: opportunities andbarriers for small firms. washington, d.c.: national academy press.gelijns, a.c., n. rosenberg, and a.j. moskowitz. 1998. capturing the unexpected benefits of medical research. new england journal of medicine 339(10): 693ð698.goodnight, j. 2002. statement submitted to the record, committee on small business, u.s. houseof representatives. june 21, 2001. available online at: www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/t010621.html.[june 24, 2003]griner, p., and d. blumenthal. 1998. reforming the structure and management of academic medicalcenters: case studies of ten institutions. academic medicine 73: 817ð825.healthcare informatics. 2001. the healthcare informatics 100. available online at: http://www.healthcareinformatics.com/issues/2001/0601/jun01.htm. [june 24, 2003]herman, w.a., d.e. marlowe, and h. rudolph. 1998. future trends in medical device technology:results of an expert survey. rockville, md: center for devices and radiological health, u.s.food and drug administration. available online at: http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ost/trends/toc.html. [june 24, 2003]hopkins, h.h., and n.s. kapany. 1954. a flexible fibrescope, using static scanning. nature 173: 39ð41.hynynen, k., and f.a. jolesz. 1998. demonstration of potential noninvasive ultrasound brain therapythrough an intact skull. ultrasound in medicine and biology 24(2): 275ð283.hynynen, k., o. pomeroy, d.n. smith, p.e. huber, n.j. mcdannold, j. kettenbach, j. baum, s.singer, and f.a. jolesz. 2001. mr imagingguided focused ultrasound surgery of fibroadenomas in the breast: a feasibility study. radiology 219(1): 176ð185.iglehart, j.k. 1994. rapid changes for academic medical centers. part 1. new england journal ofmedicine 331(20): 1391ð1395.keller, k.h. 1998. how are changes in the health care environment affecting universityindustryresearch collaboration? presentation at the nae workshop on medical devices and theuniversityindustry connection: future directions, washington, d.c., november 2, 1998.lele, p.p. 1962. a simple method for production of trackless focal lesions with focused ultrasound.journal of physiology 160: 494ð512.lele, p.p. 1975. ultrasound in surgery. pp. 325ð340 in fundamental and applied aspects of nonionizing radiation, s.m. michaelson, e.l. carstensen, r, magin, and m.w. miller, eds. newyork: plenum press.lewin group. 2000. outlook for medical technology innovation. washington, d.c.: health industry manufacturers association.littell, c.l. 1994. datawatch. innovation in medical technology: reading the indicators. healthaffairs 13(3): 226ð235.lynn, j.g., r.l. zwemer, a.j. chick, and a.e. miller. 1942. a new method for the generation and useof focused ultrasound in experimental biology. journal of general physiology 26(1): 179ð193.lysaght, m.j., n.a. nguy, and k. sullivan. 1998. an economic survey of the emerging tissueengineering industry. tissue engineering 4(3): 231ð238.mcgrawhill and u.s. department of commerce. 2000. u.s. industry and trade outlook ô00. newyork: mcgrawhill.moskowitz, j., and j.n. thompson. 1997. preventing the extinction of the clinical research ecosystem. journal of the american medical association 278(1): 241ð245.nsf (national science foundation). 2000. federal r&d funding by budget function: fiscal years1998ð2000. arlington, va.: nsf.nsf. 2001. federal funds for research and development: fiscal years 1999, 2000, 2001. arlington,va.: nsf.ota (office of technology assessment). 1984. federal policies and the medical devices industry.washington, d.c.: government printing office.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108the impact of academic research on industrial performanceparrish, j. 1998. why cimit? why now? research perspectives online. available online at: http://www.mgh.harvard.edu/depts/pubaffairs/researchperspectives/aug98whycimit.htm. [june 24, 2003]rose, e.a., a.j. moskowitz, m. packer, j.a. sollano, d.l. williams, a.r. tierney, d.f. heitjan, p.meier, d.d. ascheim, r.g. levitan, a.d. weinberg, l.w. stevenson, p.a. shapiro, r.m.lazar, j.t. watson, d.j. goldstein, and a.c. gelijns. 1999. the rematch trial: rationale,design, and end points: randomized evaluation of mechanical assistance for the treatment ofcongestive heart failure. annals of thoracic surgery 67(3): 723ð730.rosenberg, n. 1996. uncertainty and technological change. pp. 334ð356 in the mosaic of economic growth, r. landau, t. taylor, and g. wright, eds. palo alto, calif.: stanford university press.rosenberg, n. 2000. interfaces between universities and industry. submitted to the canadian centerfor advanced studies.shaw, b.f. 1987. the role of the interaction between the manufacturer and the user in the technological innovation process. ph.d. dissertation. university of sussex, sussex, united kingdom.spera, g. 1998. the next wave in minimally invasive surgery. medical device and diagnosticindustry 20(8): 36ð44.spetz, j. 1995. physicians and physicists: the interdisciplinary introduction of the laser to medicine. pp. 41ð66 in sources of medical technology: universities and industry, n. rosenberg,a. gelijns, and h. dawkins, eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press.thier, s. 1998. academic medicine and the development of prototype technology. presentation atthe nae workshop on medical devices and the universityindustry connection: future directions, washington, d.c., november 2, 1998.u.s. bureau of the census. 2001. statistics for industrial groups and industries, 1999. annualsurvey of manufacturers. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.van heel, a.c.s. 1954. a new method of transporting optical images without aberrations. nature173: 39.von hippel, e.a., and s.n. finkelstein. 1979. analysis of innovation in automated clinical chemistry analyzers. science and public policy 6(1): 24ð37.watson, j.t., et.al. 1994. nhlbi program history. pp. 27ð32 in report of the workshop on theartificial heart: planning for evolving technologies. bethesda, md.: national institutes ofhealth.whitaker foundation. 2001. grant programs to phase out. available online at: http://www.whitaker.org/news/phaseout.html. [june 24, 2003]wilkerson group. 1995. forces reshaping the performance and contribution of the u.s. medicaldevice industry. washington, d.c.: health industry manufacturers association.zemel, t. 2002. venture capital investment stabilizes in 4q01, according to ventureone. pressrelease, january 28, 2002. san francisco: ventureone.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.109addendumemail questionnairethe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals in variousparts of the medical devices and equipment industry, some of whom attended thenovember 1998 workshop. included among the respondents were senior executives at biomet, inc., the center for integration of medicine and innovativetechnologies, general electric company, health quality, ibm, johnson &johnson, medintec, inc., pfizer, and rand corporation; professors with expertise in biomedical engineering, mechanical engineering, medical innovationmanagement, and policy from draper laboratories, massachusetts institute oftechnology, and washington university; and a representative of the food anddrug administration.the impact of academic research on industrialperformancemedical devices panelwe invite your responses to the questions that follow. in addition, please feelfree to add any general comments or responses under question 11 below. yourresponses will be used by our panel as background information for our report.any material used verbatim will not be attributed to you without seekingyour permission.1. could you describe briefly significant academic (i.e., universitybasedresearch ñ basic, applied, clinical, etc.) research contributions to the medicaldevices and equipment industry? (if possible, please supply references to published information that outlines the contributions.)2. overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrialperformance in the medical devices and equipment industry as (please put an x inone box): 1. very large 2. large 3. medium 4. small 5. very small/nonexistent3. what is the role of academic research in educating people who work inyour industry? (please focus on university research activities, rather than university education generally.)the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110the impact of academic research on industrial performance4. what structural forms of universityindustry collaboration lead to goodresults in your industry? an example of such a structure might be a discipline orindustryoriented òcenteró that solicits industry sponsors for a collection ofprojects that span a varied research program, or an academic medical center thatprovides a venue for clinical research. what seem to be the essential determinants of success of such structures?5. what are significant emerging trends or problems that the medical devicesand equipment industry will face in the future that could benefit from academic research?6. what changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to beresponsive to these industrial trends and problems?7. what single step could be taken by universities to enhance the impact ofacademic research on the industry?8. what single step could be taken by companies to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry?9. what single step could be taken by government to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry?10. do you see any downside to enhanced universityindustry research collaboration? things to be avoided?11. other comments? any comments, pointers to other studies, or suggestions would be appreciated.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry111workshop agendamedical devices and the universityindustryconnection:future directionsnovember 2, 1998national academies building2101 constitution avenue .nw.washington, d.c.9:00 a.m.welcoming remarks and overview of the broader nae projectjerome grossman, president, healthquality, inc.9:15 a.m.overview of the work of the medical devices and equipmentpanelannetine gelijns, (panel chair), director, international centerfor health outcomes and innovation research, columbiapresbyterian medical center9:40 a.m.how are changes in the health care environment affectinguniversityindustry research collaboration?kenneth keller, university of minnesota10:15break10:30 a.m.session i. basic academic scientific and engineering research:contributions to the medical device industrymoderator: clifford goodman, the lewin groupspeaker: donald engelman, yale universityspeaker: robert nerem, georgia institute of technologyrespondent: john linehan, the whitaker foundation12 p.m.lunch in meeting room12:45 p.m.session ii. academic medicine and the development of prototype technologymoderator: nathan rosenberg, stanford universityspeaker: samuel thier, partners health carerespondent: paul citron, medtronic, inc.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112the impact of academic research on industrial performance2:15 p.m.break2:30 p.m.session iii. clinical evaluative research on medical devices:universityindustry interactionsmoderator: frederick telling, pfizer, inc.speaker: richard rettig, randspeaker: alan moskowitz, columbia presbyterianmedical center4:00 p.m.open discussion. what have we learned today about theimpact of academic research on performance in the medicaldevice industry? how can the university research contributionand impact be enhanced?4:45 p.m.closing remarksjerome grossmanthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.medical devices and equipment industry113workshop attendeesannetine gelijns, chair *director, international center forhealth outcomes and innovationresearchcolumbia medical centerjames bensonhimas. morry blumenfeldgeneral manager, global advancedtechnologyge medical systemspaul citron *vice president, science andtechnologymedtronic, inc.diane daviespfizerdonald m. engelman *professor, department of molecular biophysics and biochemistryyale universitymarilyn fieldinstitute of medicinerobert fischellmedintecclifford goodmanthe lewin groupjeanne griffithdirector, science resourcesstudies divisionnational science foundationjerome h. grossman *president and ceohealth quality inc.elizabeth jacobsondeputy director for sciencecenter for devices andradiological healthkenneth h. kellerhhh institute for public affairsjohn linehanthe whitaker foundationstephen merrillnational research councildane millerairport industrial parkwarsaw, indianaalan moskowitzcolumbia medical centerrichard nelsoncolumbia universityrobert m. neremschool of mechanical engineeringgeorgia institute of technology*panel memberthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114the impact of academic research on industrial performancejohn parrishcenter for innovative minimallyinvasive therapymassachusetts general hospitalhomer pien *manager, biomedical technologies,and head, image recognitionsystems laboratoryc.s. draper laboratorypeer m. portnerpresident, novacor divisionbaxter cvgrichard a. rettigsenior social scientistrandedward b. robertsschool of managementmassachusetts institute of technologynathan rosenbergcenter for economic policy researchstanford universitystephen i. shapiromanaging directorthe wilkerson group, inc.kenneth shinepresident (until 2002)institute of medicinejohn s. taylordirector of researchnational venture capital associationfrederick telling *vice presidentpfizersamuel o. thierpresident and ceopartners health care systems, inc.john t. watsonacting deputy directornational heart, lung, and bloodinstitutenae program office stafftom weimer, directorproctor reid, associate directornathan kahl, project assistantrobert morgan, nae fellow and senior analyst*panel memberthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4report of the panel on theaerospace industrythis report was prepared by the panel on the aerospace industry, one of fivepanels formed by the committee on the impact of academic research on industrial performance. the panel of five included three members of the nae (onefrom academia and two from industry), one other member from academia, andone from industry. two of the nae members were also members of the parentcommittee. the charge to the panel was to evaluate the past impact of academicresearch on the performance of the aerospace industry and identify ways to increase the impact in light of recent and ongoing changes in the structure andeconomic situation of the industry. the report is intended for policy makers inindustry, government, and academia. industry performance was defined as shareholder value. this metric differs from the traditional measure of success inthe aerospace industry, which was its contribution to national security or to thespace program.the aerospace industry was selected for study as an example of an industry,now relatively mature, that developed with extensive funding by government inresearch and technology and that is dependent on advanced technologies for itspresent and future economic competitiveness. therefore, the industry might provide a baseline for comparison with other less mature industry sectors.the aerospace industry has been the beneficiary of more than 50 years ofgovernmentsubsidized research conducted by industry, universities, and government laboratories. subsidies have taken the form of direct funding by the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) and the u.s. air force,other defenserelated funding, incentives in government contracts, and tax incentives; research was focused primarily on improving performance to meet the115the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116the impact of academic research on industrial performanceneeds of national defense and the space race. in recent years, large cuts in federalsupport, combined with other competitive and financial pressures, have resultedin major changes in the industry.dramatic consolidation, largely the result of huge cuts in defense spendingand greater emphasis on the use of commercial, offtheshelf technologies in the1990s, as well as increasing global competition, has changed the scope, priorities,and practice of aerospace r&d. spending on r&d in the industry declinedthroughout the 1990s to less than half its peak in 1987. in 2000, total r&dspending (by government, industry, and other institutions) in aerospace totaledabout $10.3 billion, accounting for roughly 9 percent of r&d among manufacturing industries (nsf, 2001a). employment is down 40 percent from its peak in1989, and the number of scientists and engineers in 1999 was less than half thenumber employed in 1986 (aia, 2001). (it is interesting to note, however, thatover the last two decades scientists and engineers in the aerospace industry haveearned more than 25 percent more than their counterparts in other industrialsectors [aia, 2001].) as technologies have matured, margins have shrunk, costreductions have taken precedence over improvements in performance, and electronics and information technology now account for a large percentage of aerospace product value and technical emphasis. priorities in r&d have changedaccordingly.historic patterns of industryuniversity interaction, which were based onsignificant government funding of r&d, have been broken; new models willcertainly emerge that encompass not only r&d funding, practice, and expectations, but also engineering education. but first, significant cultural and practicalbarriers will have to be overcome. indeed, for academic research to have themaximum beneficial effect on the new aerospace industry, the entire structure ofacademic research in aerospace will have to change.scope of the studyaccording to government classifications, the aerospace industry includesaircraft (naics 336411), aircraft engines and engine parts (naics 336412),aircraft equipment and parts (naics 336413), missiles and space vehicles andparts (naics 336414), guided missile and space vehicle propulsion units andparts (naics 336415), and guided missile and space vehicle parts not classifiedelsewhere (naics 336419). the panel has expanded this definition to includespacebased information systems, a burgeoning segment of space commerce. theacademic community that supports the industry was also defined broadly to include departments of mechanical engineering, materials science and engineering,and computer science, as well as the relatively few departments of aerospace engineering.1overall industry sales for 2000 exceeded $146 billion (u.s. bureau of thecensus, 2002). the panel considered it essential to limit discussion to five sectorsthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry117of the industry that made significantly different contributions to total industryshipments of 1999ð2000.2¥gas turbine propulsion systems: $10 billion¥civil transport aircraft: $30 billion¥launch vehicles: $11 billion¥unmanned aerial vehicles: less than $1 billion¥spacebased information systems: $12 billionbecause the first three are mature sectors, cost and reliability have replacedperformance as their principle criteria for success. the last two are relativelyimmature sectors that are undergoing rapid development and are, therefore, moredependent on new technologies.gasturbine propulsion systemsthe gasturbine industry developed in the 1950s and 1960s with the rapidconversion of both military and commercial aircraft from reciprocating to jetpropulsion engines. initially, several companies entered the arena, but in a rathershort time all but about a halfdozen had dropped out, either because of the largefinancial investment required or because of technical difficulties. currently, threelarge manufacturers of jet enginesñgeneral electric aircraft engines, pratt &whitney, and rollsroyceñare engaged in intense competition for both militaryand commercial business. smaller firms supply niche markets, such as generalaviation or missiles.driven by competition for higher thrust/weight ratios and lower fuel consumption, the providers of jet engines are pressing materials and fluid mechanicaland solid mechanical design procedures to their limits. in this highstakes business, the development of a new engine costs up to $1 billion, and companies areeager to take advantage of the improved understanding and new techniques thatacademia can provide. the knowledge base for academic researchers is arcane,however, and the community of researchers is small. presently, only about a halfdozen universities in the united states are making significant contributions.civil transport aircraftprior to world war ii, the commercial aircraft industry was robust. with theintroduction of the jet transport in the 1950s, the industry entered a period ofrapid growth. since the late 1970s, sales of civil aircraft have more than doubled,from $14.3 billion to more than $38 billion (aia, 2001). like the engine industry, the commercial aircraft industry initially comprised several companies, allbut one of which have now been absorbed into the boeing company, which hasthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118the impact of academic research on industrial performancedominated the field for the last decade. in fact, because some aerospace firms thatare not formally part of boeing manufacture major components of boeing aircraft, its dominance is actually greater than it appears. boeingõs only substantialcompetition in commercial aircraft is airbus industry, a european consortium.the commercial transport market is fiercely contested, and market share canbe gained or lost by small differences in performance or cost. technologies toimprove performance and manufacturing are both critical to success, which createsa fertile field for academic research. a significant contribution of academic research to the industry has been the development of design techniques based incomputational fluid dynamics. for example, the aerospace design program at thegeorgia institute of technology receives financial support from a number of aerospace companies. in addition, the lean aerospace initiative at the massachusettsinstitute of technology (see box 41) and the automation and robotics researchinstitute at the university of texasarlington are addressing manufacturing technology and management issues and have attracted significant industry interest.box 41lean aerospace initiative at themassachusetts institute of technologythe lean aerospace initiative (lai) is a research program of the center fortechnology, policy, and industrial development and the department of aeronautics and astronautics at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit). lai waslaunched in 1993 by leaders of the u.s. air force, mit, defense aerospace businesses, and labor unions who recognized the potential of applying lean manufacturing and management concepts to the aerospace industry. lean manufacturingpractices, developed primarily by toyota and first documented by jameswomack, daniel roos, and daniel jones in the machine that changed the world(1991), have led to significant improvements in the automobile industry in terms ofcost, quality, and productivity. the elements of lean practices being addressed bylai include integrated product and process development, optimized product flow,total quality management in an environment of continuous improvement, andstrong employee participation.participants in lai are members of a consortium of government, industry, labor, and other universities. members include the aeronautical systems center andspace and missile commands of the u.s. air force; the office of safety andmission assurance of the national aeronautics and space administration (nasa);the boeing company, general electric aircraft engines, hewlett packard, lockheed martin, northrop grumman, pratt & whitney, raytheon, rockwell, rollsroyce allison, and trw; the international union of united automobile, aerospaceand agricultural implement workers of america; the aerospace industries association; and the university of chicago, university of washington, and whartonschool of business at the university of pennsylvania.lai represents a new model for research at mit. the research agenda andpriorities are developed jointly by mit researchers and customers, and users ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry119launch vehiclesthe launchvehicle industry grew out of the ballistic missile industry withthe dawn of the space age in 1958. the new industry was entirely dependent ongovernment funding until the birth of the communications satellite industry in the1970s. in the last 10 years, the commercial market for satellites has becomecomparable to the government market for satellites, missiles, and nasa missionhardware, and with the proliferation of communications satellite constellations,the demand for launch services has grown rapidly.3 there are currently threemajor u.s. suppliers of launch services (boeing, lockheed martin, and orbital)and four foreign suppliers of either launch vehicles or launch services.all but the two or three most recently developed launch vehicles have beenderived from ballistic missile technology, which was heavily funded by thefederal government from the 1950s through the 1970s. initially, academic research made substantial contributions in key technical areas, such as reentry,the research participate directly in the research process (e.g., case studies, benchmarking, and surveys). there is a great deal of interaction between sponsors andresearchers, and research objectives are established by consortium members;specific research plans and approaches are developed by mit researchers andreviewed and prioritized by focus teams of members. an lai research councilreviews and coordinates the research plans to ensure that the total research program meets stakeholder expectations. research plans have been established forfactory operations, product development, policy and external environment, supplier relations, and test and space operations.research results are organized into a systematic framework called the leanenterprise model (lem), which is used to communicate results to consortium members and is a model and catalyst for change in the defense aircraft industry. lemencompasses lean enterprise principles and practices derived from surveys, casestudies, and other research activities, and provides a framework for disseminatinglai research results, a reference tool for consortium members to benchmark theirlean attributes, and a tool to encourage the development of new lean paradigms inthe design, development, and production of military aerospace products. for consortium members, lem provides a guide to translating conceptual principles intopractical applications.lai has developed a unique approach to academic research in aerospace because it is not focused on a particular technology or product but addresses crosscutting topics throughout the aerospace enterprise, from customer and initial design to supply chain management and final product delivery. research and thedissemination of results depend on the active participation of consortium members. broad consortium membership from government, industry, labor, and otheruniversities is also unique. the program has been of great value to sponsors andmay provide a model for other research initiatives in the aerospace industry toaddress shortcomings identified by industry.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120the impact of academic research on industrial performancethe combustion of rocket engines, and the development of resin matrix composites, which are widely used in solidrocket motor cases, nozzles, and corevehicle components.4 in the past few years, launch vehicles have not been avery fertile field for academic research, partly because of the lack of newdevelopments and partly because the major problems have been developmentalrather than basic.unmanned aerial vehiclesalthough drones have been used since the beginning of aviation as targetsand as research vehicles, unpiloted aircraft became important militarily with theintroduction of cruise missiles enabled by the development of very small gasturbine engines and terrainfollowing guidance systems, which extended theirrange and gave them the capability of attacking designated targets. unmannedaerial vehicles (uavs) have been operational for about two decades. recently,however, there has been a good deal of interest in both the military and scientificcommunities in the development of very small, autonomous, aerial vehicles(microair vehicles [mavs] so small that they are essentially covert) equippedwith miniaturized imaging systems and guidance systems enabled by microcircuit technology (see box 42).box 42microair vehiclesin 1994, charles ellington, a zoologist at cambridge university, published theresults of his research on insect flight, which revealed a microscale vortex at theleading edge of the wings during the downstroke. these findings were brought tothe attention of the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa), whichhad begun a $35 million program to develop microair vehicles (mavs). dr. ellingtonõs insight into the aerodynamics of insect flight was the basis for darpaõsmesoscale machines for military applications program, which began in 1998. theprogram provided $20 million over a period of three years to a handful of researchinstitutions, including the georgia institute of technology and vanderbilt university, as part of a larger program to create versatile, robust reconnaissance òbugs.óthe research team at georgia tech, now joined by dr. ellington, and working withthe ohio aerospace institute, has developed and is seeking a patent for a òreciprocating chemical muscleóña chemical power source that would power the wings,guidance system, and payload for a device called an entomopter. the team hasachieved wing motion of 70 cycles per second with enough power to fly. workcontinues on the entomopter, with researchers also exploring its application forresearch and mapping of mars.source: toon, 2001.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry121another area of growing interest is unpiloted vehicles capable of long endurance flight at very high altitudes for atmospheric sampling or surveillance. thistype of uav, marketed by innovative companies such as aurora flight systems,was facilitated by advances in lightweight materials, control technology, andmodeling and simulation. several firms that emerged directly from academicresearch continue to rely on research by academics.spacebased information systemsspacebased information systems include all systems that use orbital assetsto acquire or transmit information, such as observational satellites for militarysurveillance, weather satellites, navigation and positioning satellites, and commercial communications satellites. the first spacebased information systemswere military surveillance satellites that were launched in the 1960s with greatsecrecy. these systems have been systematically upgraded since then and are stillan essential component of our national defense. weather satellites and earlygeosynchronous communications satellites came next. the number and capacityof geosynchronous satellites have increased steadily. the largest potential increase in communication satellites, however, will be the launch of large constellations of satellites, some in lowearth orbit (òlittleó and òbigó leos) and somein specialized orbits for particular markets. although several companies addressing this market failed in the late 1990s (e.g., iridium, ico global communications), others (e.g., teledesic and satellite llc) plan to launch extensive satellitenetworks to provide broadband data communications.5the increase in the number of satellites has been enabled by the explosivedevelopment of microcircuits, which made information processing possible, including information buffering and the passing of information between satellitesin an array and ground stations. electronic miniaturization has also made it possible to build satellites with considerable capabilities that weigh as little as90 pounds. the key technologies for these satellites are microcircuitry, antennae,photovoltaic power supplies, lightweight structures, and small propulsion systems for orbital positioning and maintenance. highvolume, lowcost manufacturing of standardized parts has been essential to the emergence of this segmentof the industry.innovationthe most obvious innovations in aerospace have come from industrythrough the development of new products and systems. this pattern goes backto the wright brothers, who were motivated to conduct their research on airfoilsand control by a desire to build and market a useful aircraft. with few exceptions (e.g., robert h. goddard, who was a professor, and c.s. draper, whoinvented and developed inertial guidance), key innovations have not arisenthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122the impact of academic research on industrial performancefrom academic research. the pioneers of aerospace were engineers and entrepreneurs who used available technologies to create new capabilities for flight inthe atmosphere or beyond.several government laboratories were created to stimulate the growth ofthe industry. the first of these was the national advisory committee for aeronautics (naca), which was created in 1915 when decision makers in thegovernment became aware that the united states was far behind europeannations in the development of aeronautics. the establishment of the langleyaeronautical laboratory at hampton, virginia, followed; research there wasinitially focused on aerodynamics, structures, control, and propulsion for military aircraft. the langley laboratory had very little connection with universities. during world war ii, some universities established very large and effective r&d programs. examples include the radiation laboratory at mit, whichplayed a major role in the development of radar in the united states, and thenuclear laboratories of the university of california. it is important to realizethat these were essentially industry laboratories embedded in the academicenvironment for the duration of the war. they did not pursue academic researchagendas as we think of them now.after world war ii, all of the military services established laboratories towork on the technologies most important to them. these laboratories werestaffed by a mix of civil servants and military personnel. one of the functionsof the militaryservice laboratories was to maintain contact with universitiesby providing financial support and encouraging faculty to address issues ofconcern to the services. at about the same time, the services establishedorganizations devoted to funding basic research. the first of these, the officeof naval research, was followed by the air force office of scientific research (afosr) and the office of army research. in their heyday, theseoffices commanded sizeable research budgets and funded much of the academic research in aerospace, a good deal of it only tenuously connected to theneeds of the services.in 1958, nasa was established with the u.s. commitment to the apolloprogram; nasa followed a similar pattern and funded a great deal of academicresearch. whereas naca had been almost entirely an inhouse research organization devoted to aeronautical technology and facilities, nasa issued grants andcontracts to industry and universities, using its civil service workforce to managethese activities. of course, these research activities were subordinate to nasaõsmain mission, which was to go to the moon.today, government agencies command far fewer resources for research andhave focused more tightly on their missions. some are also reexamining theirrelationships with academic researchers. for instance, in 1994 nasaõs office ofaeronautics appointed a university strategy task force to review the agencyõssupport of academic research and recommend policy and other changes to ensurethe longterm health of aerospace research in academia.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry123because of the combination of substantial government funding and the emergence of government laboratories dedicated to aerospace research, universitiesassumed a role of supporting the r&d activities of the services and nasa byaddressing issues that emerged during the technology development process andimproving the base technologies for later applications. universities also played alarge role in the development and improvement of techniques for analyzing fluidflows and structures that were enabled by advances in digital computation. buteven in the area of computational fluid dynamics, much of the innovation originated in government laboratories and industry, with academic research playing asupporting role.findingsresponses to questionnaires and discussions at a workshop convened as partof this study revealed consistent concerns about the impact of academia on theaerospace industry and the future of the universityindustry relationship (see addendum). these concerns can be divided into five subject areas: (1) the implications of changes in the federal research support structure; (2) the value placed onacademic research and education by industry and the implications for industrysupport of academic research; (3) the impact of changes in the industry on theresearch and educational capabilities of universities; (4) intellectual property rightsand how they affect universityindustry collaborations; and (5) arrangements topromote cooperative research between academia and industry.changes in the federal research support structurefor three decades after world war ii, the missionoriented agencies of thefederal government had charters from congress and successive administrationsto support a broad range of research without having to demonstrate the applicability of the research to their missions. the first agency with this kind of flexibility was the office of naval research, but eventually the air force, army, nasa,u.s. department of energy, and other smaller agencies were given the samesupport and flexibility. later, the national science foundation (nsf) and thenational institutes of health (nih) were created with specific responsibilities forfunding socalled basic research (meaning research without specific, known applications). nsf has not played a very significant role in funding for aerospaceoriented research, although some research on manufacturing funded through thensf engineering directorate may be applicable to aerospace.the strong support of the federal government for aerospace research hasdiminished significantly in the last decade. federal funding has fallen dramatically, and available funding is being managed much more carefully to achievespecific results at lower cost. missionoriented agencies now insist on demonstrated relevance to their missions as a precondition for funding research. thisthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124the impact of academic research on industrial performancerepresents a significant change from the earlier mindset when ensuring the healthof academic research was considered an important part of an agencyõs mission.beginning in 1990, the afosr began to assess academic research in termsof improvements in the performance of military aircraft. universities were nolonger considered afosr customers, but means to an end. afosr focusedparticularly on how the results of academic research could be transitioned intoapplications that would improve air force systems. for example, in fluid dynamics, a mature technology, the transition has taken 20 or more years from basicresearch to application. afosr is working toward shortening the transition timeusing a new model of technological innovation based on a work published bystanford university, conceptual foundations of multidisciplinary thinking(kline, 1995). today, when the air force needs a new product, the reserve ofknowledge is first reviewed, and research is funded only if the necessary knowledge is not available. afosr has found that the knowledge base created by yearsof support for research is extensive and that the need for new basic research is notas great as it once was. this reflects the maturity of the technology/product/industry. using this approach, afosr program managers have become brokersbetween industry and academic researchers, facilitating networking in the research community by communicating the needs of industry, the sources of knowledge from past research results, and the creation of new knowledge through newresearch, when necessary.these changes have been made in other agencies as well. nasa, for example, used to have a generic space technology research program. today, research decisions have been distributed to offices with mission responsibilities,and only technologies with nearterm mission applicability are supported.because of these changes, significantly less advanced research in aerospaceis being done or even contemplated by the u.s. government, potentially shrinking the future pool of technology available in the field. arguably, this situationmay be a correct response to the maturing process; technological progress in theindustry is progressing slower than in the past; the development of new aerospacesystems is now measured in decades rather than years.value placed on academic research and educationindustryõs viewpointthe panelõs research strongly suggests that mature sectors of the industryvalue academia principally for its graduates at all levels. therefore, industryplaces more value on researchers than on research itself. masterslevel studentsare especially attractive to industry because they have a broad knowledge of theirfields and have not become specialized in a narrow area of interest required for adoctoral thesis. although numerous technical contributions from academia canbe identified (see box 43), the research results per se are not highly valued,the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry125partly because improvements in industry performance (defined as increasingshareholder value) can seldom be traced to them. the indirect benefits of academic research are often not recognized by industry, despite their contributionsto the knowledge base that may ultimately contribute to the development ofnew technologies.the contribution of academic research to the development of very largescale integration is one example. academic research directly benefited chipmakers (e.g., intel) and indirectly benefited aerospace companies by enabling thedevelopment of enhanced avionics. however, research results become visible tomanagement only when they are applied directly to an aerospace system or improve a companyõs performance. another example is the development of composite materials, the underpinnings for which were developed in academia andthe applications of which include turbine engines, solid rocket motors, and othercritical and noncritical engine and airframe components. the indirect benefitsmay not be recognized, although they have tremendous value. in contrast, university graduates are highly valued because they provide direct visible benefits.if academic research is considered in the broad context of innovation processes, it plays a very large role, along with government laboratories, in laying thefoundations of understanding that lead to the next wave of innovation. this role isreflected in recent studies by diana hicks and francis narin (2001) of chi research and others (e.g., spencer, 2001) showing the predominance of academicresearch papers cited in patent applications. of the scientific papers cited on u.s.industrial patents in 1993ð1994, academic research was the source of 52.1 percent,roughly twice the number of industry research papers (narin et al., 1997).in the current environment, future opportunities for academic research willbe much more focused on issues that contribute to market success and willrequire much more flexibility on the part of academic researchers. for industry,the focus of r&d will be success in the marketplace; r&d should generatetechnological discriminators, improve affordability, and create new business opportunities. to receive industry support, academic researchers will have to meetindustryõs needs for timely and usable results. to achieve these results, industrywill have to manage its relationships with universities more effectively.typically, large aerospace companies define key corporate strategic opportunities and fund them first. subsequent r&d spending authority is dependent onprofit and loss. with a few exceptions, large aerospace companies no longer havecentral r&d laboratories. instead, they use contract research capabilities whenthey are available, and they fund universities philanthropically to support centersand institutes for research in specific areas. at this stage, aerospace companiesare especially keen on the development of better methodologies and tools, such astools in computational fluid dynamics and the research results of the lean aerospace initiative.small companies maintain a very different relationship with universities for a number of reasons. first, there is a significant state and federalthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126the impact of academic research on industrial performancebox 43examples of academic contributions to aerospacealthough the consensus view of the respondents to the panelõs questionnaireis that academic research has contributed mostly indirectly to the performance ofthe u.s. aerospace industry, a wide array of technologies were identified to whichacademic researchers had contributed in meaningful ways. in some cases,the contributions were the development of tools, especially models of systembehavior; in other cases, specific technologies were cited.tools¥radar crosssection modeling¥extrinsic fabryperot interferometer (efpi) applied to smart structures¥models of satellite communication systems¥performance of competing aircraft design tools¥modeling of electromechanical theory¥advanced nonintrusive instrumentation¥flowvisualization techniques¥computational fluid dynamics¥microelectrommechanical systems(mems)¥multidisciplinary optimization¥nonlinear, constrained optimization codes for designing control laws¥modeling of the mechanical properties of composites¥thermomechanical fatigue testing¥electron backscattering technique for finescale analysis of crystal orientation¥thermodynamic software for predicting phase equilibria (thermocalc)infrastructure to support small business research, especially the small business innovation research (sbir) program and state programs that provideloans and matching grants. second, many states and universities have technical business òincubatorsó that provide technical and management expertise for new technology companies until their ideas are commercially viable. once these firms graduate from the incubators, they have multipleconnections to the university for continued research. third, small firmstypically have little or no research staff; contracts with universities, faculty consultants, student cooperatives, and other resources provide a costeffective mechanism for securing technical expertise. fourth, maintainingclose relations with universities gives small businesses access to information and cuttingedge technology that they often have little time to obtainon their own.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry127finally, university research provides intellectual mixing that leads to constant discussions and debates, both formal and informal, about new ideas. universities serve as brain trusts that provide a longterm perspective on ideas andtechnology development that is difficult to find elsewhere and is exceedinglyvaluable to small firms. small manufacturers of uavs illustrate many of thesepoints (see box 44).however, industry must learn how to manage relationships with universities. small companies tend to want technical expertise from universities, whilelarger firms tend to want system engineers (with technical expertise). because ofacademic schedules, universities are not well suited for research on the shortterm critical path. for longer term projects, however, academic research canprovide the foundation for new products and services that may be critical to acompanyõs business.applied research¥heat transfer, combustor cooling, aeromechanics¥vaneblade interaction for transonic turbines to understand unsteady flow¥influence of clouds of volcanic ash on turbine engine performance¥low reynolds number airfoil design¥internet by satellite, including protocols and computational tools for dataintegration¥foldingwing design for small uavs¥fracture and flaw sizes of critical brittle materials¥aluminumlithium alloy applications in space systems¥amorphous alloys¥obstacle detection and avoidance, relative navigation, mapping¥differential absorption lidarbasic research¥theoretical basis for uav flight controls¥shannonõs information theory¥electromagnetic antenna theory¥linearized unsteady flow analysis¥composite laminate theory¥improved understanding of fibermatrix interactions in composite materials¥superplasticity¥realtime decision systems using artificial intelligencecenters¥gas turbine laboratory (mit)¥turbomachinery components research laboratory (iowa state)¥whittle laboratory (cambridge university)¥lean aircraft initiative (mit)¥automation and robotics research institute (university of texasarlington)the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128the impact of academic research on industrial performancebox 44unmanned aerial vehicles and academic researchthe unmanned aerial vehicle (uav) sector is representative of the highrisk,stillemerging end of the aerospace industry. a brief description of three companies developing new aircraft in this sector illustrates the range of experiences companies can have with universities. these examples also demonstrate the dangersof making broad generalizations about relations between industry and universitiesin the aerospace industry.the cypher uav, developed by sikorsky to meet u.s. military and commercialneeds in ground and naval surveillance, relaying communications, forestry surveillance, law enforcement, and searchandrescue missions, recently became operational with the u.s. marine corps. cypher combines the efficiency of a ductedairstream with the attributes of a coaxial, advancingblade rotor system. it can takeoff and land vertically, carry a payload of about 50 pounds for several hours, andcruise at 80 knots. academic involvement in the development of cypher has beenintermittent (e.g., in the development of the panoramic view sensor). because ofthe small amount of government funding available to support r&d on rotary aircraft, work with universities has proven to be difficult, and most contacts with academics has been initiated by universities rather than program managers. managers pursued ideas to see if a common interest could be identified, but oftenacademic interest was primarily a search for funding to support research and graduate students. most companies believe they derive little benefit from working withuniversities unless a common interest can be found because of problems in meeting deadlines, the frequent turnover of students working on projects, and a tendency for academics to promise more than they can deliver.aurora flight systems was formed in the 1980s by an mit graduate and aharvard graduate to build robotic aircraft to study chemicals in the upper atmosphere. according to company president john langford, aurora depends on universities for its research and considers funding of academic research a wayof buying a timeshare in the worldõs best research laboratories. aurora hasthe reexamination of universityindustry relationships should not be confined to research. engineering education must also be adapted to an environmentin which the context of engineering, the workplace, and the role of technologyhave changed dramatically. for instance, the ethics of engineering are becomingmore complicated. mission success may conflict with the emphasis on marketsuccess, which demands sticking to businessdetermined costs and schedules.the required capabilities of engineers, especially their ability to work inmultidisciplinary teams, are also changing. many have argued that engineeringcolleges have not responded well to these changes (see box 45).academic viewpointthe principal measure of success for a research university is the quality of itsfaculty and student body. faculty success is measured principally by standing inthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry129partnerships with universities on small business innovation research (sbir)projects and has taken advantage of state programs to encourage cooperationwith state universities. the company considers academic research a way of laying the foundations for new products and services, rather than a mechanism forsolving shortterm critical problems.aurora has contracts with universities in many key technical areas: computational fluid dynamics and analysis codes; advanced propulsion concepts; differential absorption lidar; advanced navigation, guidance, and control algorithms; andcomposite material testing. the company works with mit, west virginia university, university of vermont, university of virginia, university of maryland, and virginia polytechnic institute. aurora worked with mit, for example, to develop faulttolerant controls to eliminate redundant flight control system hardware, which addsweight to the aircraft. because faulttolerant control systems have applications inmany industries, aurora created a new business, athena technologies, to commercialize these technologies.freewing aerial robotics corporation was the direct result of the technologyincubator program at the university of maryland. as a startup in the incubator,freewing had access to technical and business advice from the university, officespace, university facilities, especially the wind tunnel and computer equipment,and workstudy students. in return, the university of maryland held a 3 percentshare in the company. freewingõs first product was the scorpion 10050, a tactical, lowaltitude, subsonic uav designed from the beginning for military andcivilian use. new products were planned based on a patented òtiltbodyó technology that created a new class of aircraft applicable to any size and speed. however, inability to raise fresh capital forced freewing to file for chapter 7 bankruptcyin october 2001.the university of maryland and texas a&m university contributed resourcesand research capabilities to the development of two critical technologies: (1) anonlinear mathematical model of the aerodynamics of a freewing aircraft and subsequent wind tunnel testing; and (2) avionics for an autopilot.research peer groups (in exceptional cases very innovative teaching can conveystar status). the most prestigious faculty members seem to attract the brightestand most ambitious students. thus, universities compete vigorously for the research elite who are the recognized intellectual leaders in their fields and arewilling to expend significant discretionary resources to attract them for laboratories, graduate student support, and faculty control of research funds. thus, majorresearch universities do not depend entirely on external funding to support theresearch programs that determine their standing in the academic hierarchy. onemeasure of independence is that most leading research universities now pay theirfaculty almost entirely from internal funds, rather than through research contracts, even though faculty typically spend about half of their time working onfunded research projects. other costs of research include matchingfund requirements, costs for bids and proposals, and other costs that are not fully reimbursedthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130the impact of academic research on industrial performancebox 45strengthening academic supportfor more than a decade, government agencies, the aerospace industry, anduniversities have expressed concerns about how well universities can meet theengineering needs of industry and, conversely, the willingness and ability of government and industry to provide the funding necessary for universities to maintainand enhance their research capability. studies by the national research council(1995), the american society for engineering education (1994), and others haveexplored the changing needs of industry and the ability of universities to meetthose needs. based on these studies, government has undertaken a number ofinitiatives, such as a project in the mid1990s by the national science foundationto form coalitions of universities to address systemic reforms in the engineeringcurriculum and related issues. these activities reflect an awareness by all partiesñindustry, universities, and governmentñthat the needs of industry are notbeing met.in the aerospace industry, the need to improve relations with universities and toimprove the quality of graduates led to at least two major initiatives in the early tomid1990s, one by industry and one by government. based on attempts in the late1980s to improve relations with universities historically important to boeing, theboeing company initiated what has become the industry university governmentroundtable for enhancing engineering education (iugreee) (mcmasters, etal.,1999). iugreee held its first meeting, with additional industry and universityparticipants, in 1995. the goal of iugreee was to catalyze actions, rather thanecho recommendations of other studies.iugreee now perceives itself as providing a broadbased industry voice forchanges in engineering education. iugreee has adopted the following objectives:¥to articulate and draw attention to critical issues that industry believes shouldaffect engineering educationby contracts. in the final analysis, universities contribute substantially to supportfor research rather than making money on research, as is often assumed.some of the brightest and most innovative young faculty may find thatfurthering their careers in academia often conflicts with focusing on developingstrong cooperative relationships with industry. indeed, too much emphasis ondeveloping industry ties can seriously retard their progress. these same youngfaculty are often poorly informed about the needs of industry and the differencesbetween industry and academic work modes. thus, they do not provide rolemodels for students, most of whom seek employment in industry after graduation. to address this problem, boeing introduced an academic fellows programthat brings 10 to 15 academics to work in the company during the summer. thegoal of the program is to provide firsthand knowledge of how industry operatesand to expose academics to realworld technical problems. leaders at boeingargue that the only way to overcome longstanding cultural differences betweenthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry131industry and academia is to provide opportunities for interaction and to maintaina dialogue to identify differences and develop potential solutions.much of the tension between the needs of the academic research system andindustryõs needs for personnel and technology can be addressed by better management of universityindustry relationships. for example, academic involvement in problem definition can help focus research on meeting the needs of both.industry must also recognize that universities cannot work to an industry schedule and should choose research projects accordingly. projects must be interestingenough to attract graduate students and must be structured in a way that is compatible with the university reward system. a combination of longterm and shortterm funding can provide stability for academic programs that may then be in abetter position to address shorter term industry problems. active industry advisory boards can help overcome communication problems.¥to develop agendas to see that changes are made¥to facilitate the implementation of these agendas through existing organizationsand other mechanismsin 1995, in response to similar concerns, nasaõs aeronautics advisory committee appointed a task force on university strategy to examine issues related tothe role of universities in nasaõs aeronautics enterprise. the task force was askedto address criticisms of nasaõs management of industry and university relationsand to recommend ways to improve collaborations between nasaõs aeronauticsprogram and universities. the task force on university strategy undertook thefollowing tasks:¥a review of nasaõs aeronautics enterprise mission statement, strategic plan, and related documentation visavis u.s. universities¥a review of nasaõs policies and practices toward research grants for the aeronautics program¥a comparison of university research strategies used by other government agencies and nasaõs industry collaborators with the policies and practices ofnasaõs aeronautics enterprise¥a review of the data collected by previous informal study groups and symposia¥the development of recommendations to improve how nasaõs aeronautics program collaborates with universities, including a better definition of the role ofuniversity research in the aeronautics enterprise and methods of supporting,evaluating, and collaborating in that rolein 1997, the task force issued recommendations on nasaõs funding of basicresearch, the use of peer reviews, the protection of intellectual property, an increase in funding limits for multiyear grants, collaborative research with universities and industry, and other aspects of relations with universities (nasa, 1997).the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132the impact of academic research on industrial performanceacademia also has constraints that industry does not always comprehend.universities have costs and business pressures just like corporations, although ina different context. because of reductions in government funding and more frequent matchingfund requirements, the dollar amounts of individual governmentresearch grants have been reduced. industry grants also tend to be small, averaging about $43,000 for one large aerospace firm. chasing many small grants canbe expensive. wealthier research universities can absorb these costs more readilythan most, but the costs are real. universities may also face legal restrictionsimposed by many states on feeforservice research contracts that might put theuniversity in direct competition with a private research firm. to industry, thesetypes of constraints can be frustrating and may make universities seem unresponsive. industry must recognize these constraints and modify its expectations.foreign studentsa large fraction of graduate students from around the world who attend u.s.universities remain in the united states, attracted to the innovative, dynamic,research environment in this industry. in 2000, of the 215 doctorates awardednationwide in aeronautical and aerospace engineering, 85 were awarded to nonu.s. citizens, only 10 of whom had permanent visas (nsf, 2001b). export lawsand other restrictions, however, limit the involvement of foreign students in sometypes of aerospace research. typically, for companies that have a substantialfraction of business with the dod or nasa, employing noncitizens is difficult.even for purely commercial applications, companies are wary of funding academic research performed by foreign students who may take the results to foreigncompetitors after they graduate. in some cases, firms are legally required torestrict the involvement of foreign students on contracts with universities. generally, universities find it difficult to accept these restrictions because they cannotguarantee the future use of information generated in their laboratories. someuniversities have restricted some of their laboratories to graduate students whoare u.s. citizens, but these arrangements may become increasingly difficult tomaintain as the percentage of foreign students (and faculty) in science and engineering school populations increases. therefore, industry and government mayhave to consider changing their policies to ease restrictions on foreign studentsand faculty, many of whom opt to remain in this country and thus contribute tou.s. competitiveness (nsf, 2001b).intellectual property rightsanother key barrier to collaboration between universities and industry isintellectual property rights. within universities, intellectual property is usuallyshared by the faculty member and the university; although the professor may bewilling to negotiate ownership away, the institution tends to be very reluctant tothe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry133do so. for obvious commercial reasons, companies generally insist on proprietary rights to research results produced by programs they fund. universities, fora variety of reasons, find it either not in their interest or impractical to grant suchrights and, perhaps more importantly, to protect them in the courts. as a result,companies must cope with different policies at different universities and evendifferent projects at the same university. pursuing the negotiating process on acasebycase basis can be costly.university faculty and administrators sometimes have inflated expectationsof the value of intellectual property, which must be considered in the context ofhow its value can be realized. if the university and/or faculty member retainsownership but cannot sell it or develop a product from it, the value is much lowerthan if ownership is assigned to the company, and the proceeds are shared insome negotiated way.ownership of intellectual property is not the only issue that must be addressed. mechanisms are also needed to protect intellectual property, especiallyin universities with a culture of disbursing knowledge. in georgia, state lawswere changed to allow georgia tech to protect intellectual property for threeyears, which is usually long enough to meet commercial needs. this arrangementhas the added advantage of teaching graduate students to respect intellectualproperty as they will be expected to do in industry.arrangements to improve research collaborationsin the course of committee and workshop discussions, a number of suggestions were made for improving research collaborations between universities andindustry. representatives of large and small companies and academics had quitedifferent ideas. generally, large companies called for changes in the structure ofacademic research organizations to make them more compatible with industryneeds; universities called for more flexibility on the part of companies and arecognition of the limitations under which they operate.research partnerships abroadsome of the problems associated with industryuniversity collaboration mightbe solved by the formation of exclusive, oneonone research partnerships; industry partners would conduct research, in return for support from the single, industrial partner, and universities would give up the right to accept support from othercompanies. an example of this approach is rollsroyceõs university technologycenters (utcs), a program established in 1990 to focus and coordinate rollsroyce university research in the uk. the firm targeted university departmentswith proven track records and expertise in technical areas of strategic importanceto rollsroyce. utcs at 12 universities in the uk conduct about half ofthe research funded by rollsroyce across a wide spectrum of shortterm andthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134the impact of academic research on industrial performancelongterm needs. the utcs have quarterly management meetings and annualreviews with rollsroyce managers, and they compete for funding to ensure thatthe company gets value for its money. utcs are also part of the firmõs recruitment and training strategy, ensuring access to the best people the uk with thenecessary technological training. university technology partnerships (utps),intended to complement the utcs, involve suppliers, customers, and other european universities. for example, the rollsroyce utp in engineering designprocesses involves british aerospace and the universities of sheffield, cambridge, and southampton. it was launched in 1998 to conduct a joint program ofresearch into engineering design processes for the twentyfirst century.u.s. research partnershipone of the presentations at the workshop described the efforts of ge aircraftengines (geae) to develop a new strategy for funding academic research, similar to the strategy used by rollsroyce but tailored to the issues specific to u.s.universities. the strategy, called the university strategic alliance (usa), isintended to shift the companyõs current pattern of funding of 140 small contractsat many universities to funding of much larger contracts at a few universities thatcould become longterm partners. the change was partly motivated by a66 percent drop in the companyõs internal engineering staff, which has made thecompany anxious to make more effective use of university capabilities.geaeõs idea behind usa is to integrate university research into the firmõsbusiness strategy and technology road maps. the company would enter into aguaranteed, performancebased, fiveyear contract with sufficient funding to ensure a critical mass of capability at each university. contracts would be focusedon specific problems, such as film cooling issues on highpressure turbine airfoils, in realworld contexts. the companyõs intent is to ensure reasonable academic freedom, reasonable protection of intellectual property rights, and opportunities for publication (with some restrictions). the universities would haveaccess to company technology. the company would share ownership of intellectual property with the university but would generally not pay royalties.because protecting intellectual property can be a difficult issue, terms wouldbe negotiated with each university. in some cases, the company might own theintellectual property rights but allow publication; in other cases, it might sharepatents. the same university could have different contracts for the treatment ofintellectual property for different projects. a person with technical knowledge oneach side would participate in the negotiations so that decisions would not bemade solely by legal departments.the companyõs goal is to enlist academic research to solve problems, manyof which require fairly basic research. the company would allow universityresearchers to identify ways the problems could be solved, as long as thoseapproaches could actually be implemented and would result in solutions in one tothe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry135three years. the company envisions that faculty and students will come to itsfacilities to learn about problems in a realworld context and will pursue solutionsin both company and university facilities.from the companyõs point of view, this kind of companyuniversity interaction would have significant benefits, particularly compared to the relatively littlevalue the company now receives from the academic research it funds. from theuniversity perspective, however, it may be difficult to participate despite assurances of longterm funding. a particular concern is that the problems posed bythe company might not be attractive research subjects to faculty members because they would probably not involve problems at the intellectual frontier of thefield and, therefore, would not be supported by the academic reward system. thearrangement might also be perceived as too restrictive in terms of publication andthe universityõs freedom to work with other companies. finally, the companymay not gain access to the best researchers, who can raise research funds fromother sources without the restrictions imposed by the company and so may notperceive any benefit from participation.this example highlights some of the difficulties in improving universityindustry research collaborations. the proposed strategy addresses the companyõsdesires to have universities perform productive research and attempts to accommodate the universityõs need for open publication, protection of intellectual property, and stable funding. nevertheless, u.s. universities may not consider thisplan in a positive light.conclusionsconclusion 41. academic research in aerospace is changing rapidly. the government policy change reducing government support for aerospace in generalmeans support for research in aerospace will also be reduced. henceforth, marketforces will determine how things change, and industry and universities will haveto adjust accordingly.conclusion 42. although industry values academia for turning out educatedgraduates and, to a lesser extent, for its research results, industry is not willing tosupport generalized research programs. industry will provide support for programs with clearly identifiable impacts on its performance.conclusion 43. in the more mature parts of the aerospace industry (e.g., airframe and engine manufacturing), better methodologies and tools are the mostvalued research products. these include tools in computational fluid dynamicsand the results of the lean aerospace initiative. in less mature industry sectors(e.g., uavs, mavs, and satelliteinformation systems), new concepts and physical understanding will be most beneficial.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136the impact of academic research on industrial performanceconclusion 44. industry considers academic research contributions most valuable (i.e., most relevant and easiest to transfer) when they result from cooperativeprograms with industry.conclusion 45. issues concerning proprietary rights pose substantial barriers toimproving collaborations between academia and industry. resolving these issueswill require compromises between industryõs desire to protect intellectual property and academiaõs desire to maintain a free and open intellectual community.conclusion 46. formal research partnerships between industry and academiaare evolving. for new approaches to succeed, however, the academic rewardsystem will have to find a way to recognize the value of close collaborationwith industry.notes1many engineering colleges have merged aerospace engineering departments with other departments, typically departments of mechanical engineering.2because the five subsectors studied by the committee do not align with the industry subsectordefinitions used to report sales and shipments data, these numbers are rough estimates that drawupon data from the following sources: aia, 2001; mcgrawhill/doc, 2000; and crs, 2003.3in 1986, commercial launches accounted for only 13 percent of commercial and governmentlaunches (excluding space shuttle launches). by 1996, commercial launches accounted for half ofthe total (mcgrawhill/u.s. department of commerce, 1998).4researchers at the university of pennsylvania developed the underpinnings of laminate theoryin the 1960s. since then, michigan state university, case western university, stanford university,university of connecticut, and university of wyoming, among others, have contributed to the understanding of fibermatrix interactions and to the modeling of mechanical analysis of composite materials.5satellite llc purchased the assets of iridium in late 2000 and relaunched operations of the73 leo satellites previously launched by iridium. an additional five satellites were launched infebruary 2002. see washington post, february 12, 2002, p. e4.referencesaia (aerospace industries association). 2001. aerospace facts and figures. washington, d.c.:aerospace industries association.american society for engineering education. 1994. engineering education for a changing world.washington, d.c.: american society for engineering education.crs (congressional research service). 2003. unmanned aerial vehicles: background andissues for congress. washington, d.c.: library of congress. available online at: http://www.fas.org/irp/crs/rl31872.pdf. [august 21, 2003]hicks, d., and f. narin. 2001. strategic research alliances and 360 degree bibliometricindicators. pp. 133ð145 in strategic research partnerships: proceedings from an nsfworkshop. nsf 01336. arlington, va.: national science foundation.iugreee. 2001. vision 2010. available online at: http://www1.eng.iastate.edu/iugreee/. [june 24,2003]kline, s.j. 1995. conceptual foundations of multidisciplinary thinking. palo alto, calif.: stanforduniversity press.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry137mcgrawhill/u.s. department of commerce. 2000. u. s. industry and trade outlook ô00. newyork: mcgrawhill.mcmasters, j., b.j. white, and t. okiishi. 1999. industryuniversitygovernment roundtable forenhancing engineering education. aiaa 990281. reston, va.: american institute of aeronautics and astronautics.narin, f., k. hamilton, and d. olivastro. 1997. the increasing linkage between u.s. technology andpublic science. research policy (26)3: 317ð330.nasa (national aeronautics and space administration). 1997. report of the university strategytask force. washington, d.c.: office of aeronautics, nasa.nrc (national research council). 1995. engineering education: designing an adaptive system.washington, d.c.: national academy press.nsf (national science foundation). 2001a. research and development in industry: 2000. nsf 03318. table a3. online at: http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf03318/start.htm. [june 24, 2003]nsf. 2001b. science and engineering doctorate awards: 2000, s.t. hill, author. nsf 02305.arlington, va.: division of science resources statistics, national science foundation.spencer, j. 2001. how relevant is universitybased scientific research to private hightechnologyfirms? a united statesjapan comparison. academy of management journal 44(2): 432ð440.toon, j. 2001. flying on mars. research horizons 19(1): 19ð23. available online at: http://gtresearchnews.gatech.edu/reshor/rhf01/mars.html. [june 24, 2003]u.s. bureau of the census. 2002. statistical abstract of the united statesñ2002. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office. available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statisticalabstract02.html. [june 24, 2003]womack, j.p., d.t. jones, and d. roos. 1991. the machine that changed the world. new york:harpercollins.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138addendumquestionnairethe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals in various segments of the aerospace industry, some of whom attended the december 1998workshop. included among the questionnaire respondents were senior executivesat aerospace corporation, boeing, draper laboratories, ge aircraft engines,lincoln laboratories, nasa lewis research center, northrop grumman, orbital sciences launch systems, orbital space systems, rollsroyce allison,saic, trw, inc., and professors with expertise in aerodynamcs, heat transfer,highspeed instrumentation, and turbomachinery from iowa state university,ohio state university, and carnegie mellon university.study of the impact of academic research onindustrial performance1. please identify the targeted sector or sectors of the aerospace industry withwhich you are most familiar. spacebased information systems launch vehicles transport aircraft unmanned aerial vehicles gas turbine propulsion systems2. please describe any cases you are aware of in which the contributions andimpact of academic research to sector(s) have been clearly evident. what werethe circumstances that led to the favorable outcome? (if possible, please supplyreferences to published information.) please use additional pages, as necessary.3. overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrialperformance in your sector(s) of the aerospace industry as (please put an x in one box): 1. very large 2. large 3. medium 4. small 5. very small/nonexistent4. the panel has identified a number of mechanisms (listed below) by whichit believes academic research has an impact on performance in the aerospacethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry139industry. please rate the importance of each mechanism using the same 1ð5 scaleused above [where 1 is òvery largeó and 5 is òvery small/nonexistent.ó wherepossible, please write down under each item some specific contributions you areaware of that have been made by academic research to industry via the mechanism. please use additional pages, as necessary.( )a.researchrelated education and training (of graduate students)( )i.at the m.s. level( )ii.at the ph.d. level( )b.invention and innovationfor example, please consider any specific patents owned by a university or specific innovations resulting from university researchthat have been of benefit to your business or industry.( )c.consultingthis refers to faculty providing expert advice to the industry.( )d.technology filteringthis refers to the role of academic research in helping companies identify research/technological opportunities and research/technological òdead ends.ó( )e.tools and productivitythis includes the development of analytical, computational, andexperimental tools and methods that are adopted by industry.( )f.pontification, professionalism, foundationsthis refers to the function of faculty in documenting and presentinginformation critical to aerospace; in conveying relevant information to others in the profession, investors, and legislators; andto service to the profession, for instance, in organizing and sustaining professional societies, industry associations, and othertrade groups.5. are there systematic trends that will either increase or decrease the impactof academic research in the future? for example, the panel perceives that industrial inhouse research is being deemphasized as a result of downward pressureon engineering staff sizes. is this a trend you perceive also? if so, will this resultin more or less opportunity for productive research partnerships between industryand academe? are there other trends of importance? please use additional pages,as necessary.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140the impact of academic research on industrial performance6. what changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to beresponsive to trends and emerging challenges in the industry? please use additional pages, as necessary.7.to what extent is academic research relevant to aerospace justified for theresearch results it produces versus the academic infrastructure (faculty, postdocs, other research personnel, facilities) it supports, which enables the othercontributions outlined above in question #4? please use additional pages,as necessary.8. do you see any downside to enhancing universityindustry research collaboration? things to be avoided? please use additional pages, as necessary.9. other comments? please use additional pages, as necessary.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry141workshop agendaworkshop on enhancing academic researchcontributions to the aerospace industrydecember 4, 1998national academies building2101 constitution avenue, n.w.washington, d.c.9:00 a.m.introduction to study and summary of statusj. kerrebrock9:20 a.m.summary of findings from questionnairet. mahoney9:30 a.m.session i: general discussionhow have changes in the aerospace industry, as well as changes inacademia, especially engineering, affected universityindustry research cooperation?how might the future of research cooperation be different from the past?what role does academic research play in the total research enterprise (industry, university, government) in this industry?10:15 a.m.break10:30 a.m.session ii: discussion of specific universityindustryinteractions: presentations by industry participants¥criteria to determine what types of research universities do best¥managing the research interaction: definition of deliverables,monitoring progress¥longterm vs. shortterm collaborations¥single firm vs. consortiabased collaborations¥stellar examples of success and failure12:00 p.m.working lunchthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142the impact of academic research on industrial performance12:30 p.m.session ii continued: presentations by academic participants:¥sources of research funding¥preferred research for industry and expectations of industry¥managing interaction with industry, both for specific researchprojects and overall¥longterm vs. shortterm collaborations¥single firm vs. consortiabased collaborations¥stellar examples of success and failure1:30 p.m.session iii: detailed discussions (in breakout groups, if desired)2:30 p.m.presentation and discussion of findings1.can best practices be identified? do they correlate to researchwith significant impact? can the impact from academic researchbe clearly differentiated from the impact of internal and government research?2.how might universityindustry research collaboration be managed better to meet the needs of both?3.how essential is industry participation in academic research, as afunder, definer, and active participant, both from the industryviewpoint and to meet the academic mission of research and education?4.is it possible to maintain the desired educational role of academia,in the absence of traditional academic research programs? if not,then how do we motivate and justify academic research, especially at the ph.d. level, in the absence of a strong need for itsresearch output?3:30 p.m.formulation of findings, conclusions, and recommendations4:30 p.m.adjournthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.aerospace industry143workshop attendeesjack l. kerrebrock, chair*professor of aeronautics andastronauticsmassachusetts institute of technologywilliam f. ballhaus, jr.corporate vice presidentscience and engineeringlockheed martin corporationjohn s. barasdirector, center for satellite andhybrid communication networksuniversity of marylandjewel b. barlowdirector, glenn l. martin windtunneluniversity of marylandrobert a. delaneychief, design technologyrollsroyce allisonrobert m. ehrenreichsenior program officernational materials advisory boardnational research councilantonio l. elias*senior vice president, advancedprogramsorbital sciences corporationkenneth c. hall*associate professordepartment of mechanical engineering and materials scienceduke universitydavid heebner (retired)saicrobert j. hermann*senior partnerglobal technology partners, llcwei h. kaodirector, mmtc structural materialsdepartmentthe aerospace corporationkent kresa*chairman, president, and ceonorthrop grumman corporationjohn s. langfordchairmanaurora flight sciences corp.james mcmichaelprogram managerdarpa/ttoart rochdirector, advanced technologycommercial aircraft divisionnorthrop grumman corporation*panel memberthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144the impact of academic research on industrial performancearun k. sehradeputy, aeronautics directoratenasa lewis research centers.k. varmaaerospace consultantbethesda, marylanddavid c. wislermanager, university programs andaero technology labsge aircraft enginesconsultant to the aerospaceindustry panelthomas c. mahoneydirector, wvmepwest virginia universitynae program office stafftom weimer, directorproctor reid, associate directorrobert morgan, nae fellow and senior analystpenny gibbs, administrative assistantthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5report of the panel on thetransportation, distribution, andlogistics services industrythe panel on transportation, distribution, and logistics services industrywas made up of six members, including three members from nae (two fromacademia and one from industry), two other members from academia, and one fromindustry. three of the panel members were also members of the parent committee.the panel was asked to assess the contributions of academic research to integratedlogistics services and associated activities, technologies, and methodologies thatcut across the many components of the transportation, distribution, and logistics(tdl) services industries. the panel reviewed the literature, developed severalcase studies, and sent a questionnaire to selected individuals, primarily universitybased researchers, with special knowledge of the tdl industry (addendum). thequestionnaire was followed by two roundtables attended by panel members and12 senior individuals in the tdl services industries (see addendum).during the past two decades, deregulation of transportation and rapid advancesin computing and communications technologies have resulted in a surge of innovation in logistics and accelerated the pace of change in the broader tdl industries.in manufacturing, reducing inventories and workinprocess through justintimedeliveries, òpulló systems of supplychain management, and other technologies andmanagement practices depend on integratedlogistics services, which combinematerials management and physical distribution. logistics has emerged as a distinct function in many companies and as a distinct service performed by integratedlogistics service providers. over time, the users of integratedlogistics serviceshave become more demanding, and, in response, providers have become moresophisticated. their use of technology and their need for knowledgeable workershave created interest in and opportunities for academic research.145the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146the impact of academic research on industrial performancedefinition of the industrytransportation, distribution, and logistics services affect every facet of economiclife in the united states. in 2000, the united states spent about $1.006 trillion to movefreight. trucking accounted for $481 billion, or about 48 percent of the total. railroads came in second, accounting for $36 billion, and international, inland, andcoastal water transportation was next at $26 billion (delaney and wilson, 2001).as a percentage of gross domestic product (gdp), transportation and inventorycosts have been declining since 1981, when total logistics costs in the united states,including inventory carrying costs, transportation, and administrative costs, totaledalmost 17 percent of gdp. in 2000, the total was 10.1 percent (delaney and wilson,2001). by far the most important reason for the decline has been deregulation in therail and trucking industries, but other factors such as deunionization, advances intechnology, and improved management practices have also contributed (belman andmonaco, 2001). competition in transportation has not only created new incentives forservice providers to reduce costs and improve the quality of service, but has alsostimulated innovation in the types of services they provide. at the same time, competition in the retail and manufacturing sectors has forced service providers to reducecosts, ensure faster inventory turns, reduce the amount of workinprocess to a minimum, and operate in close coordination with suppliers. all of these measures havebeen enabled by improvements in integrated logistics. figure 51 shows the changesin inventory, transportation, and administrative costs in the last 20 years.01234567891002468101214161820gdp $ trillion (left scale)total u.s. logistics costs$ trillion (left scale)logistics percentage of gdp (right scale)19761977197819791980198119821983198419851986198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998figure 51 the cost of logistics in relation to gdp. source: cass information systems, 1999.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry147integrated logistics: a competitive differentiatorbecause of the many changes in technology and management practices in thetdl services industry, especially since deregulation, the panel decided to focuson integrated logistics (also known as supplychain management) and associatedactivities, technologies, and methodologies that cut across the tdl services industry. integrated logistics is becoming an increasingly important source of competition in all parts of the tdl services sector, as well as in other sectors of theeconomy and the national security establishment.two big changes laid the foundation for integratedlogistics services: (1) theautomation of transactions enabled by advances in information technology; and(2) the deregulation of transportation. deregulation has led to dramatically morecomplex logistics decisions in many industries and a proliferation of transportation service providers, which has encouraged innovation in service delivery andprovided businesses with many more choices. advances in information technology have enabled businesses to accumulate vast amounts of data on every aspectof their supply chains, from production to delivery. efficient integration of supply, production, and delivery schedules with suppliers and customers requires theeffective management of these data.supplychain activities can be categorized into three major areas: (1) theacquisition of materials and supplies; (2) the manufacturing process; and (3) thedistribution of products. supplychain management is the integration of the flowof materials, documents, information, and finances to optimize individual shipments. managing the supply chain requires the integration of some parts of thesupply chain that were previously regarded as separate.integrated logistics includes the planning, implementation, and control of theflow and storage of raw materials, inprocess inventory, finished goods, services,related information, and payments among suppliers and consumers from theproduction of raw materials to the final recycling or disposal of finished goods.the logistics value chain has three major elements:¥the supply chain (the physical components, including manufacturingplants, warehouses, vehicles, and transportation infrastructure)¥logistics business practices (practices and processes associated with theflow of goods, information, and payments through supply chains)¥information and decision technologies (computerrelated technologiesused to design, plan, and operate supply chains, including the monitoringof the status of materials, parts, and finished products in the supply chainand communications among supplychain elements)in a well integrated logistics value chain, all supplychain elements areoptimized with regard to both service and cost. integratedlogistics technologiescan change a òproducerpushó system to a òcustomerpulló system, in whichinventory decisions are based on what customers are actually buying. inthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148the impact of academic research on industrial performancemanufacturing, this change has been driven by intense competition and thenecessity of eliminating waste in the production process in the form of rawmaterials, work in process, and inventories of finished goods. in retailing, similar pressures to reduce costs, coupled with the growing purchasing power oflarge retail chains, have led to new ways of doing business. today, large retailchains choose suppliers based on how well they can match product flow toactual customer demand.in a survey of major global corporations in 1999, more than 90 percent ratedeffective supplychain management as a critical success factor, up from 25 percentin the early 1990s (deloitte consulting, 1999a). this change reflects the continuingconcentration by businesses on core competencies; increased outsourcing ofnoncore production, distribution, and other functions; continued emphasis on costreduction; and product proliferation in the consumer products, food, electronics,and other industries. integratedlogistics services enable companies to manage thesupply chain to meet their cost and flexibility goals.in the past 15 years, integrated logistics has evolved into a new discipline.most competitive manufacturing and service companies have installed information systems capable of acquiring large quantities of timely, accurate data regarding major business functions throughout their internal and external supply chains.advanced planning and optimization (apo) software can respond to the needs ofa range of manufacturing systems (thomas, 1998). enterprise resource planning(erp) software, which automates transactions and connects vital business systems (e.g., manufacturing, human resources, financial, and other information/data systems), is also widely used. industries are attempting to develop optimization and decisionmaking capabilities that can translate the information generatedby these systems into higher productivity and profits. the fruits of academicresearch have already had a large impact in this area, and they are expected tohave a significant impact on the development and application of new decisiontechnologies in support of integrated logistics.technology driverstechnological, organizational, and contextual changes have significantly influenced performance in integratedlogistics services in the past 10 to 15 years.significant technological innovations have been focused on applications of information technology:¥hardware that automatically captures data, satellite tracking systems, andnavigation systems¥information systems, such as manufacturing resource planning and erpsoftware, electronic data interchange between firms in the value chain,and database management software¥decision technologythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry149other innovations include improved transportation, container, and warehouseequipment and improved humanmachine interfaces. contextual changes, whichhave been both drivers and enablers of change, include: deregulation; the globalization of markets; the emergence of integrated supply chains, justintime delivery, and reductions in lot sizes in manufacturing; satellite communication systems; electronic commerce; increased competition; and other generaltechnological advances. the technological foundations of integrated logistics restprimarily on operations research, automated datacapture technologies, and communications/networking technologies. software providers and thirdparty logistics providers have been the main drivers of advanced technology development,diffusion, and use in integrated logistics.software providerssoftware companies have performed most logisticsrelated research and development (r&d) (mostly development) in the past 10 years. in manufacturingand logistics, companies such as sap, peoplesoft, and baan have developed asuite of erp modules for planning production, taking orders, and deliveringproducts. the modules address the following functions:¥production planning (performs capacity planning and creates a daily production schedule for a companyõs manufacturing plants)¥materials management (controls purchasing of the raw materials neededto build products and manages inventory stocks)¥order entry and processing (automates the data entry process of customerorders and keeps track of the status of orders)¥warehouse management (maintains records of warehoused goods and processes the movement of products through warehouses)¥transportation management (arranges, schedules, and monitors thedelivery of products to customers via trucks, trains, and other modesof transportation)¥project management (monitors costs and work schedules on a projectbyproject basis)after nearly a decade of rapid growth and continuous expansion and innovation in product offerings, the erp market has begun to weaken. the cost andcomplexity of erp have created opportunities for other vendors to emerge. byfocusing on narrower functionality than erp and solutions customized by industry, firms such as i2 technologies and siebel systems have rapidly increased their presence in supplychain and customer management systems (alsoknown as apo solutions systems). for instance, total revenue for siebel systems grew from $391.5 million in 1998 to more than $2 billion in 2001(siebelsystems, 2002).the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150the impact of academic research on industrial performancethe emergence of the internet as a business communication tool has attracted the interest of leading manufacturing, retail, consumer products, and otherfirms. despite the benefits of erp in generating operational improvements, companies continue to feel that their procurement systems face serious challenges andare looking for improvements through businesstobusiness electronic commerce.in a 1998 survey by deloitte consulting, companies reported that 80 percent oftheir strategic objectives for electronic commerce centered on supply chain andprocurement processes. early on, ariba and commerceone were leaders in electronic procurement, but the large erp vendors have invested heavily in addingelectronic commerce functionality that can be integrated with erp systems. although it is still too early to determine which approach or which vendors willsucceed, it is clear that large, global firms will invest heavily in online procurement systems (deloitte consulting, 1999b).thirdparty logistics providersthe number of thirdparty logistics providers has increased significantly inthe past decade. thirdparty providers are companies hired to perform logisticstasks that were previously performed in house. there are several reasons companies decide to outsource planningintensive functions:¥the explosion of new services in the deregulated transportation provider network¥opportunities provided by new information systems with increasingly sophisticated procedures and automation systems¥the availability of more alternatives¥the volatility of demand¥the rationalization of assets to minimize required investment and maximize return¥the focus on core competenciesmost frequently cited benefits of outsourcing logistics services include(logistics best practices group, 1997):¥lower costs¥the ability to focus on core businesses¥greater flexibility¥improved expertise/marketing knowledge¥improved customer servicethe thirdparty provider industry has grown significantly in size and scopein the past decade. revenues grew from $10 billion in 1992 to $56.4 billion in2000 and were projected to grow 15 percent annually through 2003 (delaney andthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry151wilson, 2001). a survey in 1991 of the use of thirdparty provider services bymanufacturers showed that 31 percent of respondents used them; by 1996,58 percent used them, including about half of the fortune 500 companies (logistics best practices group, 1997). another survey of corporate logistics managersrevealed that the outsourcing of the total supply chain to a thirdparty providercut logistics costs by more than 20 percent in the first year (masters and lalonde, 1998). the most frequently used services are warehouse management,logistics information services, shipment consolidation, rate negotiation, fleetmanagement/operations, carrier selection, and product returns (lieb and randall,1996). information technology, sensor technologies, and communication technologies are essential to all of them.the hardware and communications technologies that capture the data neededto implement sophisticated erp and apo software are still relatively new resources among integratedlogistics providers. despite rapid growth in the industry, a significant learning process is under way as industry leaders learn how touse these tools for competitive advantage, and laggards recognize the inevitability of more technologyintensive business. among industry leaders, the focus ison the acquisition of information and the effective use of data. bar coding provides specific identifiers for items being shipped; wireless communications and,increasingly, global positioning systems provide realtime data on vehicle locations. effective management of these data provides timely information on thelocation and progress of shipments, which has greatly improved customer service. perhaps more important, the data can greatly improve efficiency by enabling shippers to match vehicles with excess capacity to nearby shipmentsheaded in the same direction. in the trucking industry, advances in routeplanningsoftware have enabled companies to maximize load levels and meet customerexpectations (nagarajan et al., 1999).the internet is providing a medium for accelerating and increasing the extentof these changes. in businesstobusiness electronic commerce, the internet couldlead to even tighter integration of supply chains, and all of the logistics softwarecompanies are making their products internet enabled. as the volume of electronic commerce increases, there is general agreement in the industry that logistics could mean the difference between success and failure. some of the leadingusers of integrated logistics (e.g., cisco systems and dell computer) use theinternet to share information on production schedules, sales, customer orders,stocks, and other critical production data with their suppliers. for instance, assoon as a customer places an order on dellõs web site identifying the specificfeatures being purchased, the order is placed on dellõs production schedule wheresuppliers can see it and produce the necessary parts. integrated logistics ensurethat the parts arrive at the production line and that inventory for both dell and itssuppliers is at a minimum. the savings have been so large that manufacturers inother industries, from consumer products to automobiles, are exploring ways toapply the dell model to their supplychain management.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152the impact of academic research on industrial performanceas dell has shown, logistics has become a key determinant of success inbusinesstoconsumer electronic commerce. even if internetbased retail has littleeffect on the volume of goods shipped, it will vastly multiply destinations (e.g.,individual residences) and raise customer expectations. the result is much morecomplex logistical systems and an urgency to use technology to manage thiscomplexity profitably. the full implications of the internet for supplychain management and the businesstocustomer interface are just emerging. informationshared among suppliers is replacing physical inventories as the need for production buffers diminishes. however, different industries will embrace this change atdifferent rates based on a number of factors, such as the number of suppliers andhistoric relationships in the production chain (cairncross, 2000).innovation systemexcept for software companies and some airlines, very few logistics companies conduct r&d. a few of the leading integratedlogistics service providersconduct a limited amount of internal research and sponsor research at universities. these firms include schneider national (trucking), united parcel serviceand federal express (delivery services), csx and union pacific (railroads), andsabre/amr (until 2000) and several major airlines, such as united and usair(air transport). a few major industrial firms (e.g., ford, raytheon, lucent technologies, and procter & gamble) sponsor research at universities. general motors, through its enterprise laboratory, also supports logistics research. as leaders in their fields, these and other firms play a critical role in the diffusion ofadvanced logistics technologies.most innovations in integrated logistics have come from academic research intransportation/logistics research centers affiliated with university engineering andbusiness schools and from applied research and product development by softwarecompanies. relevant research has also been conducted at national laboratories andtransportation centers associated with state departments of transportation.the academic disciplines involved in research on integrated logistics includeapplied mathematics, computer science and engineering, industrial engineering,operations research, software engineering, materials science, social and behavioral sciences (human factors), and business and management sciences. academic research on largescale optimization models, decomposition methods, integer programming, and network optimization has been extremely valuable to theintegratedlogistics industry. academic research on the phenomenon of electronic commerce, in terms of business models and pricing models, has beencrucial to the growth and success of electronic commerce. economics research onthe structure of the industry and its economies of scale were crucial to the debatesabout deregulation. business schools involved in logistics research and trainingtend to focus on the òsofteró side of logistics (e.g., management and organization)in contrast to research on software, which is associated with engineering schools.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry153transportation research institutes with federal, state, and industry supporthave been established at some universities to serve as intermediaries betweenacademia and industry and to translate research results to industry. these institutes function primarily as conduits between the academic community and transportation practitioners, adapting technology and research results to meet practitionersõ needs and giving them a voice in setting research agendas. mosttransportation research centers focus almost exclusively on the movement ofpeople; only a few (e.g., logistics institute at the georgia institute of technology, the center for transportation studies at the massachusetts institute of technology [mit], stanford universityõs global supply chain management forum,and princeton universityõs computational and stochastic transportation logistics engineering [castle] laboratory) are doing a significant volume of workrelated to moving freight (see box 51).box 51castle laboratory at princeton universitycastle laboratory develops and directly implements tactical and realtimeoptimization models for freight transportation and logistics. research focuses onthe development of general tools for dynamic resource transformation and theiradaptation to problems that arise in trucking (truckload [tl] and lessthantruckload [ltl]), rail, and chemical distribution. tools range from routing andscheduling to fleet management and the forecasting of demand.castle laboratory was established formally in 1992 to handle a rapidly growing research program with industry. annual funding of approximately $750,000 isprovided by industry (80 percent) and government (20 percent). most of the government funds are currently provided by the air force office of scientific research. five corporate partners fund research on optimization models and algorithms for a class of problems called dynamic resourcetransformation problems.the techniques are then applied by the sponsoring companies.examples of successful techniques developed by castle laboratory include:¥a network optimization model developed for yellow freight and now used bymost of the ltl industry has been documented to save $17 million annually(widely believed to be a gross underestimate). this model was instrumental inreducing the number of end of lines in yellow freightõs network from more than650 to fewer than 400 with the same geographic coverage.¥a loadmatching system developed for tl motor carriers produced a 10 percent reduction in empties when it was first installed.¥a network model for load profitability reduced the operating ratio at burlingtonmotor carriers by 10 percent, restoring the company to profitability.¥a major drayage company with more than 400 trucks uses a realtime scheduling system for routing drivers. savings are estimated to be more than$10 million annually.source: warren b. powell, director, castle laboratory.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154the impact of academic research on industrial performancea unique academic transportation research center is the trucking industryprogram (tip), first established in 1995 at the university of michigan by a majorgrant from the alfred p. sloan foundation; the center was relocated to the georgia institute of technology in 2002.1 tip contributes to the understanding of thetrucking industry through a multidisciplinary approach involving faculty andstudents from several u.s. universities, including georgia tech, the universityof michigan, michigan state university, wayne state university, and duke university. tip is the only academic program in the united states engaged in comprehensive research on issues associated with labor, the firm, and operations andtechnology in the trucking industry. tip is widely known for conducting the mostcomprehensive survey ever undertaken of truckers at truck stops across the unitedstates. the driver survey, which was conducted between august 1997 and january 1999, has substantially improved our understanding of driversõ work hoursand is often cited for presenting the first accurate portrait of truck drivers, theirquality of life, and their views of the industry.many academic centers require that member companies fund relevant research, provide access to realworld data, and provide sites for implementation.in some cases, access to research results is restricted to member companies,which tend to be the leaders among integratedlogistics service providers andusers. at georgia tech, member firms pay $50,000 annually to participate, andindividual companies are actively involved in research with academic faculty andstudents. student/faculty teams work on problems defined by one or more companies, and research results are disseminated actively among members. atstanford, member firms pay $25,000 to support academic research as part of anindustrial consortium. members benefit from networking and from student/faculty teams working on problems of interest to all participants. at mit, firmspay $20,000 to share research findings and network but are not directly involvedin research.in addition to research, university transportation research centers also provide executive courses, seminars, and symposia to inform industry of stateoftheart academic research and new logistics technologies and to inform facultymembers of the real problems in industries. for example, affiliate companies ofthe mit center for transportation studies come to mit seven or eight times ayear to review the status of academic research.contributions and impact of academic researchbasic research, some of it done in the 1950s with no logistics applications inmind, has had the greatest impact on integrated logistics. linear programmingand integer programming have both made major contributions to methodology(see box 52). major technological contributions emerged from research on computer science/artificial intelligence, specifically constraintdirected search andits relatives.2the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry155applied research has also been important to integrated logistics, especially inthe areas of largescale optimization modeling, decomposition methods, networkoptimization, and other areas of operations research. for example, research atmit on models for shippers in the logistics industry includes transportation/inventory tradeoffs and motorcarrier bidding optimization. software for routing, production scheduling, and distribution management are examples of highbox 52cplex optimization, inc.cplex optimization, inc., founded in 1987, released its first product, cplex1.0, in 1988. (the company was sold to ilog in 1997.) cplex products are basesystems of òsimplexó optimizers for linear programming, including a specialpurpose networksimplex optimizer. the following addons are available:¥mixed integer programming (mip)¥barrier solver for linear programming¥quadratic solver for convex, quadratic programs¥parallel mip solver¥parallel barrier solverall of these optimizers can be considered computational engines that are typically built into other vertical applications.the company emerged from research on integer programming and combinatorial optimization by robert bixby at rice university. dr. bixby wrote the initialversions of what became cplex code as a classroom tool in the mid1980s. theinitial impetus for commercialization came shortly thereafter from tom baker ofchesapeake decision sciences, who began including bixbyõs code in his mimi/lpproduct as early as 1985.1 by the time cplex optimization was founded, thecode had undergone steady improvements, mainly in response to increasinglydifficult, realworld problems.simultaneously but separately, fundamental developments were made in thetheory of integer programming and combinatorial optimization, motivated by thework of manfred padberg (new york university), ellis johnson (georgia tech),karla hoffman (george mason university), martin groetschel (konrad zuse zentrum, berlin, germany), and others. as a result, dr. bixby recognized a need for afundamental computational tool that could facilitate the current research in integerprogramming and its application. the new tool would be a numerically stable, fast,callable, linear programming solver. subsequent research led to the developmentof the cplex callable library, which addressed the socalled traveling salesmanproblem. even though the problem itself was the subject of purely academic research with little direct practical applicability, it turned out to be an excellent modelfor the broad range of functionalities that made cplex a successful tool for business applications.1mimi is a sophisticated commercial system for expressing mathematical models in operations research.source: robert bixby, professor of computational and applied mathematics, rice university.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156the impact of academic research on industrial performanceimpact technologies adopted by industry that were developed by university research teams.academic research on the development of decision support tools, whichrequire a thorough knowledge of available tools and a thorough knowledge of theindustry, has been less transferable. on the one hand, most practitioners cannotexplain problems or devise innovative solutions because they are not aware of theavailable technologies. on the other hand, most researchers are not sufficientlyaware of the subtleties of realworld industry problems.universityindustry interactionmodes of interaction between universities and private firms are not industryspecific. academic research in the tdl industry is disseminated to industryprimarily through graduating students entering the workforce who apply whatthey have learned at the university. most successful employers recognize thisvector of knowledge transfer and try to maximize the expertise of new hires byproviding opportunities for them to contribute to changes in company practices.other modes of interaction are also important. member firms in universityresearch centers have a financial stake in the research and an effective interfacewith researchers. industrysponsored research, the commitment by one or asmall number of companies to support a specific project, is also an effectivemethod of generating research that benefits industry. companies are likely toadopt the research results of projects they have helped develop and funded (orpartly funded).consulting arrangements for faculty are another method of moving researchresults into the field. although the relationship between consulting and technology transfer is not well documented, faculty consulting provides an obviousmechanism for generating new practices in industry. it also provides faculty withmuch needed exposure to industry problems, which has enormous benefits inshifting research from interesting but theoretical subjects to useful and applicablesubjects. in logistics, academic consulting has often been a precursor, as well asa complement, to academically originated software startup companies. for instance, startup companies (predominantly software companies) in decision technology, founded by professors and based on their academic research and consulting, have made significant contributions to innovation in integrated logistics. thespecial role of spinoff companies is described below, and an example is givenin box 53.presentations at conferences with extensive industry participation, suchas the conferences sponsored by the major operationsresearch/logisticsmanagement professional societies (e.g., institute for operations research andmanagement science, the council on logistics management, the internationalsociety of logistics), and other organizations are also an important vector forcommunicating academic research results to industry.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry157as professional education in logistics management, in the form of shortcourses, increases, it could encourage the use of, and demand for, new logisticstools. the technology transfer via these courses is generally minimal. they expose practitioners to new technologies and ideas but generally provide littleinformation on how to use them effectively.all of these mechanisms of knowledge transfer show that closer ties betweencompanies and universities are necessary for industry to reap the maximum benefit from academic research. programs like mitõs corporate affiliates programand georgia techõs leaders in logistics are reasonably good avenues of knowledge transfer because they provide for continuity of participation and a longtermlearning process for faculty as well as industry. the panel believes that manyfaculty members focus on solving nonexistent problems, not because they arepoor researchers, but because they do not understand the realworld problemsfaced by industry. this problem can usually be overcome if faculty members aregiven sufficient opportunities to interact with industry.spinoff companiesthe creation of new companies based on research results is an importantmechanism for commercializing academic research results and increasing theirbox 53princeton transportation consulting groupprinceton transportation consulting group (ptcg) was founded in 1987 bydrs. cape, powell, and sheffi, faculty members at princeton university and themassachusetts institue of technology.1 ptcg was started by implementing drs.powell and sheffiõs consulting practice, which was based on their university research. the company, which provides decision support systems for truckload (tl)and lessthantruckload (ltl) carriers, is the leading provider of realtime tl dispatching software and ltl loadplanning software to the motor carrier industry. italso provides systems to the logistics industry for inbound transportation withmultiple plants and distribution centers and optimizationbased bidding software.this software was developed from dr. sheffiõs research at mit and was inspiredby his experience with bidding transportation services through logicorp. basedon experience, he was able to identify a new category of optimization software anddevelop a new approach. the solution was later developed into an application byptcg and is now used by dozens of large manufacturers and retailers throughoutthe united states, europe, and the far east.1in 1996, the company was acquired by sabre (at the time a subsidiary of amr, owner ofamerican airlines) and became its boston office. in 2000, dr. sheffi bought sabreõs logisticsassets to form logistics.com.source: yossi sheffi, codirector, center for transportation and logistics, massachusetts institute of technologythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158the impact of academic research on industrial performanceimpact on industry. the case studies prepared for this report describe companiesstarted by university professors; these are primarily software companies for implementing products or services developed through research and consulting.3 one ofthe case histories is summarized in box 54.in the field of integrated logistics, most startup companies involve decision support systems (routing and scheduling), optimization software, trafficnetwork analysis, thirdparty logistics companies, and consulting services.georgia techõs logistics institute, mitõs center for transportation studies,box 54ad opt technologies, inc.headquartered in montr”al, canada, ad opt technologies was founded in1987 by professor fran“ois soumis (…cole polytechnique de montr”al) and fourprogrammers from two university research centers in montr”al: groupe dõ”tudeset de recherche en analyse des decisions (gerad) and centre de recherche surle transport (crt). ad opt currently employs 100 people and had revenues of$15 million in 2001.as a spinoff of gerad and crt, ad opt is an example of the commercialization of university research results. the company continues to maintain closeties with universities in montr”al through personnel, sponsored research, andgraduate hirings. fran“ois soumis of …cole polytechnique de montr”al, acofounder of ad opt, and jacques desrosiers of …cole des hautes …tudescommerciales, who joined ad opt in 1992, supervise the gencol team atgerad. gencol, an acronym for g…n”ration de colonnes, embodies theprinciples of the columngeneration solution method that was developed to solvelargescale complex problems. the system can be modeled so that solutionscorrespond to the set of paths found in vehicle routing and crew scheduling.since gencolõs conception in 1981, it has evolved continually through the research of many graduate students and computer analysts. this program is theresult of an enormous amount of work funded largely by grants and industrycontracts. the sale of products based on the gencol optimizer represent morethan 60 percent of ad optõs turnover. the present and future growth of thecompany are directly related to research at gerad.initially ad opt technologies provided consulting services to optimize operations of openpit mines and the routing of propane delivery trucks. in the early1990s, the company began to focus on product development and scheduling ofairline crews. the altitude crew pairing system was the first product developed and marketed by ad opt. crew rostering (preferential bidding and bidline)systems followed. shiftlogic, a shift scheduling and management tool, resultedfrom work done for navcanada on a tool for scheduling air traffic controllersthroughout canada. today, ad opt continues to invest heavily in research anddevelopment to maintain its leadership and technological advantage in airline andpersonnel scheduling systems for air traffic control and other vertical markets,such as ambulance, police, firemen, 911, nurses, and doctors.source: jacques desrosiers, professor, department of management sciences, and memberof the group for research on decision analysis, ecole des hec montr”al.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry159and princetonõs castle laboratory have served as incubators/support networks for startup founders, who received feedback from other university researchers and/or companies working on realworld logistics issues and problems (see box 55). once a new company is created, graduate students areusually hired to pursue further development of software products. based on theaccumulated knowledge, problemsolving skills, and expertise of professorsand students, the software is tailored to solve a customerõs problems. considering the success of many of these startup companies, the impact on industry ofacademic research commercialized in this manner has been substantial. in manycases, larger companies eventually acquire the startup companies, thus providing more resources for continued product development and more extensive marketing.box 55caps logisticscaps logistics was founded in 1979 by don ratliff and john jarvis, professors of industrial and systems engineering at georgia institute of technology. thecompany provides three families of decisionsupport software for supplychain logistics: supplychain design and coordination, shipment planning, and dedicatedfleet management. caps has 120 fulltime employees; revenue totaled more than$15 million in 1998, when the company was sold to dutchbased enterprise software giant baan.much of the methodology implemented in caps software was developedthrough academic research. many of the concepts for integrating interactive mapbased graphics with network optimization emerged from research at georgia tech.the network optimization concepts were developed at a variety of universities,including georgia tech and mit. the research at georgia tech was funded by acombination of military funding agencies, nsf, and private companies participating in the leaders in logistics program. caps software would not have beenpossible without this research.caps also has benefited directly from federal support for logistics research. in1985, caps received a phase 1, and later a phase 2, small business innovationresearch (sbir) grant from the office of naval research to develop concepts fora òlogistics tool kitó that could be used to develop flexible logistics software. thisbecame the caps logistics toolkit, which evolved into the foundation for capssoftware. caps received six other sbir phase 1 grants but, because of matchingrequirements, particularly from nsf, was not able to obtain phase 2 funding forany of them. therefore, additional development and transfer of the technology hadto be funded internally. this research was focused primarily on making the technology easy to use by nontechnical people. caps currently has more than1,000 software installations. the users are primarily fortune 200 companies.source: donald ratliff, regentsõ professor and ups professor of logistics, and director,logistics institute, georgia institute of technology.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160the impact of academic research on industrial performancesources of fundingboth industry and government provide funding for academic research inlogistics, although federal funding for basic research has decreased recently. theu.s. department of defense has historically supported most of the basic researchrelevant to integrated logistics; as defense budgets have decreased, these fundshave become increasingly difficult to obtain. the defense advanced researchprojects agency (darpa), which funds a considerable amount of applied research in logistics, directs most of its funding to consulting firms and very little toacademia. the defense logistics agency (dla), which is a member organization of university logistics centers, such as the logistics institute at the university of arkansas, provides limited funding for academic research, as does thefederal aviation administration (faa). for example, the faa funds the national center of excellence for aviation operations research at the university ofcalifornia at berkeley and mit.historically, the national science foundation (nsf) has funded researchrelevant to logistics in mathematics and industrial engineering, but logisticsrelated research has not been a priority. in 2001, however, nsf created thecenter for engineering logistics and distribution (celdi), a multiuniversity,multidisciplinary industry/university cooperative research center based at theuniversity of arkansas, university of oklahoma, university of louisville, andoklahoma state university. research is driven by, and sponsored by, memberorganizations, which include manufacturing, maintenance, distribution, transportation, information technology, and consulting companies. celdi emerged in2001 from the material handling research center (founded in 1982) and thelogistics institute at the university of arkansas (established in 1994) to provideintegrated solutions to logistics problems through research using modeling, analysis, and intelligent systems technologies.perhaps the most significant source of federal funding in tdl research comesfrom the u.s. department of transportation (dot) through its university transportation centers (utc) program. the transportation equity act for the 21stcentury (p.l. 105178) of 1998 authorized up to $194.8 million for grants toestablish and operate as many as 33 utcs throughout the united states. in additionto emphasizing the educational role of universities, the program funds basic andapplied research to advance the body of knowledge in transportation. all utcs arerequired to match federal funds dollar for dollar; state departments of transportationtypically provide the match. some utc focus areas are listed below:¥intelligent transportation systems¥advanced technologies in transportation operations and management¥advanced infrastructure and transportation¥advanced transportation simulation¥advanced transportation technologythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry161industry funding of tdl research is limited and concentrated in a handful ofthe biggest logistics research centers. projects funded by industry, which can beeither proprietary or generic (i.e., results can be published), cover a wide range oftopics, from the movement and tracking of material in a factory to the distributionof finished goods to global markets to the scheduling of aircraft and crews forairlines. (the case studies provide some insight into the commercial applicationsof logistics technologies and research conducted to refine solutions to commercial problems.)impedimentsalthough the contribution of academic research to the emergence of sophisticated integrated logistics management and optimization tools has been significant, and the resulting decreases in operating costs and improvements in efficiency have been high, very little public or private funding is available forfundamental research in logistics. a critical mass of funding tends to be concentrated in academic logistics institutes where member companies help to defineand then participate in research projects. however, industry participation sometimes creates tensions between academic researchers and industry managers whomay have conflicting objectives for collaborative projects. industry wants timelysolutions to practical problems, while academics want to conduct valid, preferably ònovel,ó research with publishable results. for instance, stable, easytouselogistics software tools may be a high priority for industry sponsors but may beless appealing to researchers than refining and perfecting existing tools or developing new tools.an infrastructure for logistics research has not been fully developed. diagnostic tools for the complex software used in logistics applications have onlyrecently emerged. because there are no common data sets, data must be gatheredfrom industry for each project. if the data are considered proprietary, a companymay refuse to provide them. libraries of test data sets on small mathematicalproblems have been developed, but not on large problems of logistics. as a result,researchers often do not have access to data, and certainly not consistent data, onwhich to base experiments.areas for future researchin general, the tdl industry is becoming more sophisticated. continuedprogress in the implementation of erp and related software tools and the development of a stronger information technology infrastructure will result in theaccumulation of better and more extensive data, which, in turn, will enable thedevelopment and implementation of more sophisticated decisionsupport tools,which are likely to be developed through academic research. universities mightalso assume a larger role in the training/retraining of technically sophisticatedlogistics managers in the use of new tools.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162the impact of academic research on industrial performanceacademic research might have a larger impact in the area of linkages between manufacturing and transportation, especially as companies continue to tryto reduce inventories, transport costs, and time through integrated supplychainmanagement. another fruitful area for research would be the development anduse of optimization procedures for the macrolevel coordination of the supplychain, such as the allocation and scheduling of activities among plants, warehouses, and transportation channels. for example, a production schedule thatwould mean low manufacturing costs might increase transportation costs. because these costs are incurred (and measured) by different departments, manufacturers may not take transport costs into consideration in their planning. as long ascompanies had buffers (time and/or inventory) to decouple these processes, thiswas not much of a problem, but it will certainly become a major problem soon.forecasting transportation demand is becoming increasingly important, and capacity planning by carriers will have to be even more rigorous to account foruncertainties/variabilities in demand.university research could play a larger role in other areas, such as the integration of planning and operations, the development of information technology tosupport order placement, the development of information technology to supportthe coordination and scheduling of the movement of goods, and consumer research. for instance, with the availability of realtime information (e.g., currentinventory levels at retail stores; current traffic information), models of sequentialdecision making under uncertainty may become a basis for logistics tools in thefuture. research in these areas would be òengineering researchó (i.e., researchfocused on bringing technologies to bear on industry problems for which fewprinciples or laws exist). transportation and logistics security has become acritical issue that will also pose important research questions in the future: forexample, how to improve the security of systems while continuing to improve, orat least maintain, their efficiency.findingsfinding 51. the contributions of academic research to integrated logistics havebeen significant in areas of basic research as well as in the development andapplication of specific software technologies. however, academic research onlogistics and technologies has had a moderate impact on the transportation, distribution, and logistics industry overall.except for the involvement of member companies in academic logisticsresearch institutes, no institutionalized methods of technology transfer from universities to the tdl industry have been established. most highimpact academicresearch in operations and decisionsupport sciences can be attributed to facultymembers who either translated their research findings into software commercialized through a startup company or who were closely involved with a specificthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry163company in the industry. for the latter route to be effective, the host companymust be sophisticated enough to be receptive to innovative research, and theresearcher must be familiar with the specific needs of the company. industriesthat have been most influenced by academic research are airlines, manufacturersthat operate private truck fleets, lessthantruckload and truckload motor carriers,and software companies.without a strong tie to industry, academic research tends to be disconnectedto the needs of industry. the academic imperative that researchers publish theirwork often creates barriers to their addressing real industrial needs using realindustrial data. research problems that could lead to publishable results may befar too complex for companies to benefit from the results. for these reasons, thecommercialization of results through startup companies may continue to be themost effective pathway for academic research to affect industry performance.finding 52. federal funding agencies have not recognized logistics as a separate intellectual discipline and thus have not funded longrange, potentially highimpact academic research in the field.the dot, primarily through the university transportation centers program,funds some research relevant to logistics. nsf provides some funds for programsthat bring industry and academia together in the logistics area (e.g., celdi, themultiuniversity industryuniversity cooperative research center formed in 2001).in addition, nsf has launched a modest initiative, exploratory research on engineering in the transport industries, that specifically addresses logistics andsupplychain management. although some nsffunded research has benefitedairlines that contributed matching funds, nsfõs funding for research in logisticshas been minimal. in the past dod (particularly the office of naval researchand the air force office of scientific research) funded logistics as a discipline,but the funds are now focused more on mathematics research. darpa has anextensive applied research program in logistics, but funding has been directedmostly toward consulting companies rather than universities.finding 53. the two most influential factors on the industry are (1) the explosive growth of information technology and complementary disciplines and(2) deregulation of the freight industries.finding 54. most companies are still in the process of adopting and implementing information systems and acquiring data from the new systems. the next waveof innovation will be to apply the data to optimization models to supportdecisionmaking capabilities.decisionsupport software can be divided into two categories: (1) theautomation of transactions to increase productivity and improve quality,and, in the process, create and collect data; and (2) the optimization ofmanagement decisions based on these data. most companies have been in thethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164the impact of academic research on industrial performanceinformationacquisition stage for some time and have accumulated largequantities of accurate, realtime data. optimization and decisionmaking support tools could be used to translate these data into information that couldlead to higher profits and competitive advantage.finding 55. except for airlines, few companies in the tdl industry conducttheir own research, and those that do are primarily interested in developmentrather than research.airlines have not only invested in their own research, but have also demonstrated their support for academic research by funding research projects andparticipating in logisticsresearch institutes. most other tdl firms have notyet realized the value of r&d for increasing efficiency and establishing a competitive advantage. these companies have a long history of adopting lowtechnology, manualintensive business models. even the competitive demandsof the industry have not yet created a significant demand for research. mostresearch, therefore, has influenced them through software developments, eitherby existing software firms or new startup companies.finding 56. providers of logistics software are undergoing rapid consolidation.consolidation in the logistics software industry has narrowed the range ofindustryresearch interfaces resulting in fewer spinoff companies. consolidations may eventually create economic units large enough to support morebasic research.finding 57. the lack of industry demand for research and researchbasedinnovations has made it difficult for academic researchers to identify useful,highpriority problems.the absence of organized interactions between academia and industry reflects the general lack of an organized innovation system in the logistics industry.most academic researchers have little incentive to work with industry or to understand industry issues. because nsf and other funding agencies do not recognize logistics as a discipline, academics are reluctant to go into the field. the lackof interest on the part of industry, particularly the lack of corporate r&d departments to provide an interface with researchers, reinforces this reluctance.finding 58. research important to industry requires researchers who understand the industry and the subtleties of the problems industry faces.the experience of companysupported logistics institutes has demonstratedthe importance of having a critical mass of academic researchers who thoroughlyunderstand both the problems industry faces and the academic methodologiesneeded to solve them. although these research subjects meet rigorous academiccriteria and address the real needs of industry, much more work will have to bedone to encourage industry interest in academic research.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry165finding 59. transportationresearch institutes have the potential to improveindustryuniversity interaction significantly. mitõs center for transportationresearch, georgia techõs logistics institute, stanfordõs global supply chainmanagement forum, and princetonõs castle laboratory have shown that theycan improve the transfer of information between academia and industry.historically, these four centers have accounted for most industryrelatedlogistics research in academia; all four rely on industry participation and funding.with nsf support, celdi continues this model, requiring industry participationbut in a multiuniversity context. the effectiveness of these institutes is a functionof their critical mass of academic researchers who can interact effectively withindustry. the continuity of industry participation in research, outreach, networking, and continuing education has initiated a twoway learning process.recommendationsthe flow of people between academic research and industry must be greatlyincreased. the panel recommends that the following steps be taken to furtherthis end.recommendation 51. academia should develop better curricula and programsin logistics to attract student, faculty, and industry interest. this will requirechanges in the incentive and reward systems to encourage qualified researchers towork in the field.recommendation 52. industry should establish sabbaticals in industry, fulltime or parttime teaching by industry practitioners in universities, and otherprograms that would promote universityindustry interactions.notes1tip moved in 2002 when the director, dr. chelsea c. white, joined the faculty of the school ofindustrial and systems engineering (isye) at the georgia institute of technology.2constraintdirected search is one of a class of constraintsatisfaction problems in artificial intelligence in which knowledge is expressed declaratively as a collection of explicit, categorical constraints over a set of possibilities.3companies profiled include logicorp, inc., ptcg, inc., caps logistics, cplexoptimization, inc., ad opt technologies, inc., transport dynamics, inc., sts, and cambridgesystematics, inc.referencesbelman, d., and k. monaco. 2001. the effects of deregulation, deunionization, technology andhuman capital on the work and work lives of truck drivers. industrial and labor relationsreview 54(2a): 502ð524.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166the impact of academic research on industrial performancecairncross, f. 2000. inside the machine: a survey of emanagement. the economist, supplement357(8196): 5ð40.cass information systems. 1999. wall streetõs view of logistics. annual session of the council oflogistics management, toronto, ontario, october 18, 1999.delaney, r., and r. wilson. 2001. managing logistics in a perfect storm. 12th annual state oflogistics report. washington, d.c.: cass information systems.deloitte consulting. 1999a. energizing the supply chain: trends and issues in supply chain management. new york: deloitte consulting.deloitte consulting. 1999b. leveraging the ebusiness marketplace. new york: deloitte consulting.lieb, r.c., and h. randall. 1996. a comparison of the use of thirdparty logistics services bylarge american manufacturers, 1991, 1994, 1995, and 1996. lexington, mass.: mercer management consulting.logistics best practices group. 1997. survey on logistics outsourcing practices. college park, md.:university of maryland press.masters, j., and b. la londe. 1998. the 1997 ohio state university survey of career patterns inlogistics. columbus, ohio: ohio state university press.nagarajan, a., j.l. bander, and c.c. white iii. 1999. trucking. pp. 123ð153 in u.s. industry in2000: studies in competitive performance. washington, d.c.: national academy press.siebel systems, inc. 2002. annual report 2002. available online at: http://www.siebel.com/common/includes/pdfframe.shtm?pdfurl=/downloads/about/pdf/siebel2002annualrpt.pdf.thomas, j. 1998. the quest continues. logistics management and distribution report 37(8): 39ð41.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.167addendumquestionnairethe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals, primarily universitybased researchers, with special knowledge of the transportation, distribution, and logistics industry. included among the questionnaire respondents were asenior executive at the sabre group and professors with expertise in operationsresearch, applied mathematics, industrial engineering, transportation research,and integrated logistics from georgia institute of technology, massachusettsinstitute of technology, northwestern university, princeton university, university of maryland, and universite de montr”al.impact of academic research on industrialperformance1. briefly describe research carried out in your university that has had animpact on integrated chain logistics within the transportation, distribution, andlogistics services (tdl) industry.1 if possible, please provide information aboutthe nature of specific research contributions; the level of faculty, student, andindustrial researcher involvement; the research time frame; sources and level offunding; how research results were transferred (specific steps) to the industry,and whether the research had implications for companies and industries beyondthe specific company or industry involved.2. please describe briefly any other academic research they you believe hashad a notable impact on the tdls industry. (see suggested issues/items in subtextto question #1.)3. overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrialperformance in the tdls industry as (circle one):1. very large2. large3. medium4. small5. very small/nonexistent1the nae panel defines the tdls industry as encompassing all businesses involved in thetransportation and storage of goods and the movement of people. its constituent parts include: carriers, third party logistics firms, management consulting firms, terminal and distribution firms, warehousing companies, shipping companies, software providers, and major customers/retailers. thefocus of the nae panel study, however, is on the contributions of academic research to integratedchain logistics and associated activities, technologies, and methodologies that cut across the tdlsindustryõs many constituent parts.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168the impact of academic research on industrial performance4. briefly describe significant emerging trends or developments inthe tdls industry in which university research could or should play a larger role.5. what are the most important actions universities could taketo enhance the contributions of academic research to performance inthe industry?6. what are the most important actions companies could taketo enhance the contributions of academic research to performance inthe industry?7. what are the most important actions government could taketo enhance the contributions of academic research to performance inthe industry?8. what is your estimate of total annual research dollars spent at yourinstitution on academic research related to the tdls industry? what shares ofthe total would you estimate are funded by government, industry, orother sources?9. other comments?the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry169industrial roundtable agendas and participant listsinformation technology in the logistics,transportation, and distribution industrya roundtable discussionoctober 12, 1998radisson hotel, maingate anaheimanaheim, californiaroundtable agenda6:00welcomechris lofgren, schneider national, inc.introductiondon ratliff, georgia institute of technology6:10roundtable participantsselfintroduction; major technology needs and trendsin the workplace7:10group discussiondecision support systems: current and future trends and needs8:00session wrapup and adjournchris lofgrenparticipantsindustry expertschair: chris lofgren, chief technical officer, schneider national, inc.christopher caplice, senior consultant, the sabre groupvirginia carmon, senior manager, kpmg peat marwick llpbernard hale, senior vice president customer support, dsc logisticsthomas sanderson, president, sabre decision technologiesjay mabe, associate partner, andersen consultingjohn coyle, kimberly clark corporationnae panel members:h. donald ratliff, regents professor and ups professor of logistics anddirector, logistics institute, georgia institute of technologythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170the impact of academic research on industrial performancecynthia barnhart, associate professor, civil and environmental engineeringdepartment, massachusetts institute of technologyrobert e. bixby, professor, department of computational and appliedmathematics, rice universitynae staffdiane alberts, nae fellow, program officeproctor reid, associate director, program officenathan kahl, project assistant, program officechallenges and trends in the logistics,transportation and distribution industrya roundtable discussionoctober 13, 1998radisson hotel, maingate anaheimanaheim, californiaroundtable agendawelcome and opening remarksprofessor h. don ratliff (georgia institute of technology) andprofessor cynthia barnhart (massachusetts institute of technology)selfintroduction of roundtable participants:describe your job and three major challenges that you currently face.specific questions to focus your thoughts:1.what are your thoughts on the changing nature of the logistics business?2.what are the current and future technology needs of your business?3.name the most important technological innovation in your business in therecent past?4.do you interact with / turn to colleagues at universities to help meet yourbusiness challenges? if so, how? if not, why not?5.what is an important emerging trend in the ltd industry?6.what are your human capital needs? what are challenges?list of participantsindustry experts:don schneider (chair), president, schneider national, inc.doug duszynski, director of transportation, the quaker oats companythe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industry171wayne power, director, global logistics, owens corningvince chiodo, director of supply chain management, chep usahank dehne, manager of logistics distribution & planning, general millsnae panel members:h. donald ratliff, regents professor and ups professor of logistics anddirector, logistics institute, georgia institute of technologycynthia barnhart, associate professor, civil and environmental engineeringdepartment, massachusetts institute of technologyrobert e. bixby, professor, department of computational and appliedmathematics, rice universitynae program office staff:proctor reid, associate directordiane alberts, nae j. herbert holloman fellownathan kahl, project assistantthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6report of the panel on thefinancial services industrythe panel on the financial services industry comprised six members, including one nae member from industry, two other members from industry, andthree members from academia. three of the panel members were also membersof the parent committee. the panel reviewed the literature and sent a questionnaire to experts in academia, the financial services industry, and government. thequestionnaire was followed by a workshop attended by 21 senior individuals inthe financial services sector (see addendum).financial services are the foundation of a modern economy. they providemechanisms for assigning value, exchanging payment, and determining and distributing risk, and they provide the essential underpinnings of global economicactivity. the financial services industry encompasses banking, insurance, equitymarkets and brokerage houses, leasing, venture capital, and personal and commercial credit. the industry provides the wherewithal for the capital investmentthat drives innovation and productivity growth throughout the economy. as theeconomy has become larger, more global, and more complex, the industry hasbecome increasingly innovative in delivering products and services.the scope of the financial services industry is enormous:¥u.s. financial institutions process more than $9 trillion per day, approximately equivalent to the u.s. gross domestic product (gdp) in 2001.¥daily average trading volume on the new york stock exchange wasmore than one billion shares in 2000.¥commercial banks in the united states hold more than $6 trillion in assets(federal reserve, 2002).173the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174the impact of academic research on industrial performance¥the annual global life insurance market is more than $1.2 trillion inwritten annual premiums; the united states accounts for 24 percent of thistotal. other kinds of insurance total more than $900 billion in annualpolicies; the united states accounts for 40 percent.¥the u.s. savings and loan industry holds more than $1 trillion in assets.¥the industry employed nearly 6 million people in 2000 (u.s. bureau ofthe census, 2002).financial services has long been perceived as a staid, conservative industry.however, the growth of information technology and global competition has driventhe industry to embrace rapid technological advances and innovation. information technologies, the internet, risk modeling, and the creation of new markets inderivatives and other financial instruments have accelerated the pace and volumeand increased the efficiency of financial transactions, at the same time driving theindustry to make significant investments in new technologies. for instance, financial services firms account for more than 60 percent of investments in information technology in the united states. hence, highly technically trained expertshave become increasingly important to the industry.these trends have also led to an increase in competition and a blurring of thedefinition of financial institutions. financial services firms are involved in leasing (gecapital corporation is perhaps the leading example), personal credit (e.g., at&tõsentry into and subsequent exit from the credit card business)1 and other activities thatwere once the preserve of commercial banks. with the virtual elimination of interstatebanking restrictions and mergers of firms from disparate parts of the industry, consolidations have proliferated in the banking industry. the end of the glasssteagall act of1933, which prohibited banks from accepting deposits and underwriting securities andestablished the federal deposit insurance corporation, and the constant entry of newdomestic and global competitors, have created an industry subject to continuous redefinition and restructuring. technologies and services for institutions and individual investors on a national and global scale are now widely available.the consequences of rapid innovation, continuous restructuring, and ongoing regulatory changes have been largely beneficial to the u.s. economy andsociety. however, these trends have also had some negative consequences. someinnovations have been credited with having a destabilizing effect on financialmarkets leading to òfailuresó that have been very costly to the industry in bothdollars and public trust. for example, the application of derivative pricing formulas (developed by academics) in the large global hedge fund, long termcapital management, was implicated in the fundõs near collapse in 1998.definition of the industrybecause new players have entered the field from areas not traditionallyassociated with the industry, and firms already in the industry are expandingthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry175their services to encompass different parts of the business, a narrow definitionwould not be useful. the adoption of new technologies to provide new servicesand existing services in innovative, more convenient ways further complicatesefforts to define the boundaries of the industry. defining the industry usingspecific companies or current participants as examples may also be somewhat misleading.therefore, the panel decided to approach a definition from two directions.the first is based on a functional view of financial services, which is perhapsthe most useful way to examine how and why the industry is changing. in thefunctional view, most financial services or processes can be divided into twobroad categories: (1) the packaging and description of securities; and (2) thefacilitation of trade. each function poses very different questions for academic researchers.the second approach is to examine changes in the industry over time sinceabout 1980, when it still resembled the traditional industry, which was dominatedby commercial and investment banks, insurance companies, and brokeragehouses. transitions in the industry can then be assessed by comparing the industry in 2002 with the 1980 version. the characteristics of the industry in the nearfuture can be suggested based on current trends. this approach provides a senseof the changes taking place in the industry over time.functional viewthe first function of the financial services industry is the packaging anddescription of securities for consumers and businesses. this function spans awide range of core services, from the mundane, such as providing savingsaccounts, certificates of deposit, and insurance for consumers, to the esotericrepackaging of risk for large corporations, such as security bundling, (e.g.,mutual funds and mortgages). recently, repackaging services have been marketed like real goods that are manufactured by a factory and brought to theattention of consumers by a marketer. in the complex world of finance, theindustry must also play an advisory role. in fact, many firms focus more onadvising investors than on selling securities, although the recent weakness inthe stock markets and the wave of auditing scandals have made this functionmore difficult.the second major function of financial services is facilitating trades, orhelping implement transactions. financial service firms have always played a keyrole in moving trades involving actual goods and services or financial productsthrough the economy. a simple example of this type of activity is the interestfreechecking account: the bank provides standard checkclearing functions to helpconsumers and businesses make trades but does modify the securities that aretraded. other examples of transactional services are automated teller machines(atms), foreign exchange, and debit cards.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176the impact of academic research on industrial performancechanging nature of financial servicesuntil 1980, the financial services industry could be divided into four distinctcategories: commercial banking, investment banking, insurance, and investmentmanagement. applying the functional definitions to these categories is relativelyeasy. commercial banking served both functions, but the other three primarilypackaged securities and advised customers. fullservice brokerage houses performed advisory and transactional roles.the financial services industry in 2002 is in a state of continuous change, andpinning down exactly what is happening is very difficult. many outside forces areat work, including macroeconomic changes and globalization, technological innovation, competitive pressures, evolving regulatory climates, and specific eventsin the market. given that financial services are really almost entirely information,the most powerful force for change is in information technology, especially theemergence of networks, such as proprietary information networks that deliver uptotheminute financial information, greatly facilitating financial transactions.the astounding impact of advances in information technology is immediatelyapparent when the amount of money moved, the number of shares traded, or thespeed of transactions are compared with the same figures for the early 1980s.technological changes are intertwined with other forces, especially changesin domestic and international regulation, which are transforming many parts ofthe industry. the number of traditional companies is decreasing because of consolidations, which are also bringing firms together from disparate parts of theindustry to form new entities. the increase in global linkages means that fewfinancial service firms are immune to macroeconomic events that spill over national borders. both of these trendsñconsolidation and globalizationñhaveraised questions about the stability and safety of traditional financial servicesfirms and the ability of regulators to oversee them.because of changes in industry structure, regulatory environments, the scopeof services, and technological capabilities, the boundaries of the current financialservices industry are very difficult to define, and may be even more difficult todefine in the future. new firms that are not in the conventional circle of financialservices are providing traditional functions. examples can be found inecommerce, where new entrants include firms that heretofore were associatedwith computer software and hardware and entirely new webbased startup companies. both of these transaction and information service providers are outsidethe traditional realm of commercial banking but provide many of the same services. note, however, that by regulation, commercial banks are the ultimateproviders of money in all forms. a similar situation has arisen with new andpotential providers of electronic money.electronic commerce is not the only area pushing the boundaries of financialservices. the bundling and repackaging of securities is more extensive than everbefore in areas that are not obviously related to financial products. for instance,the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry177new musical recordings are òsecuritizedó to spread the risk if sales of a recordingare poor and the rewards if the recording is a hit. other kinds of securities alsoblur the boundaries. an investment bank might issue options on physical events,such as earthquakes, which have been the province of insurance companies. thegrowing areas of equipment leasing and risk management are also difficult toclassify; they include many services provided by actuaries, accountants, andother consultants whose activities are difficult to classify along traditional lines.the industry today includes many nontraditional functions, such as retailersales, software development, network management, and key functions in theconsumer industry. in general, these innovations have radically changed the keyfinancial players. many firms whose primary line of business is unrelated tofinancial services are integrating financial capabilities into their traditional business offerings to provide innovative business approaches. this trend is especiallyprevalent in the world of ecommerce and internet business. also, core parts ofthe industry, such as consumer banking, are now facing competition from companies that historically had nothing to do with financial services.as consumers are increasingly able to make investment decisions themselves, the industry is being forced to adapt. the government and others havebeen encouraging people to take more control of their longterm financial needs,and consumers are now more active in their longrange investment planning. theinternet has enabled firms to deliver detailed financial information and advicedirectly to consumersõ homes. indeed, unlike the old òtransactionbasedó relationships, financial advice has become a key factor in the establishment of enduring relationships with clients. this combination has opened new areas of investment advising, and new players have entered the field, ranging from simple websites that provide stock quotes to complete data and software services providedby firms like quicken and microsoft.2the shape of the industry in 5 to 10 years is difficult to predict. change islikely to continue, and the industry is likely to become increasingly commodityoriented with an emphasis on the development of relationshipbased interactionswith customers. future participants are likely to have more direct contact withconsumers, who, in turn, will have more choices to make. to meet the needs ofconsumers, the industry is likely to be under great pressure to use more sophisticated marketing approaches. financial services are likely to be provided in chunkscorresponding to certain functions, and overlaps with other services are likely todecrease. crucial people in the industry are likely to have technological backgrounds rather than traditional commercial or investment banking backgrounds.future industry extensions will be difficult to classify along conventional business lines. some will fit into the category of bundling of securities, while otherswill be more transaction oriented. however, in a few areas, even functionaldefinitions will not apply.nevertheless, the functionbased definitions should be retained for threeimportant reasons. first, the traditional breakdown of the industry (commercialthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178the impact of academic research on industrial performanceand investment banking, insurance, mutual funds) is no longer satisfactory. second, the functional breakdown may be important for future academic research,because some areas, such as encryption for electronic transactions, clearly havevery large engineering components. other areas, such as the pricing and packaging of new types of securities, have more of a finance/economics/financial engineering component. third, government regulation will be promulgated accordingto where the boundaries are drawn.innovation systemchanges in the past 20 years have fundamentally changed the markets, theway customers interact with service providers, and the range of products in thefinancial services industry. these changes have taken place in a relatively shortperiod of time and with no organized innovation process or formal organizationalunits devoted to research like the ones in most science and engineeringbasedindustries. historically, however, many science and engineeringbased industries did not have structured innovation systems in the early stages of their development. if the history of these industries is any guide, developments of the lastseveral decades in financial services, in which technology has become critical tosuccess in the industry, could represent the beginning of a shift to an organizedresearch base. in the meantime, the absence of an organized research base has nothindered rapid innovation.industry driversthere are three primary drivers of innovation in financial services: marketforces; tax and regulatory policy; and technology, particularly data processing,communications, and software. often, these drivers interact. for example, thespread of the bloomberg and other reporting services were made possible bytechnology, but were driven by market demand, which was reinforced becausethe availability of this information made the markets work better.a second pathway for innovation is regulatory reform, usually triggered by alarge loss or failure. pension plans, for example, are highly regulated to avoidrepetition of earlier mismanagement of pension assets. the employee retirementincome security act (erisa) requires that actuaries conduct independent evaluations of all defined pension plans each year and estimate the planõs surplus ordeficit, based on a careful analysis of assets and liabilities over a long time horizon.meeting this requirement provides employment for tens of thousands of actuaries.insurance companies must perform similar studies. the insurance industry iseven more complicated because all 50 states have insurance commissions withseparate requirements. insurance companies must report their statutory surplus/deficits (stats), their surplus/deficit according to generally accepted accounting principles (gaaps), and sometimes their economic surplus/deficits. tens ofthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry179thousands of accountants, tax advisors, and related professionals are employed inthese studies.periodically, new regulatory requirements are added. according to the financial accounting standards board (fasb) and its standards, such as fasb 87,pension plans in the united states must use a closetomarket discount factor whencomputing the market value of liabilities, rather than a fixed or arbitrary discountrate. this change is consistent with marketdriven reporting but can cause largeswings in surplus/deficits because of changes in longterm interest rates. as aconsequence, pension plans must be more careful in allocating their assets and maypurchase new financial products, such as complex options, to help them achievetheir goals. as a rule, when regulators impose new burdens on investors, the financial services industry responds by offering new products and services.another example of regulationdriven innovation is the everchanging taxcode. taxadvantaged investing is possible through a myriad of optionsñtraditional individual retirement accounts (iras), roth iras, keogh plans, state college tuition plans, variable annuities, other insurancerelated investment vehicles,and many others. university researchers sometimes play a key role in theseinnovations. the u.s. treasury departmentõs office of tax analysis (ota)routinely hires university faculty members for one to threeyear assignments.during a major study on tax reform, for example, david bradford (of princetonõswoodrow wilson school) was head of ota. faculty advisors are also shapingthe current debate on social security reform. new financial products will certainly emerge as the government provides new avenues for deferring taxes orshifting ordinary income into capital gains.although regulatory constraints can accelerate innovation by creating incentives to meet them (or work around them), regulations per se are not the principaldrivers of innovation. competitive pressures and innovations enabled by advances in computing and communications technology and the modeling and simulation of financial markets are much stronger drivers.institutional driversacademic research has played an important role in innovation in the financial services industry, but a number of other players and factors have also contributed significantly. the players are (in no particular order) financial servicescompanies, universities/academic institutions, government agencies (oversightregulations and taxation), software developers, hardware manufacturers, spinoffcompanies, and consulting companies.financial institutionsinnovation in investment banking has generally been initiated at major companies and has then been diffused to smaller companies and individuals. largethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180the impact of academic research on industrial performancebanks with large budgets for new or improved technology are able to support bothinternal and external research. the results then trickle down to the overall marketand smaller competitors. much of the research is performed at various levelswithin the banks. some of the work is undertaken in response to a central corporate directive, but most of it is done in the operating units with no particularcoordination. in general, the most productive r&d in the industry has takenplace in a few pockets in larger firms and has been loosely organized. thedisciplined ethos of r&d that can be found in hightechnology manufacturingindustries is totally lacking in financial services.consultants and consulting firmsconsultants and consulting firms have contributed significantly to innovation in financial services, sometimes based on academic research. more and moreof these firms are developing internal quantitativeresearch capabilities. management consulting firms, for instance, have developed the following innovativeframeworks for measuring a companyõs economic performance:¥activitybased costing (a refinement of standard accounting practice thatallocates costs to specific business activities)¥economic value added (eva¨) (an approach used by stern stewart &co. to measure the economic profit of an enterprise by calculating netoperating profit minus an appropriate charge for the opportunity cost ofall capital invested in the enterprise)¥cashflow return on investment (cfroi) (an approach used by bostonconsulting group to compare a firmõs cash flows with the inflationadjusted capital used to produce them)¥balanced scorecards (developed by david norton, a consultant, androbert kaplan, a professor at harvard business school) to combine financial scores with measures of less tangible assets, such as customersatisfaction and loyalty, and a firmõs ability to nurture the skills ofits employees)governmentgovernment has played a limited role in funding and using research in financial services. government has, however, funded the development of some crucialinfrastructure technologies, such as check imaging. in addition, government responsibility for the safety and soundness of the financial system has been a driverof economic and mathematical research in risk measurement and risk management. the resulting improvements in risk measurement and modeling technologies played a significant role in the decision to repeal the glasssteagall act of1933. in the 1970s, governmentfunded research developed models for analyzingthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry181tax policy, which provided systems for analyzing the impact of changes in the taxcode on different groups in the united states. today, these models are used byevery government agency.although government funds only a small amount of academic researchrelevant to financial services, it does support research in economics and mathematics ($89 million and $229 million respectively in federal funding in 2000).total funding for academic research from federal and nonfederal sources was$255 million in economics and $341 million in mathematics (nsf, 2003).software developers and hardware manufacturersthe financial services industry relies heavily on technology developed inother industries, especially information technology, computers, communicationsequipment, and software. in a compilation of r&d spending on informationtechnology in 500 enduser organizations, banking and financial services had thelargest budget (9 percent) as a share of projected revenues and were estimated tohave spent the largest percentage (0.45 percent) of projected sales revenues oninformation technologies r&d (nrc, 2000).investment in information technology has resulted in software developmentthat has enabled much of the innovation in financial services. for example,algorithmics is a growing software firm specializing in risk measurement andmanagement software. dr. ron dembo, the founder and ceo of algorithmics,was formerly on the faculties of several universities including yale, mit, and theuniversity of toronto.industry consortia and cooperationfinancial services have traditionally worked together in moving funds, setting standards, facilitating cooperation, and sharing risk. however, sharing information in financial services is not easy. because of competitive secrecy and thelack of protections for intellectual property, cooperation has not been focused oninnovation. because of competitive secrecy, it is difficult to get a sense of howmuch interesting and valuable research is being performed within the industry.the threat of competition from companies that have access to new innovative technologies has encouraged some attempts at cooperation in precompetitiveresearch. the financial services technology consortia (fstc) was establishedin 1993 to undertake precompetitive, collaborative r&d in electronic commerce,cryptography, education, and other areas. this initiative marked a first attempt atcollaboration in r&d by the industry and mirrored the same trend in technologyindustries. the american bankers association followed with its own technologyinitiative, the banking industry technology secretariat (bits), a division of thebankers roundtable. another example is the smart card alliance, in which morethan 185 companies participate. the smart card alliance was formed by thethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182the impact of academic research on industrial performance2001 merger of the smart card forum, comprising primarily financial servicesfirms, and the smart card industry association, whose members include a variety of industries and government agencies.in 1999, a risk management initiative was launched by 12 of the worldõsleading banks, 11 of which had been part of the consortium that provided longterm capital management with $3.5 billion following its near collapse in the fallof 1998. the riskmanagement group, called the counterparty risk managementpolicy group, included barclays bank plc, bear stearns & company, chasemanhattan corporation, citigroup, inc., credit suisse first boston, deutschebank, lehman brothers, inc., merrill lynch and company, inc., morgan stanleydean witter, and warburg dillon read, a unit of ubs ag. the stated purpose ofthe group is to enhance existing riskmanagement practices and to compile information that could be reported to òregulators and supervisors, all with a view toenhancing the discipline, efficiency and liquidity of financial markets.ó(bloomberg information, 1999). the group issued a report in june 1999 thatincluded more than 20 recommendations to improve risk management(counterparty risk management policy group, 1999).3intellectual propertyhistorically, protecting intellectual property was not an issue in financialservices because there was little opportunity to create it and, therefore, little needto protect it. when new financial instruments were created, they often had veryshort halflives, so the emphasis was on being first to market with innovationsand capturing market share before competing products were introduced. tradingsystems and databases are considered highly proprietary and are regarded as tradesecrets. this industry posture vis‹vis intellectual property (e.g., the need forsecrecy, tight controls) has probably been an impediment to collaborations withacademic researchers.the potential to create competitive advantage through patenting was successfully demonstrated when, in 1980, merrill lynch filed for and was issuedu.s. patent no. 4,376,978. the patent relates to the merrill lynch cash management account program (cma) and, specifically, the data processing methodology and programs for effecting the cma. the cma consolidated checking,savings, investments, and borrowing into an allinone account, which is investedin a money market fund. the patent allowed merrill lynch to exclusively offerthe cma; later the company gained substantial revenues by licensing the sametechnology to other securities firms.recently, banks and other traditional and aspiring financial institutions havebecome interested in patenting in the area of financial services, due in part to the1998 òstate streetó decision by the patent court, which broadened patent protection to include òbusiness methods,ó including financial services. although muchof the patent activity is by technology companies outside financial services, thethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry183top two assignees for patents are merrill lynch and citicorp (lerner, 2000).today, many new patents are being issued, some involving systems and technologically based financial innovations, but only one of the top five companies withpatents in the area of electronic commerce is a financial services company. itremains to be seen if these patents are enforceable.human capitaltraditionally, bankers were regarded as predominantly òrelationship peopleówho were not mathematically oriented or analytical. bankers today, however, usefinancial applications based on the black/scholes model for pricing financialoptions (black and scholes, 1973). because of regulatory changes, technologicalinnovations, globalization, and other factors, bankers must now understand andreact to events in financial markets. this has resulted in a significant increase inthe demand for scientists and engineers. for example, in 1997 when the federalreserve imposed new capital/reserve requirements based on a valueatrisk system, it created a demand for people who could calculate these requirements on anintegrated basis. at the same time, science and engineering graduates with newknowledge and new skills enabled the federal reserve to develop these newreserverequirement formulas.scientists and engineers are generally not hired to perform research in financial services companies. they are usually scattered throughout the organization,including the small business units, where they are often indistinguishable fromtraders and other personnel.contributions of academic researchthe links between academic research and the financial services industry arenot nearly as well established as they are in many other industries. nevertheless,academic research has made very important contributions to the industry. thereis a tendency to overstate the importance of breakthrough innovations in financialservices and to understate the importance of a long list of small but significantincremental innovations. the aggregate consequences of academic research forthe financial services sector cannot be quantified, but examples can be cited toillustrate their impact.academic research on financial engineering4 has been especially useful tothe industry. because underlying theory and actual practices are well aligned inthis area, a steady stream of academic contributions has flowed to the industry(heath et al., 1992). related academic research has also contributed to otherkinds of modeling (e.g., volatility skew), binomial methods and their extension,and partial differential equation methods. monte carlo methods, originally developed in the national laboratory system for weapon design, have been advancedthrough excellent crossfertilization between industrial and academic research.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184the impact of academic research on industrial performanceat the same time, research in the traditional disciplines of finance andeconomics has also made substantial contributions to financial services. examples include conceptual breakthroughs such as portfolio diversification andòtwofund separationó theory, which helped lay the foundation for modernindex funds; the development of optimal capitalstructure theory; contributionsfrom behavioral finance on decision making under uncertainty; as well as suchwidely used tools in econometric and economic modeling as the generalizedmethod of moments estimation. the financial services industry can be widelydefined to include just about all business applications dealing with financialinformation. our focus on the narrow area of financial engineering illustratesthe relationship of academic research and subsequent applications in industry.additional linkages could be cited, depending on the definition of financialeconomics and financial engineering.the nature of academic contributions to the financial services sector islikely to change in the future. as the industry evolves, new areas of academicresearch are likely to become useful. for example, academic research in consumer behavior that sheds light on how individuals make decisions regardingfinancial products and services has become extremely important. as largeamounts of data derived from networks, databases, and transaction systemsbecome available, the industry is likely to use more advanced, nonlinear mathematical analyses and other methods to predict consumer behavior.areas and types of contributionsmajor contributions of academic research to financial services can be tracedback to five areas: conceptual breakthroughs; financial products and tools; consumer research; research on legal, regulatory, and institutional issues; and research on industry infrastructure.conceptual breakthroughsfundamental research in portfolio theory, linear programming, derivativepricing theory, and prospect theory laid the foundation for entirely new familiesof financial products and services. at least nine nobel prizes in economics havebeen awarded to researchers associated with universities for major conceptualbreakthroughs important to financial services:¥daniel kahneman (princeton) in 2002 for integrating insights from psychological research into economic science, especially concerning humanjudgment and decision making under uncertainty. along with amostversky (stanford), this work created the field of behavioral finance.¥myron scholes (stanford) and robert merton (harvard) (with fisherblack of goldman sachs) in 1997 for a new method of determining thethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry185value of derivative securities. the breakthrough idea was that derivativescan be priced without estimating the future direction of the underlyingsecurity. this concept spawned a new industryñthe development, pricing, and trading of derivative securities.¥john harsanyi (university of california, berkeley), john nash(princeton), and richard selten (rheinische friedrichwilhelmsuniversit−t bonn) in 1994 for pioneering analysis of equilibria in thetheory of noncooperative games. noncooperative game theory excludesbinding agreements while making predictions about the outcome of strategic interactions. it has become a standard tool in the analysis of oligopoly and the study of competition between firms in the theory of industrial organization. but the concept has also been used in macroeconomictheory (e.g., for economic policy, environmental and resource economics,foreign trade theory, the economics of information) to make complexstrategic interactions more understandable.¥harry markowitz, merton miller (university of chicago), and williamsharpe (stanford) in 1990 for their work on portfolio theory using quadratic programs to explore diversification strategies to reduce risks. concepts based on efficient frontiers and meanvariance are used to find amix of assets that simultaneously maximizes the investorõs return andminimizes risks. this theory provides the basis for a large number offinancial planning packages.¥merton miller (university of chicago) in 1990 and franco modigliani(mit) in 1985 for their seminal contributions to the development of optimalcapitalstructure theory, specifically for positing the theory for the capitalmarket relationship between the capitalasset structure and dividend policyof production firms, and firmsõ market value and costs of capital. this workprovides a basis for structuring corporations in highly competitive markets.¥james tobin (yale) in 1981 for his work on portfolio diversification andòtwofund separation theory,ó which along with the capital asset pricingmodel, developed by william sharpe, provided the conceptual foundations for index funds.¥tjalling koopmans (yale) and leonid kantorovich (moscow academyof sciences) in 1975 for optimum resource allocation theory, which provides a practical approach for managing large, complex organizations andis used by many financial companies for managing assets and liabilities.5¥kenneth arrow (harvard/stanford) in 1972 for foundational work oneconomic equilibrium and statespaces models of uncertainty.¥paul samuelson (mit) in 1970 for his role in bringing quantitative reasoning to economics and for his work on the implications of optimizationfor understanding the qualitative behavior of models.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186the impact of academic research on industrial performancefinancial products and toolsacademics have been involved in applied research to develop specific products in financial engineering and optimization, such as pricing models and portfolio methods. although relatively few financial services firms have specializedpersonnel capable of incorporating the results of academic research, a growingnumber of firms are convinced of their value for realworld business. some of themost important products and tools are listed below:¥foundations of option pricing (black and scholes, 1973; merton, 1973)¥numerical methods of pricing and hedging, including discrete approximations of diffusion processes, partial differential equation methods, andmonte carlo survey methods¥arbitrage restrictions on the term structure of interest rates, especially thestandard interest rate model developed by david heath, robert jarrow,and andrew morton (1992) at cornell university, and earlier work byoldrich vasicek (1977), thomas ho and sangbin lee (1986), and others¥formulation and solution to problems of portfolio optimization begun byharry markowitz when he was a doctoral student at university of chicago and continued by many others, such as michael dempster at cambridge, john mulvey at princeton, stavros zenios at the university ofcyprus, and william ziemba at the university of british columbia¥methods of analyzing financial time series, especially models that incorporate autocorrelation and varying volatility (e.g., autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity [arch] models, introduced by robert engle,new york university, in 1982, and their variants)¥generalized method of moments estimation tools that are widely appliedto a large number of econometric and economic models (although themethod of moments has been known for more than 100 years, l.p. hansen[university of chicago] extended the concepts in what became known asthe generalized method of moments) (hansen, 2001)¥use of mechanism design theory, which studies the design of institutionsor mechanisms implementing collective decisions under different circumstances, for contractual design¥incorporation of credit risk into pricing models (e.g., jarrow and turnbull,1995; duffie and singleton, 1997)consumer researchconsumer research began about 25 years ago and is now very common.academic research has contributed to an understanding of large data sets, consumer behavior, and so on. the closest academic counterpart to industry researchon consumer financial behavior is in the social sciences, which tend to focus onthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry187aggregate human behavior, but rarely cover financial behavior. although marketing is taught as an academic subject, there are few, if any, programs on consumer(credit) finance. the university of michigan panel study of income dynamicscovers some financial behavior, and the credit research institute also does somework in this area.6 but little academic research focuses directly on how financialinstitutions can influence customer behavior (business strategies), how technicaltools can be used, or the best strategies for affecting consumer portfolio behavior.academic research has contributed to the development of data and technicaltools for personal financial management but has had little influence on teachingpeople how to analyze data or use the tools effectively. unlike investment banking, there seems to be little underlying social theory in this area. the trend inconsumer financial institutions is to hire scientists (e.g., physicists and mathematicians) and other highly trained technical people who often have little experiencein dealing with consumer behavior and the fuzziness of action/reaction patterns.research in this area could be very helpful to policy makers, who know very littleabout this area of social behavior or have ideas based on outdated studies. research could improve their understanding of which segments of the populationare able to manage their own financial portfolios to maintain adequate incomethrough retirement, which segments require public management through socialsecurity and medicare, how public programs can be made more efficient, andhow changes in public programs can be made.in 1996, the employee benefit research institute (ebri) arranged a review ofpublicsector and privatesector dialogues to call attention to the lack of good researchon retirement issues. ebri and the investment counselors institute managed tocreate a shared database on 401(k) participants to inform more effective policies.legal, regulatory, and institutional issuesacademic researchers have been instrumental in analyzing legal and regulatory constraints on the industry and in reforming the regulatory environment.academiadeveloped models of asset and arbitrage pricing and risk managementhave been extremely influential. rules for trading activity are based on valueatrisk models. because of the complexity of many global markets, such as energy,securities, and foreign exchange, regulators and economic policy makers nowdepend on models as a basis for decisions, which provide an objective basis formaking decisions in realworld markets that are too diverse or take too long toprovide feedback. in these cases, the models do not simply represent reality; theybecome reality.infrastructure of the industryacademic research has contributed to the infrastructure of the modern financial services sector, particularly in the area of encryption technology andthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188the impact of academic research on industrial performancenetworking. the technological infrastructure of the financial services industry isprobably the most extensive and complex of any service sector in the u.s.economy. academic contributions to networking technology have had a fundamental impact, enabling electronic payment systems, automated teller machines,and the growth of credit and debit cards in the 1970s and the emergence ofelectronic commerce via the internet in the 1990s. (for more about networkingtechnology, see discussion in chapter 2.)transfer mechanismsa pattern has developed for transferring the results of academic research tothe financial services industry. first, academic researchers publish a series ofpapers on a topic in the field of financial economics. the papers set the stage fora few innovative firms to test products based on the idea; faculty members areoften involved as consultants to these firms. in some cases, junior and seniorfaculty resign from academia to work on these projects full time. if the productproves to be effective, the financial industry invests in further development. atthis point, many firms attempt to duplicate the product or service. controversiesabout the protection of intellectual property via trademarks, copywriting, tradesecrets, and patents are addressed in the courts as they arise.an excellent example of this pattern involves index funds. during the 1970sand 1980s, there was considerable debate among academics about the efficiencyof financial markets and the ability of portfolio managers to succeed over longperiods of time. some argued that a market fund could outperform the majority ofactive portfolio managers. wells fargo and several other innovative banks set upmutual funds with the sole aim of mimicking the return of the s&p 500 stockindex. (often the banks would purchase the stock in all 500 companies). at theurging of professor burt malkiel at princeton university, the vanguard companyestablished the first index fund for individual investors. since then, index fundshave become enormously popular because of their low cost structure, their availability, and their historical performance. for example, vanguardõs total stockmarket index fund had a net asset value of $15.8 billion on january 31, 2002.fidelityõs s&p 500 index fund had a net asset value of $8.6 billion at the end ofjanuary 2002. these funds are directly attributable to the early researchof academics.a significant portion of current activities in the financial services sectorwould not be possible without fundamental mathematical tools that were developed or adapted to financial problems by academics. beginning with the blackscholes optionpricing formula now applied in a myriad of ways, these mathematical techniques enable the industry to price an almost unlimited variety offinancial instruments. markets as diverse as options, futures, other derivatives,securitization, and reinsurance could not exist in their current forms without thesetools. today, these techniques are widely known and understood, and newthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry189products and applications are being developed without further interaction withthe academic sector (although the work is done by individuals trained inacademia). table 61 shows innovations in financial services that were generatedat least partly by academic research.flow of ideasadvice and ideas from academia to the private sector continue to flow.commercial and investment banks rely heavily on academic economists, whohave a substantial influence on risk management because they are instrumental inthe development of techniques and modeling tools and have insights into themacroeconomic developments that are inputs to the models. a mutually reinforcing dynamic is at work among the diffusion of human capital into the financialservices firms, the development of increasingly powerful computer hardware,and the insights of academics into financial theory. for example, the combinedcapabilities of technology and academic research were involved in the development of the structure of largescale auctions, such as the auctioning of the radiofrequency spectrum.table 61 innovations in financial services resulting from academicresearchnew financial instruments/securities/products¥index funds¥financial derivatives¥securitization (risk neutral valuations)¥credit derivatives (emerging)/credit management (modification of models developed forscience and engineering)analytical and modeling tools¥option pricing (blackscholes and successors)¥portfolio theory¥market microstructuresfinancial information and research tools¥online information services (mixed academicindustry heritage)¥online investment services¥offtheshelf riskmanagement software¥risk metrics/credit metricstransactions¥cryptography¥electronic commerce/world wide web (mixed academicindustry heritage)consumer research¥scoring models¥panel studiesthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190the impact of academic research on industrial performanceflow of human capitalthe flow of human capital into financial services firms has been crucial tothe evolution of the industry, which draws on people from a wide variety ofdisciplines who have mathematical and modeling skills. it is not clear whetherthis diversity is a plus or a minus for innovation. on the one hand, considerableòonthejob trainingó is necessary before a physicist or nuclear engineer canapply his or her modeling skills to the analysis of financial problems. on theother hand, people with diverse backgrounds who have been encouraged to thinkcreatively by graduate research may be a source of creativity and may come upwith new approaches to problems.it is probably inevitable that training for employment in the financial services industry will gradually become more traditional. as finance and financialengineering programs become more widespread and more firmly established,they will probably provide a steady flow of people with postgraduate degreestargeted specifically to the financial sector.in general, although academic research is stimulating to some, it can seemesoteric and confusing to others. although much of the academic literature is allbut incomprehensible to nonacademics, the dissemination of research results isessential for continued innovation. socalled òquantsó (scientific quantitativepeople) working in the derivatives industry are most likely to try to keep abreastof academic research by reading preprints and attending conferences.to bridge the academiaindustry gap and to meet the need for more avenuesof transfer, some have argued that applied research should be done in individualcompanies (loosely linked to a university) or through university think tanks.impact of academic researchlinks between academia and the financial services industry are less formal,less structured, and more amorphous than the links in sciencebased industries.this may be because innovation in financial services is inherently less amenableto structured, scientific investigation. it could also be that this is a natural stagein the evolution of the industry and that, as academic disciplines such as financial engineering evolve, the structure of the innovation system will evolve withthem. if so, the current transitional relationships between academia and thefinancial services sector will be replaced by a more structured innovation systemin the future.the financial services industry can be divided into two fundamental areas:(1) securitization, or the packaging and bundling of financial products or servicesfor consumers or businesses (security bundling); and (2) the facilitation of trades,or helping to implement transactions (transactional). academic research has hada more direct impact on securitization (i.e., with development of novel financialproducts and services). clearly, financial instruments, investment management,the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry191and decision support tools created in academia or through publicprivatesectorpartnerships have been critical to the success of the financial services industry.quantitative measures of the impact of academic research are difficult todetermine. the entire industry is characterized by phenomenal increases in theamount of quantitative data concerning transaction volumes, flow rates, assetbases, customer activity, product ranges, and other activities, but assigning specific increases to academic research is difficult. certainly the number of newsecurities introduced each year based on academic research is large and growing,and the number of institutions and people who use these products for managingtheir financial affairs can be estimated. for example, the dramatic increase inoption trading in the past decade is largely attributable to the efforts of academicresearchers. another measure is the increase in the number of people who areworking on the development of financial products and in related areas. finally, itmay be possible to measure improvements in economic efficiency. although thetask is complicated by the heterogeneous nature of the industry, an informed,intuitive review suggests that much of the recent growth in the industry can betraced to academic research.some have argued that academic research can also be considered to have hada negative impact on the industry. some have argued that a number of recentfinancial disasters, such as the near demise in 1998 of long term capital management, a very large, global hedge fund that was heavily influenced by academic research, can be attributed to the results of research in financial engineering. this experience demonstrated that the pricing formulas used in manyfinancial models do not account for periods of economic turmoil and alerted thefinancial community to these pitfalls and limitations.opportunities for future academic researcha broad range of academic research in engineering, natural sciences, economics, mathematics, social sciences, and public policy will continue to contribute to the success of the financial services industry:¥identification of rogue traders¥allocations of capital to various activities¥the dynamics of markets (stochastic models) and market microstructures¥evaluation of mergers of financial services providers¥issues of globalization, such as diverse regulation, capital flight drivingcountries to near bankruptcy, tax havens, and money laundering¥investigations of legal, sociological, and technological issues related toprivacy, trust, security, contract law, etc.¥assessments of the impact of technology¥risk audits¥ethical dimensions of financethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192the impact of academic research on industrial performancefindings and recommendationsthe results of academic research in economics, information systems, andother areas have had a substantial, direct impact on the structure and performanceof the financial services industry in the past 20 years, especially in the areas ofrisk management and new financial instruments, such as derivatives. the panelhas attempted to distinguish between the direct contributions of research (e.g.,modeling and risk management) and indirect contributions (e.g., contributions ofpeople educated and trained at universities and research results embodied insoftware and hardware used by the industry). indirect contributions, such asresearch on cryptographic algorithms that now play a critical role in financialservices, have been significant. both fundamental and applied research haveaffected the industry. in some areas, such as the pricing of securities, academicresearch has played a major role. in other domains, such as the identification ofarbitrage opportunities, economic incentives are more than adequate to keepresearchers busy. these are important distinctions, because funding for academicresearch should be focused on the exploration of basic concepts that will not beundertaken under the current incentive system. a natural tendency has been tolook for specific engineering or applied research influences in financial services.however, a considerable body of academic research, including fundamental research in economics and finance, has been applicable to financial services. connecting the academic research base with the financial services industry remainsan ongoing challenge as well as an important opportunity.although it is difficult to predict the future significance of academic research, the increasing innovation and complexity of financial services will probably prove to be a rich and fertile area for future academic research. for example,the emergence of global consumer markets for financial services could createresearch opportunities in consumer research and behavioral sciences. overall, itis difficult to compare the importance of academic research to the importance ofother sources of new knowledge and innovation. it is evident, however, that thecontributions of academic research have been fundamental and consequential.finding 61. technology derived from academic research in economics, information systems, engineering, and other areas has been fundamental to innovationin financial services in the last 20 years.technology can be defined broadly to include pricing securities and riskmanagement systems. in the past, academic research relevant to financial services was concentrated on fundamental concepts in finance, economics, and technology. now, academic research on applications from engineering disciplinesand the physical sciences has become more important, and the number of jointuniversityindustry activities in these areas has increased significantly.opportunities for the application of engineering methods and processes inthe financial services industry are expanding rapidly. with the advent of massthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry193scale consumer marketing involving tens of millions of transactions, financialservices are becoming similar in some ways to manufacturing and process industries. the advent of the internet and its potential transformation of financialservices has underscored the role of engineers and technology to the future offinancial services. at the same time, engineers can also learn from engaging withthe financial services industry, particularly in the areas of stochastic and modelbased approaches to problem definition and solution.recommendation 61. the national academy of engineering together withother agencies or private foundations should examine how engineering methodsand processes practiced in advanced manufacturing industries can be applied infinancial services.finding 62. because financial services firms traditionally have had no formalresearch function or culture (in contrast to sciencebased industries), no formalorganizational structure has been established for technical personnel to keeptrack of academic research or to communicate industry research needs toacademia. at the same time, academia has also failed to establish an organizedway of mapping the needs of the industry and relating them to academic research.recommendation 62. the management of financial services companies shouldbecome more familiar with the ways academic research affects their businesses.managers should review the processes they have (or need) to ensure that they cantake advantage of the results of academic research. the creation of an engineering research center for financial services, similar to the research centers supported by the national science foundation for engineering, could provide anexus for industryacademic activities.finding 63. a convergence of events, including deregulation, globalization,increasing competition, and the information revolution, has made financial services more technically intense and accelerated innovation in the industry. thepanel expects innovation to remain very rapid, driven mainly by developments inengineering and technology.recommendation 63. professional societies, policy research organizations, andfederal agencies associated with science, engineering, and technology, includingthe national academy of engineering and the national science foundation, mustrecognize the importance of research and technology to financial services andinclude financial services in their mainstream activities. accordingly, federalfunding for longterm, potentially highimpact research relevant to financial services, which is currently very limited, should be expanded.finding 64. regulation has been a major factor shaping the financial servicesindustry, both as a boundary condition and as a stimulus to innovation. theimpact of academic research on regulation has been relatively small historically(and usually in response to a crisis); however, the impact of academic research onthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194the impact of academic research on industrial performanceregulation, particularly on risk management, is growing. in general, the regulatory community lags behind the industry proper in the application of new knowledge and tools in the area of risk management.recommendation 64. regulators should be encouraged to support more academic research in their areas of concern and to become more knowledgeable inmodern riskmanagement methods.finding 65. the responsibility for financial decisions is being shifted to individual consumers of financial products, and individual responsibility for financing retirement is becoming increasingly likely. the current administrationõs proposal for partially privatizing social security is a move in this direction. theknowledge and tool base available to help individuals make good financial decisions is in its infancy. most marketing research is descriptive and is performedfor the benefit of financial service providers; very little normative research isaimed at helping individual consumers make better financial decisions.recommendation 65. the national science foundation and other federal agencies should fund normative research to help consumers make better financialdecisions to complement anticipated legislative action that would shift financialresponsibilities to individuals.finding 66. individuals play an important role in transferring the results ofresearch from academia to the financial services industry. as the field of financebecomes more quantitative and analytical, the training of engineers and financialanalysts is becoming increasingly similar. the migration of academically trainedpeople to the industry has apparently had a significant impact on successfulinnovation. unlike more sciencebased industries, financial services companieshave only recently begun to hire technically trained people who can interactprofitably with academic researchers and translate industry needs to academiaand academic research results to industry.today, academia provides much of the human capital for the financial services industry. business schools, for instance, train large numbers of practitionersfor the industry, including many who advance to senior management levels.engineering departments train many of the analysts, but there is very little support or guidance for this training from the financial industry. although the industry benefits greatly for very little investment, the benefits could be even greater ifthe industry provided more support and was more closely involved.recommendation 66. the financial services industry should encourage research exchanges, sabbaticals in industry, industry practitioners teaching in universities, and other industryacademic interactions. the industry would benefitgreatly from the establishment of mechanisms to facilitate the flow of peoplebetween academic research and the financial services industry. mechanismscould include more targeted curricula and programs in computational finance,the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry195financial engineering, and other areas; revised incentive and reward systems;and protections of intellectual property.finding 67. historically, intellectual property in financial services has not enjoyed the same level of protection as intellectual property in sciencebased industries. instead, the industry has focused on keeping trade secrets and speed tomarket. although patenting has increased greatly, it is too soon to tell if this willhave a positive or negative effect on innovation and growth. because technologyis essential to many innovations, more patents are sure to be granted.recommendation 67. the panel calls upon the u.s. patent office, federalreserve, u.s. department of the treasury, national science foundation, andother affected federal agencies to support research on the impact of changes in thetreatment of intellectual property in the financial services industry, specificallythe impact of the recent flurry of patent activity.finding 68. the relationship between innovation and economic performance ispoorly understood. this problem is not specific to the financial services industry.recommendation 68. given the sheer size and importance of the financialservices sector to the nationõs economy, measures of innovation and of the relationship between innovation and economic performance should be developed forthe financial services industry. although defining the end product of financialservices will be difficult, focused research on this problem could reveal suitable measurements.finding 69. the deregulation of markets has created many opportunities forbusinesses and individuals but has also increased risks. for a variety of reasons,including technological advances, esoteric financial instruments and structures,globalization, the speed and magnitude of money/asset movement, and masscommunications, risk management is more important for financial services nowthan it was in the past. risks, ranging from operational risks to credit and currency risks, are more numerous and less understood than ever before. each riskhas the potential of endangering not only financial institutions but also sovereignnations and, ultimately, the global economic system.recommendation 69. management in financial services should review howleading engineeringintensive industries have integrated risk management andquality improvement into all aspects of the design, production, and delivery oftheir products and should apply the principles to financial services. the nationalacademy of engineering should convene a meeting to develop a suitable research agenda.finding 610. a research gap has become apparent between basic research andapplied research, particularly in the areas of financial models and market reality,and the financial infrastructure and its behavior under various conditions. tothe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196the impact of academic research on industrial performancebridge the gap between theory and practice in experimental economics, economictheories should be tested in real markets and the structures analyzed before new(potentially destabilizing) products are introduced. although regulators have triedto anticipate problems by using models and other tests, their efforts have beenhampered by inadequate data and a lack of established processes. in general, theindustry does not have a solid theoretical foundation to mount an institutionalresponse to problems. the lack of data is largely the result of companies beingunwilling to share data on credit risk, operational risk, corporate defaults, andother aspects of their businesses.recommendation 610a. to make data more widely available to academia, datafrom competing financial institutions should be collected by third parties andòsanitized.ó one simple idea would be for the industry to fund a web service thatwould help individual researchers find the sources of data in financial services.users of this data could include offwall street firms and, of course, individuals,who are increasingly being urged to manage their own financial futures.recommendation 610b. financial services companies should establish consortia/cooperative research to define and build a technological infrastructure and knowledge base for various sectors of the financial services industry. cooperativeactivities could be based on insights from bankers roundtable information technology secretariat (bits), financial services technology consortium (fstc),smart card forum, and counterparty risk management policy group.notes1at&t sold its universal card business to citicorp in december 1997.2it is not at all clear that available financial advice, tools, and data are sufficient for individuals totake control of their financial future. should investment management by professionals, alwayscontroversial in terms of performance, be replaced by investment management by individual consumers? can an individual consumer exposed to information from many sources understand òrealtime riskó as financial and economic events unfold almost in real time on television or the internet?in the wake of stock market declines in 2000 and 2001 and the enron debacle in 2002, the answers tothese questions have assumed real policy implications.3in june 1999, representatives of the counterparty risk management policy group presentedpolicy recommendations to the subcommittee on capital markets, securities and government sponsored enterprises of the house committee on banking and financial services.4financial engineering, the quantitative analysis of financial markets, complex securities, andrisk management, using mathematical, statistical, and computational models, is now included in thecurriculum at many universities.5george dantzigõs development of the simplex method should also be noted.6the panel study of income dynamics (psid) at the university of michigan is a longitudinalsurvey of a representative sample of individuals and their families. the study has been ongoingsince 1968. the data were collected annually through 1997, and biennially since 1999. the datafiles contain the full span of information collected over the course of the study. psid data can beused for crosssectional, longitudinal, and intergenerational analysis and for studies of individualsand families.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry197referencesblack, f., and m. scholes. 1973. the pricing of options and corporate liabilities. journal of politicaleconomy 81(3): 637ð654.bloomberg information. 1999. securities firms and banks form risk management group. january 7. available online at : http://www.bloomberg.com/.counterparty risk management policy group. 1999. improving counterparty risk managementpractices. new york: counterparty risk management policy group.duffie, d., and k. singleton. 1997. an economic model of the term structure of interest rate swapyields. journal of finance 52(4): 1287ð1321.federal reserve. 2002. assets and liabilities of commercial banks in the united states. federalreserve statistical release. washington, d.c.: the federal reserve board.hansen, l.p. 2001. method of moments. in international encyclopedia of the social and behaviorsciences, n.j. smelser and p.b. bates, eds. amsterdam and new york.: elsevier.heath, d., r. jarrow, and a. morton. 1992. bond pricing and term structure of interest rates: a newmethodology for contingent claims valuation. econometrica 60: 77ð105.ho, t.s.y., and sb. lee. 1986. term structure movements and pricing interest rate contingentclaims. journal of finance 41: 1011ð1029.jarrow, r., and s. turnbull. 1995. derivative securities. cincinnati, ohio: southwestern collegepublishing.lerner, j. 2000. where does state street lead? a first look at finance patents, 1971ð2000. working paper no. w7918. cambridge, mass.: national bureau of economic research.merton, r. 1973. theory of rational option pricing. bell journal of economics and managementscience 41: 141ð183.nrc (national research council). 2000. making it better: expanding information technologyresearch to meet societyõs need. washington, d.c.: national academies press.nsf (national science foundation). 2003. academic research and development expenditures: fiscal year 2001. nsf 03316. arlington, va.: national science foundation.u.s. bureau of the census. 2002. statistical abstract of the united statesð2002. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office. available online at: http://www.census.gov/prod/www/statisticalabstract02.html. [june 24, 2003]vasicek, o. 1977. an equilibrium characterization of the term structure. journal of financial economics 5: 177ð188.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198addendumquestionnairethe following questionnaire was sent to selected individuals from variousparts of the financial services industry, some of whom attended the october 1998workshop. included among the questionnaire respondents were senior executivesat falcon asset management, the center for adaptive systems applications, andstate street bank; professors with expertise in finance, operations research, applied mathematics, and financial engineering from columbia university, cornelluniversity, princeton university, and university of pennsylvania; and a representative of the u.s. department of the treasury.impact of academic research onindustrial performancewe invite your responses to these questions, either in the form of generalcomments or as responses to the more specific questions below. your responseswill be used by our panel as background information for our report but will not bequoted verbatim without seeking your explicit permission.1.briefly describe fundamental or significant academic research contributions to the financial services industry as defined by the panel? (if possible,please supply references to published information that outlines the contributions.) use additional sheets, as necessary.2.overall, would you describe the impact of academic research on industrial performance in the financial services industry over the past 20 years as(please put an x in one box):1. very large2. large3. medium4. small5. very small/nonexistentif your response is òvery large,ó could you please identify the specific areasof research you consider has had such a big impact.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry1993.what is the role of academic research in educating people who work inyour industry? (please focus on university research activities, rather than university education generally.) use additional sheets, as necessary.4.what structural forms of universityindustry collaboration lead to goodresults in your industry? an example of such a structure might be a discipline orindustryoriented òcenteró that solicits industry sponsors for a collection ofprojects that span a varied research program. what seem to be the essentialdeterminants of success of such structures? use additional sheets, as necessary.5.what are significant emerging trends or problems that the financial services industry will face in the future that could benefit from academic research?use additional sheets, as necessary.6.what changes are required, if any, in academic research if it is to beresponsive to these industrial trends and problems? use additional sheets,as necessary.7.what single step could be taken by universities to enhance the impact ofacademic research on the industry? use additional sheets, as necessary.8.what single step could be taken by companies to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry? use additional sheets, as necessary.9.what single step could be taken by government to enhance the impact ofacademic research on industry? use additional sheets, as necessary.10.do you see any downside to enhanced universityindustry research collaboration? things to be avoided? use additional sheets, as necessary.11.other comments? any comments, pointers to other studies, or suggestions would be appreciated. use additional sheets, as necessary.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200the impact of academic research on industrial performanceworshop agendaenhancing academic research contributionsto the financial services industryoctober 15, 1998national academies building2101 constitution avenue, n.w.washington, d.c.9:00 a.m.chairmanõs opening remarks and selfintroductionscolin crook, former chief information officer, citicorp9:15 a.m.introduction to the task of the financial services paneland description of the wider nae effortcolin crook10:00 a.m.break10:15 a.m.panel discussion of the financial services innovation system:understanding the process, players, and trendschester spatt, mellon bank professor of finance, and director,center for financial markets, carnegie mellon universitywilliam w. lang, deputy director for special studies, office of thecomptroller of the currencyjoe dauber, vice president, customer management, novusservices, inc.12:00 p.m.lunch in meeting room12:30 p.m.panel discussion of the contributions of academic researchto financial services: past, present, and futuremartin holmer, the policy simulation grouppaul glasserman, professor, graduate school of business,columbia universitysholom rosen, vice president, citicorp2:00 p.m.breakthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry2012:15 p.m.panel discussion on assessing the impact of academicresearchjack triplett, brookings institutionpatrick t. harker, department of operations and informationmanagement, the wharton school, university ofpennsylvaniacolin carlton, chief investment officer, canada trustinvestment management group3:45 p.m.academic research and financial services: where arewe going?colin crook, chairman5:00 p.m.adjournthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202the impact of academic research on industrial performanceworkshop attendeescolin crook, chair*chief information officer (retired)citicorpjohn aliclecturer in energy, environment,science, and technologywashington, d.c.colin g. carltonchief investment officercanada trust investmentmanagement groupjoe daubervice president, customermanagementnovus services, inc.john r. davieschairmancenter for adaptive systemsapplicationsjudith m. farvoldendirector, research communicationsalgorithmics, inc.paul glassermanprofessorcolumbia universitypatrick t. harkerups professor and chairman, operations and information managementdepartmentthe wharton schooluniversity of pennsylvaniamartin holmerpresidentpolicy simulation groupwilliam w. langdeputy director for special studiesoffice of the comptroller of thecurrencyblake d. lebaron*center for biological and computational learningmassachusetts institute of technologydeborah malinssenior vice presidentproduct development and information researchstate street corporationalex meerauspresidentgams development*panel memberthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services industry203john m. mulvey*department of civil engineeringand operations researchprinceton universitymitchell rachlissenior economistgeneral accounting officesholom rosenvice presidentcitibankchester s. spattmellon bank professor of financeand director, center for financialmarketscarnegie mellon universitymorris tanenbaum*retired vice chairman and cfoat&teric thorlaciusvice presidentfalcon asset managementjack e. triplettbrookings institutionandrew b. whinstonprofessor and director of the creccollege of business administrationuniversity of texas at austin*panel membernational research council staffstephen a. merrill, director, board on science, technology, and economicpolicythomas s. arrison, senior staff officer, governmentuniversityindustryresearch roundtablenae program office stafftom weimer, directorproctor reid, associate directorrobert morgan, nae fellow and senior analystpenelope gibbs, administrative assistantthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7the contributions and impact ofacademic researchsignificant contributions have been made by academic researchers in all fiveof the industries examined in this study. each industry illustrates a unique patternof industryuniversity research collaboration and different ways academic contributions are used. the study also reveals some crosscutting areas of academicresearch that are important to overall industrial performance. in addition, themechanisms by which academia contributes have changed as traditional patternsof industryuniversity interactionñsuch as contract research, cooperative research, and personnel exchangesñhave been augmented by new modes of interaction. industry provides more than financial support for academic research, andacademic research contributes more than technological advances to industry,although some contributions are difficult to measure in dollars. a comparison ofpatterns of interaction reveals a number of ways industry, academia, and government could realize even greater benefits through universityindustry interaction.patterns of universityindustry interactionfinding 71. the nature of universityindustry interactions varies from industryto industry as well as among companies within a given industry and individualacademic institutions.each of the industries studied has a distinctive environment and poses different challenges for university researchers. in building infrastructure for networksystems, universities have historically been test beds for new concepts and capabilities. for the medical devices and equipment industry, fundamental205the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.206the impact of academic research on industrial performancemultidisciplinary research involving physical sciences and engineering, combined with academic medical centers, provides a critical environment for researching, developing, testing, and improving devices and for conducting theclinical trials necessary to obtaining regulatory approval, all in an atmosphere ofclose industryuniversity collaboration. in the aerospace industry, the mature,highly concentrated airframe, propulsion, and launchvehicle sectors have a fairlynarrow range of interactions with academic research, often using consulting agreements and contract research to develop better process methodologies and tools.by contrast, the less mature unmanned aerial vehicles sector of the industry looksto academic research for technical support, as well as for new concepts andunderstanding. in the transportation, distribution, and logistics services industryand the financial services industry, a sizeable cultural gap remains between industry and r&d in general, and academic research in particular. as a result,although academic research has had a significant impact on both, neither industryhas developed interfaces with academic research comparable to those ofthe medical devices and equipment industry or the network systems and communications industry.the wide variety of universityindustry research interactions in these fiveindustries makes it difficult to make generalizations. with the notable exceptionof multicompany research centers at universities, most financial support byindustry is negotiated company by company. companies have different needsand abilities to interact with academic researchers, and universities have different resources to devote to research of value to industry. generalizations aboutwhat works best for all industries and universities should, therefore, be madevery cautiously.the national innovation systemfinding 72. the academic research enterprise is a major component of thenational innovation system in the united states. the core competencies of academic research help sustain and leverage innovation to the benefit of industry.box 71 summarizes the innovation systems1 for the five industries, whichare innovative to varying degrees and in different ways that tend to change overtime. r&d is only one element of their innovation systems but can be veryimportant. overall, the u.s. innovation system has many strengths:¥open labor markets allow technically trained and educated people tomove relatively freely between and among universities and industry.¥reasonably robust review processes, coupled with a variety of supportmechanisms ranging from peerreviewed government grants to venturecapital decisions, help to maintain highquality research.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the contributions and impact of academic research207¥a large number of research structures and mechanisms, both internal andexternal to the university (e.g., academic departments, research centers,industry laboratories, startup companies), provide multiple pathways forthe commercialization of new ideas.¥a strong market and consumer demand for new technologies providesstrong commercial incentives for introducing new technologies and, therefore, strong incentives for funding research to create them.the research culture in the united states fosters innovation by supportingthe movement of ideas and people among a broad range of diverse researchbox 71industry innovation systemsnetwork systems and communications. this sector has a well developed innovation system that fosters the rapid creation and implementation of innovations, astrong research culture, and an industry structure that promotes innovation. majorgrowth segments are not impeded by excessive regulation, but allocation of radiofrequency spectrum may become increasingly contentious. the industry is heavilymarket and technology driven. government and industry invest substantial fundsin r&d relevant to the industry.medical devices and equipment. this industry has a well developed innovationsystem that benefits from broad public interest and support, including support fromnonprofit organizations. it is probably the most tightly regulated of the five industries and the most affected by government policies related to safety, efficacy, andpayments. government and industry invest substantial funds in r&d relevant tothe industry.aerospace. most innovation in the larger, mature sectors is directed toward incremental improvements and cost reductions. government support for r&d has beenreduced in recent years, and the industry has undergone significant consolidation.the smaller, less mature sectors (unmanned aerial vehicles and spacebased information services) are characterized by rapid innovation.transportation, distribution, and logistics services. the innovation system isnot as well established as in the network services and communications and themedical devices and equipment industries. although historically this industry hasnot focused on r&d or technologydriven innovation, developments in integratedlogistics are creating new opportunities for r&d. however, government and industry support for r&d in integrated logistics is modest.financial services. an organized innovation system is slowly emerging as theresult of rapid improvements and changes in information systems and technology. overall, r&d is rudimentary and not broadly supported. research opportunities in financial services underscore the need for a broad research portfolio thataddresses both business and technological aspects of the industry drawing onsocial and behavioral sciences as well as engineering and applied mathematics.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208the impact of academic research on industrial performancesectors and structures. even though research is often essential to innovation, thereis rarely a linear progression from a research result to advanced development toproduct development to economic return. ideas and people tend to bounce around,and new ideas are sometimes stymied by political or business impediments andforced to find alternative routes to implementation.contributions of academic researchcontributions of academic research to the five industries studied include:graduates trained in modern research techniques; fundamental concepts and òkeyideasó resulting from basic and applied research; and the development and testingof tools, prototypes, and marketable products, processes, and services. thesources of these contributions include engineering, the natural sciences, computer sciences, mathematics, social sciences, behavioral sciences, managementstudies, and policy sciences.graduates trained in researchfinding 73. universitybased research provides an education/training groundfor entrants into the industrial workforce. integrated research and education helpsmaintain the flow of human resources from universities that contributes to aneducated, trained industrial workforce. university graduates and faculty are alsoinvolved in many technologybased, startup companies.students trained in research are a major component of academiaõs contribution to industrial performance. u.s. universities are the primary source of peoplewith research training and experience, including undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, and faculty. individuals with research trainingare highly valued by industry, whether or not they are involved in research for thecompanies that hire them. in addition to the specific body of knowledge acquiredthrough academic research, industry values research experience because it requires abilities that are prized in any technical endeavor: selfmotivation, problem solving, teamwork, an understanding of related research, contacts with otherresearchers and colleagues, the ability to organize material, and the ability toovercome setbacks. researchtrained industry employees also enhance acompanyõs capacity to absorb new ideas, including the results of research, even ifthe company does not conduct its own research.academic researchers also participate in new companies. many technologybased startup companies emerge from academic research and continue to attractresearch graduates as they grow. many hightechnology clusters around the country have developed around one or more research university.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the contributions and impact of academic research209contributions from basic, longterm researchfinding 74. contributions from basic, longterm academic research in a broadspectrum of disciplines have figured prominently in industry performance.portfolio theory, linear programming, derivativepricing theory, and prospect theory, all of academic origin, have laid the foundation for whole newfamilies of financial products and services. academic contributions to linearand integer programming and queue theory are the building blocks of theinformationmanagement and decisionsupport technologies at the heart of theintegratedlogistics revolution. medical devices, such as magnetic resonanceimaging machines and pacemakers, are based on the contributions of fundamental research from multiple disciplines in the natural sciences and engineering. inthe network systems and communications industry, universities have made important research contributions to the development of digital subscriberline technology, thirdgeneration wireless communication, computer graphics, databases,search engines, generalized processor sharing, parallel processing, traffic management, and stable broadcast networking. in aerospace, contributions of basicresearch include: the theoretical basis for flight controls for unmanned aerialvehicles; shannonõs information theory (e.g., as applies to communication withaircraft, spacecraft, and satellites); electromagnetic antenna theory; linearizedunsteadyflow analysis; compositelaminate theory; improved understanding offibermatrix interactions in composite materials; superplasticity; and realtimedecision systems using artificial intelligence.basic, longterm research is essential to the universityõs role as creator ofnew knowledge and understanding. the committeeõs review of these five industries confirms that the results of basic research in a wide range of disciplineseventually find their way by diverse paths into many aspects of commercial life.contributions from applied researchfinding 75. academic researchers in applied research and the academic research infrastructure are directly involved in the development of industrial tools,prototypes, products, and production processes, as well as the delivery of products and services.the five industries in this study provide a variety of examples of the contributions of applied research (see box 72). sometimes applied research is protractedand has cumulative, incremental results. an example might be continued improvements in computational fluid dynamics as a tool for modeling airflow. anotherwould be the longterm contributions of academic researchers to improved production processes and product performance in electronic storage devices.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210the impact of academic research on industrial performancethe ability to solve discrete practical problems is also valuable in countlessprojects performed for individual companies. shortterm research projects, student projects, and consulting projects to solve specific, important problems inindustry are based on formal and informal relationships between companies andfaculty. many companies nurture relationships with multiple universities, oftenrelying on local institutions to solve technical problems or to advise the companyõsengineering staff on potential solutions. examples include assistance in production scheduling in logistics, simulations of airflow and nondestructive evaluationof materials in aerospace, and models for pricing derivatives and securities inbox 72contributions of applied university researchnetwork systems and communications. contributions include packet switching and the internet tcp/ip protocol, both key elements in the development ofthe internet. the mosaic web browser interface was an important step in therapid evolution of the world wide web. university researchers and other university personnel have contributed in significant ways to routers, the developmentof atm switches, digital subscriberline technology (dsl), thirdgeneration wireless transmission, computer graphics, search engines, traffic management,stable broadcast networking, the evolution of new networks, and the development of standards.medical devices and equipment. the development of a wide range of therapeutic and diagnostic devices has resulted from the involvement of academic researchers and academic medical centers in r&d, prototype testing, evaluation,and clinical trials. devices and equipment include magnetic resonance imagingequipment; wholebody cat scanners; flexible endoscopy; lasers for a broadrange of medical applications, ranging from gastrointestinal surgery to eye surgery; cardiacassist devices; organ and joint replacements; ultrasound and minimally invasive surgical techniques; and developments in tissue engineering.aerospace. contributions to the development of tools include advanced nonintrusive instrumentation, flowvisualization techniques, and computational fluid dynamics. contributions to specific technologies have been made in the areas ofheat transfer, combustion cooling, and aeromechanics; lowreynoldsnumber airfoil design; internet by satellite, including protocols and computational tools fordata integration; and foldingwing design for small unmanned aerial vehicles.transportation, distribution, and logistics services. contributions include optimization modeling for shippers, software applications/decisionsupport systemsfor routing, production scheduling, logistics, and distribution management. muchof this software was commercialized by academic spinoff companies.financial services. contributions include new financial instruments (including index funds and derivatives); financial information and research tools, including risk/credit metrics and financial riskmanagement software; models for pricing derivatives and securities; and advances in cryptography for specific financial services.these contributions have come from engineering and business schools, as well asfrom mathematics research.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the contributions and impact of academic research211financial services. most universities consider this an important aspect of theservice role of the university and encourage these interactions.research centers, especially those with industrial participation, are anotheravenue by which universities perform both òdirectedó basic research and appliedresearch that helps industry. in 1993, almost 70 percent of industryõs financialsupport for university research flowed through some 1,100 universityindustryresearch centers, which have become the dominant form of industry support foracademic r&d (cohen et al., 1998). the best known examples are the engineering research centers (ercs) funded by the national science foundation (nsf)since the mid1980s. nsf currently funds 20 ercs in four broad categories:bioengineering; design, manufacturing, and product development systems; earthquake engineering; and microelectronic systems and information technology(nsf, 2001). industry participation and industryõs help in defining problems thatare of interest to many companies, have greatly increased the impact of academicresearch centers.2key ideasfinding 76. sustained interactions between academic research and industryhave been a source of òkey ideasó that have generated significant technologicalopportunities through a fusion of knowledge of the possible and knowledge ofwhat needs to be done.specific contributions of academic researchñbasic and appliedñrepresentkey ideas derived from sustained interaction between academic research andindustry. key ideas and the major technological opportunities or breakthroughsthat result from key ideas are often the product of cumulative research interactions and advances involving the flow of ideas and people back and forth acrossthe boundaries between universities and industry. examples of key ideas include:the tcp/ip internet protocol, the web browser, routers, index funds and derivatives, decisionsupport technologies, pacemakers, and magneticresonance imaging. (for a graphic illustration of the interaction between academic and industryresearch on key ideas leading to major technological advances in informationtechnology see figure 21.)contributions from multiindustry, indirect, andcomplementary researchfinding 77. academic research in a given field or discipline may contributedirectly or indirectly to more than one industry; and many innovations result fromcomplementary advances in more than one field of research.many contributions of academic research to an industry are mediated throughother disciplines or embedded in technologies, products, and services derivedthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212the impact of academic research on industrial performancefrom other industries. basic research in physics, biology, and chemistry has led tonew knowledge and capabilities in microelectronics, genetic engineering, andother fields that have directly contributed to the creation of highvalue, hightechnology products and services. contributions from academic research tomajor crosssector technologies, such as information technology, have directlybenefited many industries. for example, information technology is critical to thetechnical and market performance of aircraft and has profoundly changed thestructure and performance of the financial services, as well as the transportation,distribution, and logistics services industries. similarly, intelligent sensors,computeraided diagnosis, and robotics are the basis for many new medical devices. research in materials science and bioengineering has enabled advances inproducts and processes in many industries.the five industry studies have also underscored the multidisciplinary character of many innovations in products and services. for example, the development of new medical devices relies heavily on advances not only in the lifesciences, but also in the physical sciences and engineering. many service innovations in the network systems and communications industry have depended oncomplementary progress in engineering and physical, social, and behavioral sciences.contributions from the social sciencesfinding 78. many valuable contributions to industry have resulted from academic research in the social, behavioral, management, and policy sciences.network systems and communications industryacademic business schools have long been concerned with making the benefits of information technology available to businesses. through research, a number of approaches and techniques have been developed, including decisionsupport systems, the implementation of information technology for strategic advantage, computersupported cooperation, productivity research, and softwaredevelopment methodologies. deregulation, partly a response to academic research in economics, has affected all five of the industries in this study to varyingdegrees. economics research on network externalities and internet economics hashelped to define business strategies for electronic businesses and internet serviceproviders. organizational aspects of communications service companies are thefocus of attention in new informationmanagement schools and programs. research by psychologists and social scientists has explored how people use computer and communication systems and the effects of these systems on people andorganizations. an excellent example is a classic study by card et al. (1983)showing how cognitive psychology can be used to estimate human performancewhen interacting with a computer.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the contributions and impact of academic research213medical devices and equipment industryresearch in engineering, the natural sciences, the social sciences, risk analysis,and business are likely to be of increasing importance to medical information systems.in addition, clinical research studies that help determine the acceptance or rejection ofnew medical devices require a broadbased approach that incorporates a varietyof disciplines.aerospace industryin a broad sense, academic research on production and management systems,typically performed by business faculty, has had an enormous impact on allmanufacturing industries. concepts that have contributed to recent increases inproductivity in manufacturing, such as total quality management, workforce empowerment, supplychain integration, and justintime production, were identified and disseminated by academic researchers. the lean aerospace initiative(lai) at the massachusetts institute of technology is an example ofmultidisciplinary research with strong industry participation. focused on strategies for applying lean manufacturing and management concepts to aerospace,lai includes research in several engineering disciplines, economics, behavioralscience, computer science, marketing, management, and other disciplines.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industrythe research most relevant to integrated logistics is in operations research,an area associated with engineering schools, applied mathematics departments,and business or management programs. human factors research and consumerresearch are also important to the industry.financial services industrythe financial services industry has a history of benefiting from economicsand business research rather than research in natural sciences and engineering.leading examples are the nobel prizewinning work in economics by markowitzand sharpe on portfolio theory, by scholes and merton on pricing derivativesecurities, and by koopmans and kantrovich on linear pricing models. academicresearch in the social sciences has contributed to an understanding of large datasets and consumer behavior. in addition, academic researchers have been instrumental in analyzing legal and regulatory restraints on financial services.vectors of contributionfinding 79. numerous diverse, robust, and often mutually reinforcing vectorslink academic research to the five industries.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214the impact of academic research on industrial performancethe traditional idea of universities as places that educate students and conduct basic research is, at best, incomplete. ideas and people are carried by multiple vectors between academia and industry. these vectors include the directhiring of students, graduates, and faculty by industry; temporary exchanges ofresearchers; faculty consulting arrangements; sabbaticals; research grants andcontracts; institutional mechanisms at universities (e.g., research centers, consortia, industrial liaison programs); technology licensing; spinoff companies; publications; conferences; and short courses. the modes or pathways are summarizedin box 73.impact of contributionsmeasuring the quantitative impact of specific innovations on the performance of a firm or an industry is extremely difficult because performance in themarket is determined by synergies between multiple innovations and other factors, both internal and external. isolating the contribution of academic researchis at best an inexact science. therefore, this study was designed from the outsetto provide a qualitative assessment. panels for each industry relied on informedopinion, informal surveys of industry and academic leaders, workshop discussions, and expert judgment to assess the impact of academic research on industry performance.network systems and communications industryacademic research has had a substantial impact on this industry. the flow ofresearchers, ideas, and entrepreneurial activity between universities and industry,coupled with government support for research and test beds for infrastructuredevelopment, have been instrumental in the creation of new companies, services,and modes of business. as emphasis shifts to the deployment and maintenance oflargescale systems and the economical provision of services, the impact of university research may be moderated somewhat because research relevant to operational networks is expensive and often proprietary. many firms opt to hire capable university researchers, rather than fund research at universities. however,the federal government continues to invest heavily in academic research on information technology, which is expected to generate results with longterm commercial impacts.medical devices and equipment industryacademic research has had a substantial impact on performance in this industry. in addition to science and technologybased research and innovation inuniversities, academic medical centers (amcs) play a unique role. industry andacademia depend on each other for product development, testing, introduction,the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the contributions and impact of academic research215box 73vectors of technology transfer from universities to industrytrained graduates. the direct employment of graduates and faculty, whether aspermanent or temporary hires, by manufacturing companies and by the intermediate product and service vendors that support them is an important vector ofknowledge/technology transfer from academic research to industry.consultancies. faculty consultancies are not well documented but represent animportant means of exchanging knowledge. data on the amount of time facultyspend consulting with industry are not available. most engineering schools, however, allow faculty to spend up to 20 percent of their time as consultants.sponsored and collaborative research. research grants, primarily from thefederal government but also from other nonindustry sources, can lead to resultsthat find their way to industry. research funded directly by industry accounts forroughly 8 percent of total academic research activity; industry support is sometimes a requirement for federal funding.spinoff companies. companies started by academic researchers have becomean increasingly important mechanism of knowledge/technology transfer in the lasttwo decades.1 cisco systems, amati communications, and growth networks inthe network systems industry and cplex optimization and caps logistics in thetransportation, distribution, and logistics industry are examples of the successfulcommercialization of the results of academic research by startup companies.licensing. technology licensing directly from the university or through spinoffcompanies increased rapidly during the 1990s. university gross revenues fromlicensing increased from $130 million in 1990 to a total of $1.1 billion in 2001(autm, 2002; nsb, 2000).2 patent ownership by universities rose sharply, fromabout 250 annually in the early 1970s to more than 3,700 in 2001 (autm, 2002;nsb, 2000). however, royalties from university patents represent only about2 percent of r&d expenditures and generally come from a few blockbuster patents (nelson, 2000). patenting and licensing by universities have been mostly inthe biotechnology sector (nsb, 2000).research centers. the number and importance of universityindustry researchcenters has increased substantially in the last two decades. in general, these relationships appear to play a useful facilitating role in universityindustry interactionand knowledge transfer.publications, conferences, workshops, and short courses. research publications and the presentation of research results at conferences, workshops, andother forums that bring together academic and industrial researchers remain important vectors for the exchange of knowledge between academia and industry.1more than 3,870 new companies were formed based on licenses from academic institutions between 1980 and 2001, 494 of them in 2001. in that year, universities held anequity interest in 70 percent of these startup companies. many more companies based onuniversitygenerated ideas, science, and technology did not involve university licensing(autm, 2002).2these figures were selfreported by respondents to the autm licensing survey and donot necessarily include all universities (autm, 2002).the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216the impact of academic research on industrial performanceand modification of medical devices at amcs. nevertheless, the impact could beeven greater if there were a more systematic approach to educational partnershipsbetween industry and universities. these partnerships might include the sharingof large, expensive medical research facilities and joint research and training activities.aerospace industryalthough many basic concepts and a good deal of the fundamental knowledge of aerodynamics were developed by academics, the impact of academicresearch on performance in the mature sectors of the aerospace industry has beenrelatively modest in recent years. the combination of aerospace corporationsõstrong research capabilities, concerns about intellectual property rights, an emphasis on incremental improvements in products with long life cycles, and competitive pressures that demand improvements in production processes has limitedthe current value of academic research. however, industry and government laboratories that support the mature aspects of the industry continue to depend ongraduates educated and trained at universities, and aerospace continues to be oneof the most researchintensive industries. less mature sectors, such as unmannedaerial vehicles and spacebased information systems, where innovation is proceeding rapidly, depend heavily on universities for research and innovation.transportation, distribution, and logistics services industrythe impact of academic research on performance in transportation, distribution, and logistics services as a whole has been relatively modest. basic research, some of it done in the 1950s with no logistics applications in mind, hashad the greatest impact on the industry. linear and integer programming andqueueing theory are the building blocks of the informationmanagement anddecisionsupport technologies at the heart of the integratedlogistics revolution.applied research in these fields has also made important contributions, such aslargescale optimization modeling, decomposition methods, network optimization, and advances in other areas of operations research. these successes notwithstanding, a large gap remains between technologies that could have a tremendous impact and technologies that actually have had an impact. overall,there is not enough demand from the industry or capacity in the industry to takeadvantage of research results.financial services industryacademic research has had a substantial impact on certain aspects of thefinancial services industry, especially on novel financial products and services.the financial instruments, investment management, and decisionsupport toolsthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the contributions and impact of academic research217created in academia or through publicprivate partnerships have been critical tonew products, business lines, and more efficient transactions, and hence to thesuccess of the industry. furthermore, a significant component of modern financial services would not be possible without the fundamental mathematical toolsdeveloped for or adapted to financial problems by academia. research has focused on linear programming models in economics, portfolio theory, and pricingderivative securities. university research has greatly impacted financial servicesdespite the lack of a well developed, organized r&d system focused directly onproblems and issues related to financial services.notes1drawing on lundvallõs (1992) definition of national innovation systems, the committee definesan industryõs system of innovation as òconstituted by elements (people, capital, organizations, et al.)and relationships that interact in the production, diffusion and use of new, and economically useful,knowledgeó within a given industry.2at the end of the funding period for nsfsupported engineering research centers, most ercswill become selfsustaining. currently there are 16 selfsustaining ercs.referencesautm (association of university technology managers). 2002. autm licensing survey, fy2001. northbrook, ill.: autm.card, s.k., t.p. moran, and a. newell. 1983. the psychology of humancomputer interaction.hillsdale, n.j.: lawrence erlbaum associates.cohen, w.m., r. florida, l.p. randazzese, and j. walsh. 1998. industry and the academy: uneasypartners in the cause of technological advance. pp. 171ð199 in challenges to research universities, r. noll, ed. washington, d.c.: the brookings institution.lundvall, b.l. 1992. national systems of innovation: towards a theory of innovation and interactive learning. london: pinter publishers.nelson, l. 2000. many forms of technology transfer from universities. viewgraph presented at theaaas science and technology policy colloquium, washington, d.c., april 2000.nsb (national science board). 2000. science and engineering indicators 2000. washington, d.c.:u.s. government printing office.nsf (national science foundation). 2001. engineering research centers: partnerships for competitiveness. arlington, va.: national science foundation.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2198challenges for the futurebased on the conditions, experiences, and trends in the five industries examined in this study, the committee identified six major challenges that are likely toaffect the impact of universitybased research on industry performance in thecoming years.servicesfinding 81. although innovations in service delivery are becoming more important, the academic research enterprise is not focused on or organized to meetthe needs of service businesses.services account for almost 80 percent of the u.s. gross domestic product,employ a large and growing share of the science and engineering workforce, andare the primary users of information technology. in most manufacturing industries, the service functions, such as logistics, distribution, and customer service,have become leading sources of competitive advantage. the rate of innovationand level of productivity in the services infrastructure (e.g., finance, transportation, communication, health care) have an enormous impact on the productivityand performance of all other segments of the economy. moreover, as the studiesof the financial services industry, the transportation, distribution, and logisticsservices industry, and the network systems and communications industry show,improving services is a major impetus for innovation throughout the economy.nevertheless, the u.s. academic research enterprise, despite its broad disciplinary base and potential for crossdisciplinary research and training, is notfocused on or organized to meet the needs of service businesses. majorthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220the impact of academic research on industrial performancechallenges facing universities are: (1) adapting and applying systems and industrialengineering concepts, methodologies, and qualitycontrol processes toservice functions and businesses; (2) integrating technological research withresearch in social sciences, management, and public policy; and (3) educatingand training engineering and science graduates to deal with management, policy,and social issues.the regulatory climatefinding 82. regulations and regulatory changes have profoundly influencedindustry receptivity to contributions by academic research. in some cases, academic research has helped to shape the regulatory environment; academia is wellqualified to provide interdisciplinary expertise to inform regulatory decisions.all of the industries in this study operate in an environment that is currentlyor has been highly regulated, and changes in the regulatory environment overtime have affected them in obvious and not so obvious ways. at one end of thespectrum are the airline and trucking industries. for many years, strict regulationprecluded airlines and trucking companies from competing based on price; therefore, competition was based on speed, reliability, and other amenities that tendedto spur innovation. deregulation in both industries has led to intense competition,based on both price and quality of service. although the need for innovationremains, lower margins and, therefore, tighter research budgets have restrictedthe focus of r&d. at the other end of the spectrum is the medical devices andequipment industry. companies in this industry operate in a highly regulatedenvironment in which the safety and effectiveness of new devices must be clearlydemonstrated. universities, specifically academic medical centers, are particularly well equipped to carry out the laboratory research and clinical trials described in regulatory requirements. this industry is a prime example of how thecontributions of academic research are affected by the overall regulatory environment in which an industry operates.academic research has also greatly influenced the regulatory environment.based on economics research, much of it performed in academia, the role ofregulation has been redefined from protecting the public interest in naturallymonopolistic markets to promoting market entry and ensuring vigorous competition to achieve public benefits. the change has spurred deregulation in a number of industries, including network systems and communications. in the financial services industry, the impact of academic research on regulation has beensmall historically, usually in response to crises; however, the impact is growing,especially in the area of risk management. the influx of technically trainedscientists and engineers into financial regulatory bodies has enabled regulatorsto draw on advances in risk modeling, which, in turn, has led to innovations inthe industry proper. in the medical devices arena, academic researchers couldthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges for the future221play an important role in the ongoing reform of the food and drugadministrationõs regulatory policies by assembling industry, regulatory, andclinical panels to discuss appropriate requirements for bringing products, suchas artificial hearts and mechanical cardiacassist devices, into widespreadclinical use.intellectual propertyfinding 83. over the past 25 years, research universities have increasinglyemphasized technology transfer and the generation of income from research results, through patenting, the creation of technology transfer offices, and licensing. although the increased attention to management of intellectual property hashad many positive consequences for industry and academia, questions remainabout the overall effectiveness of technology transfer investments, as well as theimpact of these activities on universitiesõ core research and education missions.throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, government policy increasinglyfavored stronger protections for intellectual property resulting from publiclyfunded research. several universities had already increased patenting activity inthe 1970s, largely as a result of the emergence of biotechnology, but the propensity to patent increased markedly after 1980. since 1980, the number of university technology transfer offices has grown from 25 to more than 200 (sampat andnelson, 1999). these offices have provided an alternative interface with industryto the traditional offices of sponsored research. technologytransfer offices focuson licensing university technologies and generating royalties.other mechanisms for profiting from research have also been developed. forinstance, some leading research universities have made longterm agreementswith individual companies for joint research, joint clinical trials, and profit sharing; companies use these agreements to leverage research funded from othersources. universities are becoming more willing to take equity stakes in newcompanies. a percentage of equity is often a requirement for companiesõ participation in universitybased business incubators, and universities are increasinglyproviding some of the initial funding for faculty membersõ startup companies. inaddition, a growing number of university researchers have added financial gainand entrepreneurship to their traditional university roles of teaching, research,and service. in some cases, patents and royalties are shared with the university. inother cases, faculty researchers have taken advantage of available venture capitalto fund new companies to produce commercial products based on their research.all of these mechanismsñpatents, licensing, contracting, industrial liaison programs, and startup companiesñhave expanded interactions between universitiesand industry and changed the traditional role of universities in that relationship,which, for the most part, had been limited to faculty consulting, small amounts ofcontract research for companies, and the preparation of graduates for careersin industry.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222the impact of academic research on industrial performancethe emphasis on commercializing research results has affected the structureand dynamics of industry interactions with leading research universities. for example, in the mature sectors of the aerospace industry the problem of the protectionand ownership of intellectual property is a significant barrier to collaborativeuniversityindustry research. this situation may be attributable to the advancedlevel of competition in the industry and could be indicative of things to come inother mature, highly competitive, researchintensive industries. by contrast, thetreatment of intellectual property rights has not figured prominently in relationsbetween universities and the financial services industry, in which secrecy and firstmover advantages prevail. indeed, the lack of intellectual property rights in financial services might be an impediment to collaborative academicindustry researchin a different way because it is difficult for universities to maintain secrecy. in thetransportation, distribution, and logistics services industry, where intellectual property is often developed and commercialized by the same faculty, consultancies andstartup software companies have helped the industry avoid problems.increased patenting activity by academic researchers has had many positiveconsequences for both industry and academia. academic researchers now havenew incentives and new avenues for pursuing their entrepreneurial energies andnew products, services, processes, and companies to show for it. as congresspredicted when it passed the bayhdole act in 1980, allowing universities to ownand profit from the results of their research has stimulated researchers to patentand seek the commercialization of research results. recent research indicates thatthe willingness of industry to invest in the commercialization of inventions licensed from universities is closely correlated with strong property rights (jensenand thursby, 2001; dechenaux et al., 2002). the increase in patents has also hadbenefits for industry: (1) patenting places research results in the public domain,where they are much more accessible than they are through journals or unpublished papers; (2) patents have value that can be capitalized through licensingagreements or as collateral in securing financial resources for startup companies;and (3) patents provide at least some protection for the resulting commercialproducts, thereby encouraging investors to make the capital investments necessary for successful commercialization.at the same time, the growing emphasis on university ownership and exploitation of intellectual property has raised questions about the nearterm efficacy ofthe patentlicensing infrastructure, as well as the longterm impact on universityindustry interactions and the health of the academic research enterprise. to date,direct contributions of academic research through patenting activity has beensmall. the creation of technologytransfer offices, with the technical, financial,and legal expertise they require, however, can be expensive; indeed, relativelyfew universities have earned much of a direct financial return on these investments. in fiscal year 2000, only 72 universities had income from licenses of morethan $1 million; and the university of california system accounted for nearlyonequarter of the total license income reported in that year. although even smallthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges for the future223amounts of income are important in the context of tight university budgets, license income exceeded 5 percent of total research expenditures at only 15 universities; typically it is less than 1 percent (autm, 2001).students of technology transfer and the research university have begun tolook into questions raised by the growing interest of universities and researchfaculty in intellectual property (e.g., henderson et al., 1998; link et al., 2002;morgan and strickland, 2000; nelson, 2001; press and washburn, 2000; stefan,2000). have investments in patent licensing infrastructure been worth it? havethey made technology transfer from universities to industry more effective? orwould the licensed technologies have been picked up by industry in any case?does the emphasis on capturing intellectual property rights raise the transactioncost of research? are there other valueadded results from these investments, andhow should they be measured? to what extent does the emphasis on intellectualproperty and secrecy inhibit the free flow of ideas, impede advances, and disruptthe research culture? how has increased emphasis on intellectual property affected teaching and learning? a better understanding of these and related issueswill have important implications for future practices and policies. therefore, it iscritical that these questions continue to be addressed.information technologyfinding 84. information technology is critical to the performance of all industries and will continue to be so in the future. industryõs need for the continueddevelopment, diffusion, and application of advanced information technology presents major opportunities for academic research in many disciplines, includingmathematics, computer sciences, physical sciences, life sciences, multiple engineering disciplines, social sciences, and behavioral sciences.the importance of information technology to industry performance cannotbe overstated. as hardware becomes cheaper and more powerful, networks andcommunications are becoming more pervasive, and the volume of informationcreated, stored, and exchanged is growing exponentially. as a result, questionsabout the management of information for private gain and/or public benefit arealso increasing. addressing these issues will provide a wide range of challengesfor academic researchers in almost every discipline. to name just a few examples, industries will need software that facilitates the interoperability of legacysystems and reduces the vulnerability of infrastructure and business to breachesof security and privacy. academia will also be expected to continue supplyingskilled technicians, developers, and managers (nrc, 2000).a balanced research portfoliofinding 85. universities must maintain a balance of research projects to sustaintheir role as repositories of expertise and resources in many disciplinesñbasicthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224the impact of academic research on industrial performanceand applied research in engineering, life sciences, physical sciences, social sciences, behavioral sciences, managerial sciences, public policy studies, and interdisciplinary research.basic, longterm research performed at universities is an essential part of thenational innovation system. all of the industries studied derive significant benefits from basic research, although the importance of basic research to industryperformance is not well recognized, particularly among individual companies.most federal funding continues to support basic research, but industryfundedacademic research is focused mostly on problems that can be solved relativelyquickly. as universities become more entrepreneurial, the potential financialgains from commercially relevant research could create strong incentives foruniversities to focus on applied research at the expense of basic research. if so,federal funding for basic, longterm research will be even more critical.federal funding is now virtually the only source of support for basic research, which makes effective management of federal research programs of paramount importance. at the highest level, congress should recognize and reaffirmthe importance of basic research at universities. to capture the imaginations ofthe best academic researchers, program managers at the defense advanced research projects agency, national science foundation (nsf), and other agenciesshould work with researchers to develop agendas that might lead to major newinsights. in some areas, such as network systems, the best researchers may already be losing interest. the challenge is not just to maintain a balance betweenbasic and applied research, but also to ensure that the basic research portfolio issufficiently diverse to stimulate innovative thinking by academic researchers inmany fields.to meet this challenge, the balance of federal funding for research in specificfields and agencies should be reassessed. the percentage of federal funding foracademic research supported by the national institutes of health increased from49 percent to 62 percent from 1980 to 2001. during the same period, nsfõsfunding decreased somewhat, from 20 percent to 17 percent. the relative sharesof federal funding for academic research at other federal agencies, such as thenational aeronautics and space administration, the u.s. department of energy,and the u.s. department of defense, have also declined (nsf, 2001). in a policystatement accompanying science and engineering indicators 2000, the nationalscience board noted (nsb, 2000):the life sciences now account for more than 50 percent of the u.s. federalinvestment in basic researché. todayõs strong federal support for the life sciences is warranted because biomedical research is on the cusp of a revolution inpreventative medicine and treatment. nevertheless, todayõs overall research budget is increasingly out of balance.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.challenges for the future225the generation of key ideas that lead to technological breakthroughs, as wellas sustained incremental innovation, requires contributionsñboth direct and indirect via crosssector technologiesñfrom research in many fields. the value ofresearch results in one field often depends heavily on advances in complementaryfields, which is a strong argument for maintaining a balanced research portfolioin many fields of science and engineering.finally, research opportunities in the social and behavioral sciences pose another challenge for industry program managers, as well as academic researchers.as the u.s. economy continues to shift toward services, and competitiveness inmanufacturing and services industries is defined increasingly by the relative abilityof firms to manage knowledge and human capital, as well as to anticipate and meetthe wants of customers (involving them more and more directly in the design andproduction of goods and services), the importance of research in social, managerial,behavioral, and policy sciences for industry and government will certainly grow.for the most part, the value and relevance of this research has yet to be recognizedby industry or government agencies. although research in selected areas of economics and managerial sciences has had a demonstrable impact on industry practices, researchers in the social and behavioral sciences, in general, have not conveyed the value of their research to industry effectively. examples in this study offive very different industries show that research in the social and behavioral sciences (integrated with the natural sciences and engineering) in areas related toinformation technology and services can greatly improve our understanding of howtechnological developments affect individuals and society as a whole.keeping pace and moving forwardfinding 86. the core strengths of the academic research enterprise are stableenough and flexible enough to respond to the rapidly changing needs of industry.a major challenge for universities is keeping pace with the rapidly changingresearch and human resource needs of industries while continuing to pursue basicresearch in new areas to generate ideas that will provide the foundation forindustries in the future. this challenge is manifested differently in different industries. in the network systems and communication industry, as well as themedical devices and equipment industry, where linkages to academic researchhave been very strong, industry leaders are concerned that academic researchmay not be able to adapt, articulate, and pursue basic and applied research andtraining in new directions. in the financial services and the transportation, distribution, and logistics services industries, which do not have a strong industryr&d ethos, and in the mature sectors of the aerospace industry, industry is lessconcerned about academic research òkeeping upó than about academia meetingtheir research and educational/training needs. all five industry studies revealedthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226the impact of academic research on industrial performanceproblems with participants in academic longterm research adapting to shiftingindustry priorities and emerging opportunities in particular areas.the academic research enterprise has some very important core strengths.universities address a broader spectrum of ideas and disciplinary perspectivesthan any other institutions in the u.s. innovation system; they have enormouspotential for multidisciplinary research. universities also integrate advanced research and education. the constant flow of new students through universitiescontinuously revitalizes the academic research enterprise, challenging the assumptions of faculty and bringing fresh perspectives to research. researchtrainedgraduates play a critical role in the development, transfer, diffusion, and application of new knowledge and technology in industry. universities can draw onthese core strengths to keep pace with current industry needs and move forward.referencesautm (association of university technology managers). 2001. autm licensing survey,fy 2000. norwalk, conn.: autm.dechenaux, e., b. goldfarb, s. shane, and m. thursby. 2002. appropriability and the timing ofinnovation: evidence from mit inventions. summer institute 2002, national bureau of economic research, cambridge, mass. available online at: http://www.nber.org/~confer/2002/si2002/thursby.pdf. [june 24, 2003]henderson, r., a. jaffe, and m. trajtenberg. 1998. universities as a source of commercial technology: a detailed analysis of university patenting, 1965ð1988. review of economics and statistics 80(1): 119ð127.jensen, r. and thursby, m. 2001. proofs and prototypes for sale: the licensing of university inventions. american economic review 91(1): 240ð259.link, a.n., j. scott, and d. siegel. 2002. the economics of intellectual property at universities: anoverview (forthcoming in special issue of the international journal of industrial organization).available online at: http://www.people.virginia.edu/~sa9w/ijio/abstracts/accepted/overview.pdf. [june 24, 2003]morgan, r.p., and d.e. strickland. 2000. u.s. university research contributions to industry: findingsand conjectures. science and public policy 28(2): 113ð121.nelson, r.r. 2001. observations on the postbayhdole rise of patenting at american universities.journal of technology transfer 26(12): 13ð19.nrc (national research council). 2000. making it better: expanding the scope of informationtechnology research to meet societyõs needs. computer science and telecommunicationsboard. washington, d.c.: national academies press.nsb (national science board). 2000. science and technology policy: past and prologue. a companion to science and engineering indicators, 2000. available online at: http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2000/nsb0087/nsb0087.pdf. [june 24, 2003]nsf (national science foundation). 2001. federal funds for research and development: federalobligations for research to universities and colleges by agency and detailed field of scienceand engineering: fiscal years 1973ð2001. arlington, va.: national science foundation.press, e., and j. washburn. 2000. the kept university. atlantic monthly 285(3): 39ð54.sampat, b., and r. nelson. 1999. the emergence and standardization of university technologytransfer offices: a case study of institutional change. prepared for the 1999 conference ofthe international society for the new institutional economics, september 16ð18, 1999. washington, d.c.: world bank.stefan, p. 2000. remarks at the conference on universityindustry technology transfer, purdueuniversity, west lafayette, indiana, june 10, 2000.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2279conclusions and recommendationsthis study has documented how performance in five very different industrieshas been improved by contributions from academic researchñfrom the education of graduates with research training at all levels to conceptual breakthroughsand incremental technical advances based on basic and applied research to thedevelopment and testing of tools, prototypes, and marketable products, processes,and services. numerous diverse, robust, and often mutually reinforcing vectorslink academic research to industry, including direct hiring of students, graduates,and faculty; temporary exchanges of researchers; faculty consultancies; industrysponsored research contracts and grants; research centers; consortia; industrialliaison programs; technology licensing; startup companies; publications;and conferences.researchtrained graduates at all degree levels are critical to the development, transfer, diffusion, and application of new knowledge and technology inindustry. indeed, the interaction between researchtrained individuals in academiaand in industry is essential to the exchange of knowledge and technology and tothe nationõs innovation system.basic longterm research at universities in many fields of science and engineering has had a huge impact on industry. roughly half of all basic research in theunited states is conducted by universities. basic longterm research is essential tothe health of universities as creators of new knowledge and understanding; and theresults of basic research in a wide range of disciplines intermingle, build on eachother, and eventually find their way by diverse paths into commercial life. becausein most fields it is difficult for individual firms or groups of firms to appropriatereturn on investment exclusively, commercial firms have little incentive to fundthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228the impact of academic research on industrial performancebasic research at universities. as a result, the federal government currently fundsthe majority of basic research in academia.contributions from applied research at universities are also very important toindustry. the industry studies in this report document that academic researchersand the academic research infrastructure are directly involved in the developmentof industrial tools, prototypes, products, and production processes, as well as in thedelivery of products and services. academic applied research has led to cumulative,incremental advances that have been of great importance to whole industries; individual companies have also benefited from universitybased researchers working tosolve discrete practical problems related to their businesses. universitybased research centers, with industry participation, have become an important vector fortransferring the results of òdirectedó basic research and applied research to industry.most of the applied research and òdirectedó basic research performed atuniversities is funded by federal agencies (e.g., the u.s. department of defense,u.s. department of energy, and the u.s. department of health and humanservices) looking for solutions to specific problems. industry funds a small portion of applied research in universities, both directly and indirectly by supportinguniversitybased research centers that are largely federally funded. although theportion of academic research funded by industry increased in the 1990s, it is stillonly about 7 percent of the total.universities have benefited greatly from interactions with industry. despiteminimal financial support from industry, questions posed by industry often revealgaps in knowledge that can be addressed by longterm academic research, thusstimulating fundamental research in many fields. this is apparent in hightechnology industries (e.g., network systems and communications and the medical devices and equipment industries). but even in other industries (e.g., financialservices or transportation, distribution, and logistics services) that perform littleif any r&d but require lots of technology, industry challenges can be importantstimuli to both basic and applied research.the impact of universitybased research on industry is not limited to researchin the natural sciences and engineering. research in the social sciences, broadlydefined, has also made major contributions to industrial success. research onconsumer behavior, for example, has influenced industry decisionmaking processes in marketing, product design, and the setting of technical priorities; research in economics has informed regulatory decisions, merger and acquisitionstrategies, the development of financial products, and trade, monetary, and fiscalpolicy; research in mathematics has had a direct impact on information technology but has also been crucial to other fields (e.g., cryptography) that affectpersonal and business transactions daily. in these and other fields, the cumulativeeffects of academic research have led to changes in the legal and regulatoryframeworks essential to successful innovation.often the contributions of academic research to industry are mediated throughother disciplines or embedded in technologies, products, and services derivedthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations229from other industries. the five industry studies show how academic research inphysics, biology, and chemistry has led to new knowledge and capabilities inmicroelectronics, genetic engineering, and other fields that have directly contributed to the creation of highvalue, hightechnology products and services. theyalso show how contributions from academic research to major crosssector technologiesñinformation technology in particularñhave directly benefited multiple industries. information technology is critical to the technical and marketperformance of aircraft and medical devices, for example, and has profoundlychanged the structure and performance of the financial services industry and thetransportation, distribution, and logistics services industry. the industry studiesalso reveal the multidisciplinary character of many innovations in products andservices. the development of new medical devices, for example, requires notonly advances in the life sciences, but also advances in physical sciences andengineering. many innovations in the network systems and communicationsindustry depend on complementary progress in several fields of engineering andin the physical, social, and behavioral sciences.the committeeõs review clearly indicates that academic research providesbenefits to industry and has had a longterm, positive impact on industry performance. however, it is difficult to identify specific mechanisms by which thisimpact can be maximized for several reasons. first, the nature of universityindustry interactions varies from industry to industry; each of the industries studied has a distinctive environment and poses different challenges for universityresearchers. second, research competencies, ability to interface with industry,quality of infrastructure, and many, many other circumstances vary from oneuniversity to another. third, in general, companies, not industries, interface withuniversities. companies in a given industry also vary in their ability to managethat interface, in their expectations of what academic researchers can provide, inthe complexity of their research needs, and in their time horizons.all of these factors vary over time and under different circumstances (e.g.,economic cycles). when this study began, hightechnology industries, such asnetwork systems and communications, were booming, attracting academic researchers and potential graduate students to well funded industry laboratories,growing operations, and new startup companies. when the study came to aclose, this same industry had suffered decreased sales, lower stock prices, lowerinvestments, cutbacks in research funding, and lower employment. as this realworld example shows, the unique characteristics of individual academic institutions and the changes wrought by economic cycles both affect the impact ofacademic research.general recommendationsthe general recommendations in this study address six challenges highlighted in the industry studies: (1) ensuring that universities remain repositoriesthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230the impact of academic research on industrial performanceof expertise and resources in many disciplines by maintaining a balance of research projects; (2) cultivating interactions between academic and industry researchers; (3) harnessing academiaõs broad disciplinary base and potential forcrossdisciplinary research and training to meet the needs of service businessesmore effectively; (4) assessing the impact on the core research and educationalmissions of universities of an increasing emphasis on intellectual property development and management; (5) strengthening the contributions of academic research to both regulatory agencies and the overall understanding of how regulation and deregulation affect industrial growth and development; and (6) increasingthe contribution of academic research to the management of information forprivate gain and/or public benefit in the information age.general recommendation 1. because the contributions of academic researchare diverse and often indirect, a broad and balanced portfolio of academic research should be maintained. recent trends in federal funding indicate that funding levels for research in the physical sciences, engineering, and the social andbehavioral sciences should be increased.¥congress and the administration should restore the balance in federalfunding of academic research by increasing support for research in thephysical sciences, engineering, and the social and behavioral sciences tocomplement and leverage the results of recent heavy investments in thelife sciences and medical sciences.¥federal funding of academic research should continue to emphasize longterm basic research, as well as applied research (typically funded bymission agencies). multidisciplinary research should be encouragedthrough support of projectspecific research teams and other institutionalized mechanisms, such as engineering research centers and otheruniversityindustry research centers.general recommendation 2. industries and universities should continue toexplore mechanisms and pathways for bringing the benefits of academic research to industry, keeping in mind that what works well in one industry may notwork well in another. both partners should experiment with new approaches.universityindustry research linkages should be adaptable, and universitiesshould be on the lookout for opportunities to link up with new industries andexplore leadingedge industry research activities and challenges.given the importance of personal relationships among academic and industrial researchers for productive collaboration and knowledge transfer, universitiesand industry should foster interactions between university and industrybasedscientists and engineers in the following ways:the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations231¥a major program of fellowships should be established to attract and support graduate students in science and engineering.¥sabbatical programs should be established and/or expanded to encourageacademic and industry researchers to spend time in each otherõs homeresearch settings.¥more balanced participation by academic researchers and their industrycounterparts in major conferences on specific sectors, technical systems,and disciplines should be encouraged.¥new ways of supporting personal interactions across academiaindustryboundaries, including using technology to support collaboration, shouldbe explored.¥universityindustry research centers should be structured to facilitate closeinteraction between academic and industry researchers.¥academic reward structures, such as promotion and tenure criteria, shouldbe reviewed and modified (as necessary) to encourage and reward researchers who attract research support from industry and/or address significant research questions of direct importance to industry.¥intellectual property rights policies and practices that facilitate productive research collaboration with industry should be promulgatedat universities.general recommendation 3. the ability of academic researchers to contributeto services industries and the receptivity of leaders in the services industries tothe potential contributions of academic research must both be improved. thefollowing steps would have immediate benefits:¥academic research contributions and capabilities relevant to each industry should be documented and promoted in the targeted communities toeducate senior managers about how academic research might improvecompany performance in the marketplace.¥common legal frameworks acceptable to industry and academia shouldbe established detailing the terms of confidentiality and related conditionsto facilitate academic researchersõ access to operational networks andrealtime data.¥federal mission and regulatory agencies with primary responsibility forthe services industries (e.g., securities and exchange commission, internal revenue service, federal communications commission, and u.s.department of health and human services) should consider funding academic research in ways that encourage greater participation by the services industries. engineering research centers funded by the nationalscience foundation and university transportation centers funded by theu.s. department of transportation could serve as models.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232the impact of academic research on industrial performancegeneral recommendation 4. individual researchers and organizations, such asthe association of university technology managers, that gather data on university research and technologytransfer activities should continue to monitor andassess the effectiveness of incentives for transferring academic research results(particularly intellectual property policies and practices) and the impact of entrepreneurial activity by academic researchers on the traditional university missionsof education, research, and service. the following issues should be addressed:¥the costs to institutions of patenting research results, including the costsof maintaining and defending patents, should be assessed and comparedto the benefits, in terms of income from licenses and royalties.¥steps being taken to disseminate patent information to improvethe chances of commercialization should be reviewed and best practices identified.¥best practices in the longterm management of patent inventories shouldbe shared among research institutions.¥the effectiveness of technology transfer via patented inventions shouldbe assessed and compared to transfer via more traditional mechanisms,such as publications. the benefits to faculty and universities should alsobe compared.¥the impact of universityindustry research collaboration and technologytransfer activities on undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education,the composition of academic research, the stability of academic researchfunding, the private and social returns from academic research, the manytraditional service roles of the university, and other related issues shouldbe assessed.general recommendation 5. government regulatory agencies, including thefood and drug administration, the environmental protection agency, the federal communications commission, and the securities and exchange commission, should be encouraged to maintain and strengthen their productive interaction with academic researchers and to continue to explore new mechanisms forbringing scientific and engineering advances, including scientifically based concepts and tools, to bear more rapidly and effectively on regulatory processes.general recommendation 6. government, industry, and universities shouldwork together to meet the challenges and opportunities created by informationtechnologies. the following steps would be beneficial:¥boost federal funding for fundamental research in information technologies, as part of an effort to redress the imbalance in federal funding forvarious disciplines in academic research.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations233¥increase public and private sector investment in software research, withan emphasis on (1) engineering methods for assessing and improvingquality and (2) software that is more flexible and responsive to changingbusiness conditions.¥support more interdisciplinary research on existing and potential information technologies that combines engineering methods and the socialand behavioral sciences.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biographical informationjerome h. grossman (chair) is senior fellow and director of the healthcare delivery project at harvard university, where he brings his expertise inthe health care system and information technology and his experience in community services to innovations and reforms in the medical care delivery system.he is also chairman emeritus of new england medical center, where he waschairman and ceo from 1979 to 1995, professor of medicine at tufts university school of medicine, and an honorary physician at the massachusetts general hospital.dr. grossman is known for his leadership in the evolving role of academicmedical centers in american medicine. in 1988, he founded the health instituteat new england medical center, an organization involved in research anddevelopment programs and practical applications in medical outcomes, functional health status, the relationship of doctors and patients, and related areas. amember of the institute of medicine, he has chaired four committees studyingutilization management and guidelines. in 1990, he was named a director of thefederal reserve bank of boston and was appointed chair from 1994 to 1997. in1999, he was appointed to the national academies council on governmentuniversityindustry research roundtable (guirr). in 2000, he was electedtrustee of the committee on economic development and is cochair of thesubcommittee on the future of employerbased health insurance, subcommittee on education policy, and committee on the future supply of scientistsand engineers. in 2001, he was invited to participate in the activities of thenational bureau of economic research.235the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.236the impact of academic research on industrial performancealfred v. aho is vice president of computer sciences research at belllaboratories, lucent technologies, murray hill, new jersey. prior to this appointment, dr. aho was professor and chair of the computer science department at columbia university, and before that he was general manager of theinformation sciences and technologies research laboratory at bellcore inmorristown, new jersey. dr. aho received a b.a.sc. in engineering physicsfrom the university of toronto and a ph.d. in electrical engineering (computerscience) from princeton university.dr. ahoõs research has focused on algorithms, compilers, database systems,and programming tools. he has written more than 60 research papers and published 10 books that are widely used around the world in computer scienceresearch and education. he is a coinventor of the awk programming languageand several unix programming tools. dr. aho is a member of the nationalacademy of engineering, and a fellow of the american association for theadvancement of science, the association for computing machinery, bell laboratories, and ieee. he has received honorary doctorates from the university ofhelsinki and the university of waterloo for his contributions to computer scienceresearch. he has also been a distinguished lecturer at many leading universitiesand is an active member of a number of national and international advisoryboards and committees.cynthia barnhart is codirector of the operations research center at themassachusetts institute of technology (mit), where she has been a faculty member since 1992. her research activities have focused on the development of planning models and algorithms to improve operations at airlines, railroads, truckingfirms, and intermodal partnerships. problems she has addressed include airlinecrew scheduling, airline fleet assignment, lessthantruckload routing and scheduling, truckload freight routing, intermodal (e.g., railairship) freight transportation planning, express freight service design, and rail service design. professorbarnhart has served as an associate editor for operations research, transportation science, and management science, as a board member for informs (institute for operations research and the management sciences), and as president ofthe women in operations research and management science forum. she hasbeen awarded the mitsui faculty development chair, the junior faculty careeraward from the general electric foundation, and the presidential young investigator award from the national science foundation. her work has been published in several books and research journals, including transportation science,operations research, naval research logistics, journal of business logistics,mathematical programming, computational optimization and applications, andannals of operations research.robert e. bixby is a research professor and the noah harding professoremeritus of computational and applied mathematics at rice university andthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biographical information237technology fellow of ilog s.a. he earned his b.s. in industrial engineeringfrom the university of california, berkeley (1968) and his m.s. and ph.d. inoperations research from cornell university (1971 and 1972). his research interests include the solution of largescale linear programming problems, the application of linear programming methods to integer programming, parallel methodsfor integer and linear programming, and algorithms for combinatorial optimization problems. in one realworld application, dr. bixby and coworkers fromprinceton and rutgers implemented a new algorithm for the solution of the linearprogramming relaxation of a 13millionvariable airline crew scheduling model.in addition to his academic work, dr. bixby cofounded a software companyin 1988 called cplex optimization, inc., that markets algorithms for linear andmixedinteger programming. cplex optimization was recently acquired byilog s.a, of which dr. bixby is a director. besides its commercial applications,the cplex optimizer is used by universities throughout the world in educationand research in integer and linear programming. dr. bixby is affiliated with manyscientific organizations, committees, and publications and is currently a memberof the mathematical programming society, the operations research society ofamerica, and the society for industrial and applied mathematics (siam) andchair of the mathematical programming society publications committee. he haspublished more than 60 papers and technical reports.lillian c. borrone retired as the assistant executive director of the portauthority of new york and new jersey in december 2000. in that position, sheadvised the executive director and board of commissioners on various policyissues, including international trade development, real estate acquisition and disposition for maritime, aviation, and mixeduse development projects and transportation capital project management. for 12 years, mrs. borrone was director ofthe port commerce department, which oversees the agencyõs vast marine terminals, waterfront development, and international relations responsibilities. duringher tenure, the maritime activities of the port authority increased significantly.mrs. borrone currently chairs the u.s. department of transportation advisory council to the bureau of transportation statistics. she is past chair of thenational research council (nrc) transportation research board and a pastmember of the nrc marine board executive committee, secretary treasurer ofthe board of the eno transportation foundation, and a member of the nationalacademy of engineering and the national academy of public administration.in 2001, mrs. borrone was inducted into the maritime association hall offame. she has also been honored with the traffic club of new york transportation person of the year 2000 award and the containerization institute òconnieaward.ó she was a year 2000 executive women of new jersey òsalute to policymakersó honoree and one of new jerseyõs top ten business women of 2000,selected by the newark star ledger. mrs. borrone was also a recipientof the port authority of new york and new jerseyõs robert f. wagnerthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238the impact of academic research on industrial performancedistinguished service medal. she holds an m.s. in civil engineering/transportation management from manhattan college and a b.a. in politicalscience from american university.a. ray chamberlain, ph.d., p.e., is vice president of parsonsbrinckerhoff, a worldwide engineering consulting firm. he was vice presidentfor freight policy of the american trucking associations, inc., from 1994 to1998, and executive director of the colorado department of transportation from1987 to 1994. he also served terms as president of the american association ofstate highway and transportation officials, chairman of the executive committee of the transportation research board, and president of the nationalassociation of state universities and land grant colleges. from 1969 to 1980,he was the president of colorado state university. dr. chamberlain earned threedegrees in engineering and has comprehensive knowledge of surface transportation issues.john m. cioffi received a b.s.e.e. in 1978 from the university of illinois,champaign, and a ph.d.e.e. in 1984 from stanford university. after graduation,he was a modem designer at bell laboratories from 1978 to 1984, and a diskreadchannel researcher at ibm from 1984 to 1986. he has been on the faculty ofstanford since 1986, where he is now a tenured associate professor. he foundedamati communications corporation in 1991 (purchased by texas instruments in1997) and was an officer and director of the company from 1991 to 1997.dr. cioffiõs area of interest is highperformance digital transmission. he haspublished more than 200 papers and holds more than 40 patents, most of whichare widely licensed, including basic patents on dmt, vdsl, and vofdm. hewas elected a member of the national academy of engineering in 2001 and is afellow of the ieee. he has received many awards: the 2001 ieee kobayashimedal; the 2000 ieee millennium medal; the 2000 ieee j.j. tomson medal; the1999 u. of illinois outstanding alumnus; the 1995 outstanding achievementaward of the american national standards institute; and the 1991 ieee communications magazine best paper award. dr. cioffi was a national science foundation presidential investigator from 1987 to 1992 and has served in a number ofeditorial positions for ieee magazines and conferences. he is currently on theboards or advisory boards of bigband networks, coppercom, godigital, ikanos,ionospan, ishoni, itex, marvell, kestrel, charter ventures, and portview ventures. he is a member of the national research council computer science andtelecommunications board.paul citron is vice president of technology policy and academic relations atmedtronic, inc. prior to this appointment, he was vice president of science andtechnology, responsible for corporatewide assessment and coordination of technology and for establishing and prioritizing corporate research. he was awardedthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biographical information239a b.s. in electrical engineering from drexel university in 1969 and an m.s. inelectrical engineering from the university of minnesota in 1972. mr. citron waselected a member of the national academy of engneering in 2003. he waselected founding fellow of the american institute of medical and biologicalengineering (aimbe) in january 1993, has twice won the american college ofcardiology governorõs award for excellence, and in 1980 was inducted as afellow of the medtronic bakken society. he was voted ieee young electricalengineer of the year in 1979. he has numerous publications and eight u.s.medical device patents to his credit. in 1980, he was given medtronicõs òinvention of distinctionó award for his role as coinventor of the tined pacing lead. heis a member of seven advisory boards and committees.colin crook retired from citicorp in july 1997 as chief technology officer.he now advises clients worldwide on issues involving information technology,business investments, the use of complex, adaptivesystems theory in business,security, and global financial enterprises. mr. crook is a senior fellow of thewharton school of the university of pennsylvania and chairman of its information technology committee. he is a fellow of the royal academy of engineering (elected in 1981) and a board member of several companies and nonprofitinstitutes. during the course of his career, mr. crook has worked in many parts ofthe world, has been involved with virtually all key information technologies, andhas held a wide range of management positions.antonio l. elias is executive vice president and general manager of orbitalsciences corporation, where he has been senior vice president for advancedprograms, chief technical officer (from 1996 to 1997), and corporate senior vicepresident (from 1992 to 1996). as first vice president for engineering, he led thetechnical team that designed and built the pegasus airlaunched booster and wasthe launchvehicle operator on the carrier aircraft for the rocketõs first and fourthflights. he also led the design teams of orbitalõs apex and seastar satellites andthe x34 hypersonic research vehicle.in 1980, dr. elias joined the faculty of the massachusetts institute of technology (mit), where he held the boeing chair in the department of aeronauticsand astronautics; he taught courses in control systems, spacecraft design, andcomputer hardware and software design, and conducted research in computeraided engineering and air traffic control management. during the 1970s, dr.elias worked on the design of the space shuttle orbiter avionics system at draperlaboratory, where he originated the terminal area energy management (taem)guidance strategy, which is currently used for shuttle landings.dr. elias holds a b.s., m.s., e.a.a., and ph.d. from mit. he is a fellow ofthe american institute of aeronautics and astronautics (aiaa), 1991 aiaaengineer of the year, and recipient of the aiaa aircraft design award, american astronomical society brouwer award, and corecipient of the national medalthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240the impact of academic research on industrial performanceof technology and the national air and space museum trophy. dr. elias waselected a member of the national academy of engineering in 2001. he is theauthor of several publications, holds several patents, and is a licensed radioamateur and commercial pilot.donald m. engelman is eugene higgins professor of molecular biophysics and biochemistry at yale university. his scientific interests are focusedon the structure and function of proteins and biological membranes. dr. engelmanholds an m.s. and ph.d. in molecular biophysics from yale. as a member of theboard of directors of the stryker corporation (kalamazoo, michigan), he participated in a collaboration with a biotechnology firm to bring a new product,op1, to market, based in part on science in the academic sector. he is a memberof the national academy of sciences, chair of the science and technologysteering committee at brookhaven national laboratory, and a member of several national academies panels; he also teaches biochemistry to undergraduates.he is a past chair of his department, acting dean of yale college, and director ofthe division of biological sciences.david j. farber is the alfred fitler moore professor of telecommunicationsystems at the university of pennsylvania, where he has appointments in thecomputer science and electrical engineering departments. he was responsiblefor the design of the dcs system, one of the first operational messagebased fullydistributed systems and is one of the authors of the snobol programminglanguage. dr. farber was one of the principals in the creation and implementationof csnet, nsfnet, bitnet ii, and cren and was instrumental in the creationof the nsf/darpafunded gigabit network testbed initiative; he was chair ofthe gigabit testbed coordinating committee. his background includes positionsat bell laboratories, the rand corporation, xerox data systems, university ofcaliforniairvine, and the university of delaware.dr. farber is a fellow of ieee and a member of the boards of directors ofboth the electronic frontier foundation and the internet society. he was a10year alumnus of the computer science and telecommunications board(cstb) of the national research council and a recipient of the 1995 sigcommaward (for seminal contributions to the field of computer networks and distributed computer systems) and the 1996 john scott award (for contributions tohumanity). he is a fellow of the japan glocom institute and of the cyberlawinstitute, and a member of the u.s. presidential advisory committee on highperformance computing and communications, information technology, and thenextgeneration internet.annetine c. gelijns is director of the international center for healthoutcomes and innovation research and an associate professor of surgical sciences in the department of surgery, college of physicians and surgeons, and thethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biographical information241school of public health, columbia university. her current research is focused onthe factors driving the rate and direction of innovative activity in medicine,technological change and its relation to healthcare costs, and measuring theoutcomes of clinical interventions. before coming to columbia in 1993, shedirected the program on technological innovation in medicine at the institute ofmedicine of the national academies. from 1983 to 1987, she worked for thesteering committee on future health scenarios and for the health council, thenetherlands. dr. gelijns has been a consultant to various national and international organizations, including the world health organization and theorganisation for economic cooperation and development. she has a ph.d.from the medical faculty, university of amsterdam, and bachelorõs and masterõsdegree in law from the university of leyden, the netherlands.camilo c. gomez received a b.s. in 1981 in electrical engineering and aph.d. in 1986 in physics from the massachusetts institute of technology. from1986 to 1991, he was principal investigator at los alamos national laboratory inthe los alamos laser fusion program. from 1992 to 1995, he worked in equityderivatives at lehman brothers developing program trading systems and valuation models for exotic derivatives. in 1995, he cofounded casa and headed theinvestment analytics group, which focused on finance, risk management, andcorporate dynamics. recently, he has been working on the application of advanced analytical methods to the measurement and management of risk in thetrade receivable space.daniel s. gregory has been associated with the greylock organization, aboston venture capital firm, since its formation in 1965, and has been a partner ofthe greylock management corporation; from 1976 to 1991, he was managingpartner of the partnerships. mr. gregory served in governor william weldõscabinet as secretary of economic affairs until january 1992; he was the first chairand is still a member of the governorõs council for economic growthand technology.in 1983 and 1984, mr. gregory was president, and then chair, of thenational venture capital association in washington, d.c. he is a graduateof wesleyan university and was the recipient of wesleyanõs distinguishedalumni award in 1986. he served in the u.s. navy as a deck officer from1952 to 1955 and graduated from the harvard graduate school of businessadministration in 1957. mr. gregory has served on the boards of directors ofnumerous emerging, hightech companies, including avid technology, genetics institute, new england business services, teradyne corporation, andvertex pharmaceuticals. he is a trustee of wellesley college, thompsonisland outward bound school, mystic seaport museum, and woods holeoceanographic institution.the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242the impact of academic research on industrial performancekenneth c. hall received his s.b., s.m., and sc.d. from the departmentof aeronautics and astronautics at massachusetts institute of technology. from1987 to 1990, he was an associate research engineer at the united technologiesresearch center. in 1990, he joined the faculty of the department of mechanicalengineering and materials science at duke university; he is currently the chairof that department. dr. hallõs primary research is on the unsteady aerodynamicsand aeroelasticity of gas turbine engines and aircraft. other areas of researchinclude optimization techniques, structural dynamics, and animal propulsion. heis a fellow of the american society of mechanical engineers and an associatefellow of the american institute of aeronautics and astronautics.george h. heilmeier is chairman emeritus of telcordia technologies(formerly bellcore), a leading provider of telecommunications software and professional services based on worldclass research. before joining bellcore in 1991,dr. heilmeier was senior vice president and chief technical officer of texasinstruments, inc. he holds a b.s. in electrical engineering from the university ofpennsylvania and an m.a., m.s.e., and ph.d. in solidstate electronics fromprinceton university. he has also been awarded honorary degrees by stevensinstitute and the israel institute of technology (the technion).dr. heilmeier joined rca laboratories in 1958, where his work with electrooptic effects in liquid crystals led to the first liquidcrystal displays for calculators, watches, computers, and instrumentation. in 1968, he was honored with theprestigious david sarnoff award from the ieee and the eta kappa nu award asthe outstanding young electrical engineer in the united states. in 1970, he waschosen as a white house fellow working on longrange research and development planning and technology assessment as a special assistant to the secretaryof defense. a year later, he was appointed assistant director of defense researchand engineering in charge of all u.s. department of defense programs in electronics, computer technology, and the physical sciences. heilmeier won confirmation in 1975 as director of the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa), where he initiated major efforts in stealth aircraft, spacebased lasersand reconnaissance systems, infrared technology, and artificial intelligence. during his tenure at darpa, he was twice awarded the department of defensedistinguished civilian service medal.dr. heilmeier has received numerous other awards, including the japanesecommunications and computers prize (1990) and three major ieee awards. inseptember 1991, he was awarded the national medal of science by presidentbush for contributions to national security and competitiveness. he received thenational academy of engineering founders award in 1992 and the eta kappanu vladimir karapetoff eminent memberõs award in april 1993. in 1993, hereceived the industrial research institute medal for outstanding accomplishmentin leadership of industrial research and was named the first technology leader ofthe year by industry week magazine. in 1996, he received the john scott awardthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biographical information243for scientific achievements from the city of philadelphia for his pioneering workin the development of liquidcrystal displays. dr. heilmeier is a member of thenational academy of engineering, defense science board, and the nationalsecurity agency scientific advisory board; he serves on the boards of directorsof several companies.robert j. hermann is senior partner at global technology partners,llc. prior to this, he was senior vice president, science and technology, atunited technologies corporation, where he was responsible for the development of the companyõs technical and scientific resources and overseeing theunited technologies research center. he joined the company in 1982 as vicepresident, systems technology, in the electronics sector and later served in aseries of assignments in the defense and space systems groups. for 20 years,dr. hermann served with the national security agency, where he was assignedto research and development, operations, and nato. in 1977, he was appointed principal deputy assistant secretary of defense for communications,command, control, and intelligence. in 1979, he was named assistant secretaryof the air force for research, development and logistics and director of thenational reconnaissance office. he received his b.s., m.s., and ph.d. inelectrical engineering from iowa state university. dr. hermann is a member ofthe defense science board, national academy of engineering, and board ofdirectors of the american national standards institute; he is chair of the boardof directors for draper laboratoryadam b. jaffe is fred c. hecht professor of economics and dean of artsand sciences at brandeis university. he is also coordinator of the innovationpolicy and the economy group of the national bureau of economic research(nber). at nber, he was also principal investigator for a national sciencefoundation research project, funded through nber, to compile a comprehensivedatabase on patents and patent citations and use these data to document the flowsof technological knowledge across time, industries, and geographic areas. previously, he was assistant and then associate professor of economics at harvarduniversity. from 1992 to 1994, he was visiting professor at the john f. kennedyschool of government at harvard.professor jaffeõs areas of specialization are the economics of technologicalchange, the economic impact of universities, and the economics of regulatedindustries. he has published papers on industrial research and development, theeconomics of basic research and universities, incentive regulation and regulatoryreform, and the determinants of the diffusion of new technologies. in 1990ð1991,dr. jaffe took leave from harvard to serve as senior staff economist to thepresidentõs council of economic advisers in washington, d.c., where he wasresponsible for energy policy, technology policy, and regulatory policy. he received his s.b. in chemistry (1976) and his s.m. in technology and policy (1978)the impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.244the impact of academic research on industrial performancefrom massachusetts institute of technology, and his ph.d. in economics fromharvard university (1985).jack l. kerrebrock is professor emeritus of aeronautics and astronauticsat massachusetts institute of technology (mit). he joined the faculty of mit in1960, where he remained as professor, department head, and associate dean(except for two years as associate administrator for aeronautics and space technology at national aeronautics and space administration [nasa]). dr.kerrebrock is a member of the national academy of engineering and was chairof the national research council (nrc) committee on the space station. he hasalso served as member and chair of numerous other nrc and nasa committees.dr. kerrebrock received his ph.d. from the california institute of technology.kent kresa was elected president of northrop grumman in 1987, chiefexecutive officer in january 1990, and chairman in september 1990. beforejoining northrop grumman in 1975, he worked at the defense advanced research projects agency, where he was responsible for applied research and development programs in the tactical and strategic defense arena. from 1961 to1968, he was associated with the lincoln laboratory at massachusetts instituteof technology (mit), where he worked on ballistic missile defense research andreentry technology.mr. kresa has received many industry and government honors, most recently, the private sector councilõs 2001 leadership award (for commitment toimprove governmental efficiency), the aerospace historical society internationalvon k⁄rm⁄n wings award (for contributions to the industry), and (with northropgrumman) òmanufacturer of the centuryó by the california manufacturers andtechnology association. mr. kresa is serving a oneyear term as president of theamerican institute of aeronautics and astronautics (aiaa). he is a member ofthe national academy of engineering, the past chair of the board of governorsof the aerospace industries association, and chair of the defense policy advisory committee on trade. mr. kresa received a b.s., m.s., and e.a.a., all inaeronautics and astronautics, from mit.blake d. lebaron, who earned a ph.d. in economics from the universityof chicago, is professor of finance at the graduate school of international economics and finance of brandeis university, a faculty research fellow at thenational bureau of economic research, a member of the external faculty of thesanta fe institute, and a sloan fellow. before moving to brandeis, dr. lebaronwas associate professor of economics at the university of wisconsinmadison. in1993, he was director of the economics program at the santa fe institute. dr.lebaronõs research has been concentrated on the nonlinear behavior of financialand macroeconomic time series. his current interests are the quantitative dynamics of interacting systems of adaptive agents and how these systems replicatethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biographical information245observed realworld phenomena and the observed behavioral characteristics oftraders in financial markets, including strategies and policy questions. in general,he seeks to discover the empirical implications of learning and adaptation asapplied to finance and macroeconomics.john m. mulvey is a professor in the department of operations researchand financial engineering and a founding member of the bendheim center forfinance at princeton university. his specialty is the application of largescaleoptimization models and algorithms, with an emphasis on strategic financialplanning. he has implemented integrated riskmanagement systems for manycompanies, linking the key risks to the organization and assisting in highleveldecisions. in addition, he has designed a number of significant planning systemsfor government agencies, including the office of tax analysis for the treasurydepartment, the joint chiefs of staff in the u.s. department of defense, andpersonnel planning for the u.s. army. he holds a b.s. (1969) in general engineering and an m.s. (1969) in computer science from the university of illinois,urbana, and an m.s. (1974) and ph.d. (1975) in management science from theuniversity of california, los angeles. he has edited three books and publishedover 100 scholarly papers.homer pien is chief executive officer of sru biosystems, woburn, massachusetts; previously, he was chief technology officer of medical online, lexington, massachusetts. dr. pien also spent 10 years at draper laboratory, both asmanager of biomedical technologies and head of the image recognition systemslaboratory. concurrently, he was director of technology at the center for innovative minimally invasive therapy, a research consortium comprising massachusetts general hospital, brigham and womenõs hospital, massachusetts instituteof technology (mit), and draper laboratory. prior to joining draper, he waswith mit lincoln laboratory for five years. dr. pien received his b.s. in mathematics from the university of illinois, his m.s. and ph.d. in computer sciencefrom northeastern university, and an m.s. (management) from the mit sloanschool. he is an adjunct professor in the graduate college of computer scienceat northeastern university and a member of the department of radiology atmassachusetts general hospital.h. donald ratliff is ups and regents professor of industrial andsystems engineering, as well as executive director of the logistics institute,at georgia institute of technology. he is also cofounder and president ofcaps logistics, a leadingedge supplier of logistics software. he has published more than 50 refereed papers, designed a variety of computer softwareapplications addressing logistics issues, delivered more than 200 invitedpresentations at national and international meetings, and has been a consultant for more than 40 companies on a wide range of issues related to thethe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.246the impact of academic research on industrial performancemovement and storage of products. he has supervised 20 ph.d. students,11 of whom currently hold faculty appointments at various universities. dr.ratliff has been editor in chief of the journal of operations research, areaeditor for optimization, departmental editor for applied optimization in iietransactions, and associate editor of management science. he was awardedthe 1991 outstanding research award of the institute of industrial engineers for his work in logistics and is a fellow of the institute of industrialengineers and a member of the national academy of engineering.j. david roessner is professor of public policy at georgia institute oftechnology, codirector of the technology policy and assessment center atgeorgia tech and, since september 1995, program manager for technology policyat sri international. prior to joining the georgia tech faculty in 1980, he wasprincipal scientist and group manager for industrial policy and planning at thesolar energy research institute in golden, colorado; policy analyst with thenational science foundation (nsf) r&d assessment program; acting leader ofthe working group on innovation processes and their management in the division of policy research and analysis at nsf; and research associate at thebureau of social science research, inc. he began his professional career as adevelopment engineer for hewlettpackard in palo alto, california.dr. roessner received his b.s. from brown university, his m.s. in electricalengineering from stanford university, an m.s. and his ph.d. in science, technology, and public policy from case western reserve university. his researchinterests include national technology policy, the evaluation of research programs,the management of innovation in industry, technology transfer, and indicators ofscientific and technological development. in addition to numerous technical reports, he has published papers in many policyoriented journals. from 1987 to1995, he was a u.s. editor of research policy and is still an advisory editor forthat journal. he is also a member of the editorial boards of the journal of technology transfer and technology studies; principal author of the impact of officeautomation on clerical employment, 1985ð2000 (quorum books, 1985); editorof government innovation policy: design, implementation, evaluation (st.martinõs press, 1988); editor of a special issue of research policy, published in1989, devoted to the evaluation of government innovation programs; andcoeditor of a 1996 special issue of research policy, òevaluation of industrial modernization.ódr. roessner is a member of the committee on science, engineering andpublic policy of the american association for the advancement of science(aaas) and, in 1996, was elected a fellow of the aaas. he has served as aconsultant to the congressional office of technology assessment; the u.s.departments of defense, energy, and commerce; national science foundation;jet propulsion laboratory; oak ridge national laboratory; sandia nationalthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biographical information247laboratories; los alamos national laboratory; the general accounting office;the rand corporation; and sri international.robert f. sproull, vice president and fellow at sun microsystems laboratories, leads a section of the laboratory in burlington, massachusetts. since hisundergraduate days, he has been building hardware and software for computergraphics, including clipping hardware, an early deviceindependent graphicspackage, page description languages, laser printing hardware and software, andwindow systems. he has also been involved in vlsi design, especially of asynchronous circuits and systems. before joining sun, he was a principal withsutherland, sproull & associates, an associate professor at carnegie mellonuniversity, and a member of the xerox palo alto research center. he is coauthor, with william newman, of principles of interactive computer graphics(mcgrawhill, 1981) and an author of logical effort (morgan kaufmann publishers, 1999). dr. sproull is a member of the national academy of engineering,has served on the u.s. air force scientific advisory board, is a special partner ofadvanced technology ventures, and is a member of the board of directors ofalphatech, inc.morris tanenbaum retired as vice chairman of the board and chief financial officer of at&t on june 30, 1991. he began his career there in 1952 as amember of the technical staff of bell telephone laboratories, was promoted todepartment head in the research division in 1955, to director of the solid statedevice laboratory in 1962, director of research and development for the westernelectric company in 1964, followed by vice president of the engineering division and vice president of manufacturing, before returning to bell labs in 1975 asexecutive vice president responsible for the development of customer services,switching and transmission equipment, and electronics technology. dr.tanenbaum holds seven patents and has contributed to numerous books andtechnical journals. he pioneered the use of silicon as a commercial semiconductor material with the invention of the diffusedbase silicon transistor, which became the principal building block of integrated circuitry. later he supervised thegroup that discovered the first practical superconducting materials for high fieldstrength magnets.dr. tanenbaum has served on many corporate boards and is a director of thenew jersey performing arts center, a member of the corporation of the massachusetts institute of technology, an associate trustee of battelle memorial institute, an honorary trustee of the brookings institution, and trustee emeritus of thejohns hopkins university and tufts university. formerly, dr. tanenbaum servedas vice president and councillor of the national academy of engineering and asa member of the governing board of the national research council. he is afellow of the american academy of arts and sciences, the ieee, the americanphysical society, the american association for the advancement of science, andthe impact of academic research on industrial performancecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.248the impact of academic research on industrial performancea member of the american chemical society and the metallurgical society ofaime. dr. tanenbaum earned a b.a. in chemistry from johns hopkins university and a ph.d. in physical chemistry from princeton university.frederick w. telling is a corporate vice president of pfizer, inc., andhead of corporate policy and strategic management; he began his career withpfizer in 1977. dr. telling received his b.a. from hamilton college and hismaster of industrial and labor relations and ph.d. in economics and publicpolicy from cornell university. he is vice chairman for the american foundation for pharmaceutical education and an invited faculty lecturer at the harvarduniversity school of public health and cornell university. he is involved in thework of the council on competitiveness, the national association of manufacturers, and the institute of medicine (iom), where he was a contributing author tothe iom series on technology innovation in medicine. he is a member of theboard of the alliance for aging research, bergen county united way andbergen county united way community foundation, biotechnology industryorganization (bio), california health care institute, children of bellevue, committee for economic development, healthcare institute of new jersey, nationalcouncil on aging, new york academy of medicine, new york academy ofsciences, and many other organizations. he is also a trustee and a member of theexecutive committee of the new jersey aviation hall of fame; he is activelyinvolved in aviation policy and history.stephen wolff is executive director of the advanced internet initiativesdivision of cisco systems, inc., where he is responsible for seeking out, initiating, and leading ciscoõs participation in partnerships at the forefront of internetdevelopment and deployment worldwide, including u.s. next generation internetprogram and the internet2 project. prior to joining cisco in 1995, mr. wolff wasdirector of the division of networking and communications research and infrastructure at the national science foundation (nsf), where he was responsible forthe national research and education network (nren) and nsfnet programsand for nsfõs support of basic research in networking and communications. hewas educated at swarthmore college, princeton university, and imperial college; he is a member of the association for computing machinery and a lifemember of the ieee.