detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11177assessment of department of defense basic research70 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309094436 | doi 10.17226/11177committee on department of defense basic research; division on engineering andphysical sciences; national research councilassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on department of defense basic researchdivision on engineering and physical sciencesthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.eduassessment of department of defensebasic researchassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the instituteof medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen fortheir special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this is a report of work supported by grant no. n0001400g0230 between the u.s.navy and the national academy of sciences. any opinions, findings, conclusions, orrecommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do notnecessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for thisproject.international standard book number 0309094437 (book)international standard book number 0309546494 (pdf)limited copies of this report are availableadditional copies are available from:from:air force science and technology boardthe national academies pressnational research council500 fifth street, n.w.500 fifth street, n.w.lockbox 285washington, dc 20001washington, dc 20055(202) 3343118(800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313(in the washington metropolitan area)internet, http://www.nap.educopyright 2005 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.dr.bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. thenational academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute ofmedicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chairand vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on department of defense basic researchlarry d. welch, chair, u.s. air force (retired), institute for defenseanalyses, alexandria, virginiac.d. (dan) mote, jr., vice chair, university of maryland, college parkalbert j. baciocco, jr., u.s. navy (retired), mt. pleasant, south carolinajack r. borsting, university of southern california, los angelesjohn m. deutch, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridgecharles b. duke, xerox innovation group, webster, new yorkjohn s. foster, jr., northrop grumman space technology (retired),redondo beach, californiamary l. good, university of arkansas, little rockrobert j. hermann, global technology partners, hartford, connecticutjames c. mcgroddy, ibm corporation (retired), briarcliff manor, new yorkc. bradley moore, northwestern university, evanston, illinoisjames g. oconnor, pratt & whitney (retired), coventry, connecticutrichard c. powell, university of arizona, tucsonfawwaz t. ulaby, university of michigan, ann arborbarbara a. wilson, jet propulsion laboratory, pasadena, californiajohnnie e. wilson, u.s. army (retired); dimensions international, inc.,alexandria, virginiastaffmichael a. clarke, lead division board directorjames c. garcia, study directorlanita r. jones, program assistantdaniel e.j. talmage, jr., research associatelindsay d. millard, internassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethe u.s. congress mandated that this study be conducted. the mandate iscontained in the u.s. senate report that accompanied the senates version of thenational defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004 and in the u.s. houseof representatives report that accompanied the housesenate authorization conference committee version of the act. specifically, the senate and house reports,respectively, state:while the department [of defense] is increasing its budget request for thescience and technology program, the committee remains concerned that theinvestment in basic research has remained stagnant and is too focused on nearterm demands. therefore, the committee recommends an increase of $50.0 millionfor basic research. in addition, the committee directs the director of defenseresearch and engineering to commission a study by the national academy ofsciences to assess the basic research portfolio of the services and the defenseadvanced research projects agency (darpa). this assessment should reviewthe basic research portfolio in order to determine if the programs are consistentwith the definitions of basic research in dod regulation. this report is notintended to rate the worthiness of the basic research portfolio, but rather todetermine whether the basic research portfolio needs to be realigned to be moreconsistent with the goals of traditional fundamental research activities.11senate armed services committee, fy04 national defense authorization act, 108th cong.,2003, s. rep. 10846, title ii, subtitle a. available online at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgibin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108congreports&docid=f:sr046.108.pdf. last accessed on november 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefaceandthe conferees further note their concerns about funding levels and technicalcontent of the basic research activities of the defense science and technologyprogram. the departments investment in basic research provides the foundation upon which our modern military is built. it is critical the basic researchinvestment remain strong, stable, and focused on the fundamental search fornew knowledge. therefore, the conferees direct the national academies ofscience to evaluate the dod basic research portfolio. the evaluation shallutilize the official dod definition of basic research to determine whether thebasic research portfolio is consistent with the definition provided in dod regulation. the conferees expect to work closely with the national academies ofscience and the secretary to build the terms of reference for this evaluation.the evaluation should be made available to the congressional defense committees prior to the fiscal year 2006 budget request.2the department of defense (dod) awarded national research council(nrc) the study grant with an effective starting date of march 2004.background and scope of studythe department of defense currently defines basic research as follows:3basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable factswithout specific applications towards processes or products in mind. it includesall scientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing fundamentalknowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical, engineering, environmental, and life sciences related to longterm national security needs. it isfarsighted high payoff research that provides the basis for technologicalprogress. basic research may lead to: (a) subsequent applied research and advancedtechnology developments in defenserelated technologies, and (b) new andimproved military functional capabilities in areas such as communications,detection, tracking, surveillance, propulsion, mobility, guidance and control,navigation, energy conversion, materials and structures, and personnel support.program elements in this category involve premilestone a efforts.2house armed services committee, national defense authorization act for fiscal year 2004, 108thcong., 2003, h.r. rep. 108354, title ii, subtitle d. available online at http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgibin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=108congreports&docid=f:hr354.108.pdf. last accessed on november16, 2004.3department of defense, financial management regulation, dod 7000.14r, vol. 2b, ch. 5,june 2004. available online at http://www.dtic.mil/descriptivesum/budgetactivities.pdf. lastaccessed on november 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixthe goal of dod basic research support is to encourage advances in fieldsthat are likely to contribute to national defense, and in doing so, to foster acompetitive technology base for the u.s. military.in order to maintain this competitive technology base, the dod continues tofund basic research. however, over the past 6 years, it has come to the attentionof the congressional committees on armed services that basic research funded bythe dod may be changing. several organizations, including university researchdepartments and defense laboratories, have described areas of concern. theyinclude the following:some research conducted using funds designated specifically for basicresearch is not, under the dods definition, considered basic research;reporting requirements on dod grants and contracts have become cumbersome and constraining to basic researchers; andbasic research funds are handled differently among the services, whichmakes the funds, in some cases, difficult to track and monitor.these concerns prompted the armed services committees to request that thenational academies perform a study regarding the nature of basic research currently being funded by the department of defense. the task includes assessingthe dods basic research portfolio, including that managed by the office of thesecretary of defense, the three military departments, and the defense advancedresearch projects agency (darpa), to determine if the programs in that portfolio are consistent with the definitions of basic research contained in dodregulations and consistent with the characteristics associated with fundamentalresearch activities. specifically, the national academies statement of task isshown in box p1.study approach and constraintsthe committee (see appendix a for biographical sketches of members)approached the study in two basic steps, which corresponded to its first twomeetings. the committee devoted its first meeting, on may 56, 2004, to understanding the dod definitions for basic and applied research and the characteristicsassociated with fundamental research and to gathering data and information thatwould provide insight into the study issue and background from representativesof the research community. during this meeting, the committee received presentations by personnel from the dod, the office of management and budget(omb), the national science foundation (nsf), and the department of energy(doe) and from a former member of the senate committee on armed servicesstaff. representatives of the association of american universities (aau) andthe american association for the advancement of science (aaas) spoke. theassociate provost from the massachusetts institute of technology (mit) and viceassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefacebox p1statement of taskin accordance with senate report 10846, title ii, subtitle a, and house report108354, title ii, subtitle d, the national academies will conduct a study to assessthe basic research portfolio of the department of defense (dod), including thatmanaged by the office of the secretary of defense (osd), the three militarydepartments, and the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa), todetermine if the programs in that portfolio are consistent with the definitions ofbasic research contained in dod regulations and consistent with the characteristicsassociated with fundamental research activities. to conduct the study, the nationalacademies will accomplish the following tasks:1.form a study committee that possesses knowledge and expertise in thescience and technology areas in which dod basic research is involved; understanding of the differences and relationships between the dod science andtechnology (s&t) program categories of basic research (6.1), applied research(6.2), and advanced technology development (6.3); and understanding of dodfinancial management and budget regulations and processes that define basicresearch and govern the categorization of science and technology programsand related budgets as basic research and understand the historical characteristics associated with fundamental research activities.2.review the unclassified and classified dod basic research portfolio throughdescriptions and documentation of recent, current, and planned programs; discussions with dod s&t and basic research policy makers, program managers,and intramural and extramural researchers; onsite examination; testimoniesfrom persons with knowledge relevant to the study issues; and other referenceinformation as applicable.3.audit the nature of the research to look at fundamental vs. applied orientation;research program review criteria used by the osd, military departments, anddarpa; any restrictions being placed upon principal investigators; whetherbroad agency announcements permit truly innovative approaches to be proposed; and other such indicators.4.determine if programs in the dod basic research portfolio are consistentwith the definitions of basic research contained in dod regulations and consistent with the characteristics associated with fundamental research activities.identify any instances where programs are not consistent with dod regulationsor are not consistent with the characteristics associated with fundamental researchactivities.5.identify any problems that might arise from the definitions themselves or theregulations, policies, or processes implementing the definitions that have a significant bearing on the study issues.6.report findings, conclusions, and recommendations regarding the tasks above.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexiprovosts for research from the university of southern california (usc) andhoward university made presentations. speakers from harvard university andgeorge mason university discussed how research fits into innovation. the list ofguest speakers and titles of their presentations at meeting 1 is provided inappendix b.the committees second meeting, held on may 2627, 2004, was devoted toreviewing the dods basic research program. it included presentations (seeappendix b) by representatives from the u.s. army, u.s. navy, u.s. air force,darpa, the defense threat reduction agency (dtra), and the office of thesecretary of defense (osd). army speakers included representatives of theassistant secretary of the army for acquisition, logistics, and technology(asaalt); the army research laboratory (arl) (including the army researchoffice [aro]); the army research institute (ari); the medical research andmateriel command (mrmc); the engineer research and development center(erdc); and the research, development, and engineering command (rdecom).the committee received presentations from navy representatives of the office ofnaval research (onr), the naval research laboratory (nrl), and the navalwarfare centers. representatives of the air force office of scientific research(afosr) and the air force research laboratory (afrl) made presentations.the director of darpas defense sciences office represented darpa. thedod chemical and biological defense program was discussed by a dtra representative. an osd representative discussed the department of defense experimental program to stimulate competitive research (depscor).the committee also conducted several site visits. committee members visiteddarpa, the three main service laboratories, and the navy and air force officesresponsible for managing their respective services basic research program.during each visit, committee members met with key organization leadershippersonnel in addition to one or more groups of researchers and/or researchmanagers. discussion topics included the dod definition of basic research; theperceptions of leadership, researchers, and managers about how well their researchfits this definition and about characteristics associated with basic research; trends;concerns; and suggested improvements. appendix c lists the dod organizationsvisited.committee members also visited and/or interviewed individuals and groupsat the universities shown in appendix c. each visit included a meeting with thekey person responsible for research at the university (usually a vice president orvice provost for research), as well as one or more groups of dodsponsoredresearchers. in addition to the same topics discussed during the dod site visits,the discussions at the universities addressed the importance of dod researchfunding to the university research enterprise (e.g., faculty development and support, the ability to train graduate students, and the impact on the research agendaof individual researchers and the institution). these same topics were discussedduring interviews of university research leaders who were not visited in person.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiprefacein selecting the universities that it would invite to participate in its meetings,visits, and/or interviews, the committee attempted to include a representativesample of universities receiving dod research funding. the universities thatreceived dod basic and applied research funding in fiscal year 2002 are shownin appendix e. although it was impossible for the committee to conduct sitevisits or interviews with research leaders and others at all of these universities oreven a major percentage of them, the committee sought to obtain meaningfulinformation regarding the study issue by selecting a sample that received a significant portion of dod research funding, included research sponsored by allthree military services and darpa, and was geographically balanced. in all, thecommittees site visits and interviews included discussions with approximately140 people from 7 dod research organizations and 14 universities.constraints on this study were the normal ones experienced by most suchstudiesschedule and resources. the primary constraint was the requirementexpressed by congressional staff members that the study results be available bythe end of 2004.acknowledgmentsthe committee thanks the many organizations and guest speakers that provided excellent support to the committee. the speakers presented information tothe committee that had a direct bearing on the study. from the high quality of thepresentations, it was obvious that the speakers and others had spent many hourspreparing. from the point of view of the committee, this was time well spent. wehope that the speakers, their organizations, the committees department of defensesponsor, and ultimately the readers of this report will agree.finally, the committee thanks the nrc staff members who supported thestudy. primary among them were mike clarke, jim garcia, lanita jones, danieltalmage, and intern lindsay millard.larry d. welch, chaircommittee on department of defense basic researchassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approvedby the national research councils (nrcs) report review committee. thepurpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical commentsthat will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possibleand to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draftmanuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:duane adams, carnegie mellon university,rita colwell, university of maryland,anthony j. demaria, coherentdeos,gerald p. dinneen, honeywell, inc. (retired),fernando l. fernandez, stevens institute of technology,ernest henley, university of washington,kathryn logan, georgia institute of technology (retired),john w. lyons, u.s. army research laboratory (retired),john b. mooney, jr., u.s. navy (retired),theodore poehler, johns hopkins university,charles v. shank, e.o. lawrence berkeley national laboratory,james siedow, duke university,pace vandevender, sandia national laboratories, andcharles zukoski, university of illinois.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivacknowledgment of reviewersalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. thereview of this report was overseen by william g. agnew (nae), general motorscorporation (retired). appointed by the nrc, he was responsible for makingcertain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefullyconsidered. responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely withthe authoring committee and the institution.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvcontentsexecutive summary1assessment of department of defense (dod)7basic researchintroduction, 7definitions and their role in managing basic research, 8findings, 11recommendations, 11basic research in the wider cycle of discovery and technologyexploitation, 12findings, 13recommendation, 13multiple missions, motivations, and management approaches, 14findings, 17recommendations, 18the demand versus the supply, 18findings, 23recommendations, 24appendixesabiographical sketches of committee members, 27bguest speaker presentations to the committee, 37assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvicontentscdod basic research organizations and universities: committeesite visits and/or interviews, 41ddefinitions of basic, applied, and fundamental research, 44euniversities that received department of defense 6.1 and 6.2funding in fiscal year 2002, 51assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarythe department of defense (dod) supports basic research to advance fundamental knowledge in fields important to national defense. over the past 6 years,however, several groups have raised concerns about whether the nature of dodfunded basic research is changing. the concerns include these: funds are beingspent for research that does not fall under dodõs definition of basic research;reporting requirements have become cumbersome and onerous; and basic researchis handled differently by the three services. to explore these concerns, the congress directed dod to request a study from the national research council (nrc)about the nature of the basic research now being funded by the department. specifically, the nrc was to determine if the programs in the dod basic researchportfolio are consistent with the dod definition of basic research and with thecharacteristics associated with fundamental research.summary of findings and recommendationsno significant quantities of 6.1 funds (basic research) have been directedtoward projects that are typical of research funded under categories 6.2 or 6.3.dod managers are generally successful in assuring that the basic researchfunded by dod fits within its definition. that definition, which precludes having òspecific applications . . . in mindó for basic research funded under category6.1, is not, however, a useful criterion for discriminating between basic andapplied research. dod should modify its definition by acknowledging that basicresearch òhas the potential for broad, rather than specific, applicationó and òmaylead to: . . . the discovery of new knowledge that may later lead to more focusedadvances.óassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2assessment of department of defense basic researchit is also important to note that the need for discovery from basic researchdoes not end once a specific use is identified, but continues through applied research, development, and operations stages. basic research is not part of a sequential, linear process from basic research, to applied research, to development,and to application. dod should view basic research, applied research, and development as continuing activities occurring in parallel, with numerous supportingconnections throughout the process.at the same time, there has been a trend within dod for reduced attention tounfettered exploration in its basic research program. nearterm dod needs areproducing significant pressure to focus basic research in support of those needs.dod needs to realign the balance of its basic research effort more in favor ofunfettered exploration. senior dod management should support longterm exploration and discovery and communicate this understanding to its research managers. longterm, reliable dod leadership support for basic research depends ona clear understanding of the researchõs expected value.the key to effective management of basic research lies in having experienced, empowered managers. dodõs personnel policies should provide for continuity of research management with managers having an adequate level of authority. dod should also include within the attributes it assigns to themanagement of its basic research the discovery of new fundamental knowledge,flexibility to modify goals and approaches, freedom to pursue unexpected pathsand highrisk research questions, minimum requirements for detailed reporting,open communications, freedom to publish, unrestricted involvement of studentsand postdoctoral fellows, no restrictions on nationality of researchers, and stablefunding.the breadth and depth of science and technology (s&t) essential to the dodmission have expanded greatly in the past decade while simultaneously resourcesprovided for basic research have declined significantly. dod should adjust itsbasic research allocation to be more in line with its need to pursue research intoexpanded areas of s&t and to support more unfettered research and new researchers.much greater involvement of university researchers is probably essential tomeet the demand for new discovery. acquiring support from dod, however, isoften difficult for many young university researchers. furthermore, placing export controls on dodsponsored 6.1 research disqualifies it from being considered basic research as defined by nsdd189 and poses a significant threat to theopen character of basic research performed in universities. dod should recognize nsdd189, the fundamental research exclusion that provides for the unrestricted character of basic research, in its agreements with universities to performsuch research.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3specific findings and recommendationsthe committeeõs findings and recommendations, which appear in the mainbody of the report with related discussion, are presented below.findingsfinding 1. department of defense basic research funds under 6.1 have not beendirected in significant amounts to support projects typical of 6.2 or 6.3 funding.finding 2. research managers are well motivated and generally successful infocusing 6.1 funding on the discovery of fundamental knowledge in support ofthe range of department of defense needs.finding 3. having specific applications in mind is not a useful criterion for discriminating between basic and applied research.finding 4. the set of attributes and desirable characteristics of basic researchwidely shared among experienced basic research managers can be beneficial indistinguishing between basic and applied research.finding 5. the basic research needs of the department of defense are complexand do not end when specific applications are identified.finding 6. the need for ongoing discovery from basic research can, and usuallydoes, continue through the applied research, system development, and systemoperation phases.finding 7. included in the range of values expected from basic research in thedepartment of defense are (1) discovery arising from unfettered exploration,(2)focused research in response to identified dod technology needs, and(3) assessment of technical feasibility.finding 8. a recent trend in basic research emphasis within the department ofdefense has led to a reduced effort in unfettered exploration, which historicallyhas been a critical enabler of the most important breakthroughs in militarycapabilities.finding 9. generated by important nearterm department of defense needs andby limitations in available resources, there is significant pressure to focus dodbasic research more narrowly in support of more specific needs.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4assessment of department of defense basic researchfinding 10. universities, government laboratories, and industry have overlappingroles in basic research: universities primarily address the creation of broad newknowledge and human competencies, and department of defense laboratoriesand industry are more sharply focused on discovery tied more directly to identified dod needs.finding 11. a clear understanding of the value expected from basic researchacross its full range provides the most reliable assurance of longterm departmentof defense leadership support for the basic research.finding 12. a variety of management approaches in the department of defenseis appropriate to the widely diverse missions and motivations for basic research.finding 13. the key to effective management of basic research lies in havingexperienced and empowered program managers. current assignment policies andpriorities (such as leaving substantial numbers of program manager positionsunfilled) are not always consistent with this need, which might result in negativeconsequences for the effectiveness of basic research management in the long term.finding 14. the breadth and depth of the sciences and technologies essential tothe department of defense mission have greatly expanded over the past decade.finding 15. in real terms the resources provided for department of defense basicresearch have declined substantially over the past decade.finding 16. the demand for new discovery argues for significantly increasedinvolvement of university researchers. yet some younger university researchersin the expanded fields of interest to the department of defense are often discouraged by the difficulty in acquiring research support from the department.finding 17. recent pressures to apply restrictions on participation and publication through export controls on department of defensesponsored research fundedin 6.1 both disqualify it from being considered basic research as defined by nationalsecurity decision directive 189 and threaten to change fundamentally the openand public character of basic university research. this finding does not apply toresearch funded in 6.2.recommendationsrecommendation 1. the department of defense should change its definition ofbasic research to the following:assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledgeor understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and has thepotential for broad, rather than specific, application. it includes allscientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing fundamental knowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical,engineering, environmental, social, and life sciences related to longterm national security needs. it is farsighted highpayoff research thatprovides the bases for technological progress. basic research may leadto (a) subsequent applied research and advance technology developments in defenserelated technologies, (b) new and improved militaryfunctional capabilities, or (c) the discovery of new knowledge that maylater lead to more focused advances in areas relevant to the departmentof defense.recommendation 2. the department of defense should include the followingattributes in its guidance to basic research managers and direct that these attributesbe used to characterize 6.1funded research: a spirit that seeks first and foremostto discover new fundamental understanding, flexibility to modify goals orapproaches in the near term based on discovery, freedom to pursue unexpectedpaths opened by new insights, highrisk research questions with the potential forhigh payoff in future developments, minimum requirements for detailed reporting, open communications with other researchers and external peers, freedom topublish in journals and present at meetings without restriction and permission,unrestricted involvement of students and postdoctoral candidates, no restrictionson the nationality of researchers, and stable funding for an agreed timetable tocarry out the research.recommendation 3. the department of defense should abandon its view ofbasic research as being part of a sequential or linear process of research anddevelopment (in this view, the results of basic research are handed off to appliedresearch, the results of applied research are handed off to advanced technologydevelopment, and so forth). instead, the dod should view basic research, appliedresearch, and the other phases of research and development as continuing activities that occur in parallel, with numerous supporting connections among them.recommendation 4. the department of defense should set the balance of support within 6.1 basic research more in favor of unfettered exploration than ofresearch related to shortterm needs.recommendation 5. senior department of defense leadership should clearlycommunicate to research managers its understanding of the need for longtermexploration and discovery.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6assessment of department of defense basic researchrecommendation 6. personnel policies should provide for the needed continuityof research management in order to ensure a cadre of experienced managerscapable of exercising the level of authority needed to effectively direct researchresources. further, in light of the reductions in positions reported to the committee on department of defense basic research, the department of defenseshould carefully examine the adequacy of the number of basic research management positions.recommendation 7. the department of defense should redress the imbalancebetween its current basic research allocation, which has declined critically overthe past decade, and its need to better support the expanded areas of technology,the need for increased unfettered basic research, and the support of new researchers.recommendation 8. the department of defense should, through its funding andpolicies for university research, encourage increased participation by youngerresearchers as principal investigators.recommendation 9. to avoid weakening the long and fruitful partnershipbetween universities and department of defense agencies, dod agreements andsubagreements with universities for basic research should recognize nationalsecurity decision directive 189, the fundamental research exclusion providingfor the open and unrestricted character of basic research. dod program managersshould also explicitly retain the authority to negotiate export compliance clausesout of basic research grants to universities, on the basis of both the programõsspecific technologies and its objectives.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7assessment of department of defensebasic researchintroductionthe central issues addressed by the committee on department of defensebasic research are these: (1) determining if the content of the basic researchportfolios managed by the department of defense (dod) is consistent with thedod definition of basic research and with the characteristics of basic research,(2) evaluating management challenges arising from the definition of basicresearch, and (3) identifying constraints on basic research in universities and laboratories arising from the definition and its implementation.to address these issues, the committee engaged in discussions with leadersand managers across the dod research enterprise and with others who havespecial interest in the subject. the discussions included two open plenary sessions.a list of the presentations made at these meetings is provided in appendix b. inaddition, to ensure a wellgrounded understanding of dod basic research management and its effect on researchers, the committee interviewed approximately140 program managers and researchers located at 7 dod organizations thatmanage and/or conduct basic research and 14 universities that are among thosereceiving the largest aggregate of dod grants and contracts for research. thesedod organizations and universities are listed in appendix c. although thecommittee did not attempt a statistical analysis of the results of these contacts,consistent themes in the responses of interviewees make the anecdotal evidencecredible and useful.the committee held discussions in plenary sessions and at the dod researchorganizations and at universities engaged in dodsponsored research andreviewed a large number of documents describing the basic research activities ofassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8assessment of department of defense basic researchdod organizations and dodsponsored research in industry and at universities.even so, at best, this information covered only a sampling of the dod 6.1 basicresearch portfolio. based on that sampling, the committee found reason to question the appropriateness of the classification as 6.1 basic research for only a smallpercentage of the work. even in those cases, the issue usually centers on theimplication in the dod definition of basic research (see the following section)that having specific applications in mind is inconsistent with the purposes ofbasic research. the committee concluded that discussion of that issue is not productive, just as the distinction itself is not useful. hence, the committeeõs conclusion is that, while some trends in basic research are undesirable, as discussedelsewhere in this report, there is no evidence of significant misapplication ofbasic research funding.in the course of the committeeõs work, the following four themes emergedand are addressed in the sections below:¥definitions and their role in managing basic research;¥basic research in the wider cycle of discovery and technologyexploitation;¥multiple missions, motivations, and management approaches; and¥the demand versus the supply.definitions and their role in managing basic researchon the basis of its plenary sessions and contacts with program managers andresearchers, the committee concludes that those responsible for directing andmanaging basic research in the dod are well motivated and generally successfulin directing basic research resources for purposes appropriate to the dod definition of basic research: that is, òsystematic study directed toward greater knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable facts without specific applications towards process or products in mind.ó1research managers comply generally with the spirit of this definition, although ifit was taken literally and researchers had specific applications in mind, their programs would be disqualified from receiving basic research support. researchmanagers and the committee agree that such a practice would be inappropriate.hence, although the military departments and defense agencies have the motivation and processes to ensure that 6.1 funding is spent on basic research that hasthe potential for fundamental discovery, these bodies would not deny 6.1 supportfor research simply because it would also fund discovery intended for developing1department of defense, financial management regulation, dod 7000.14r, vol. 2b, ch. 5, june2004. available online at http://www.dtic.mil/descriptivesum/budgetactivities.pdf. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research9technology for military needs. if there were such constraints, there would be muchless support for basic research.furthermore, if a literal interpretation of the dod definition was applied, thespecifics of what the researcher had in mind could be regarded as a key discriminator in determining whether a program was basic research or applied research.fortunately, the committee found that research managers apply consistent andreasonable judgment on the level of specificity that is appropriate to the purposesof basic research.the committee concludes that, although managers are able to apply thecurrent definition of basic research effectively to achieve the purposes of basicresearch, the phrase òwithout specific applications towards process or products inmindó is not useful either to furthering the purposes of basic research or to helping ensure that 6.1 funding is properly directed.2 various motivations for thisdistinction may exist. however, the view presented to the committee by severalsenior managers, and strongly reinforced by members of the committee withextensive experience in senior dod positions, was that this distinction primarilyserves the need for a uniform budget and fiscal accounting classification. thecommittee concludes that this distinction is not a useful research managementtool. ideally it should be possible to convey the purposes of basic research in sucha way as to discriminate basic from applied research on the basis of wellunderstood and accepted principles.the committee devoted significant time to creating a reasonably simple,straightforward description of basic research and concluded that the combinationof slight change in the current dod definition and a description of characteristicswould best serve the needs of effective management of basic research. accordingly, the first change that the committee suggests is that the opening statement inthe dod definition (see appendix d for the current definition) be changed toread as follows:basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledgeor understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and has thepotential for broad, rather than specific, application.it is important to note here that this revised opening statement does notsuggest that basic research ends when a specific application or set of specificapplications is identified. the committee is aware of many instances in whichwork on a specific application led to expanded basic research that provided further fundamental discoveries with far broader application than what the researcher2this assertion is consistent with the concept of useinspired basic research proposed by stokes.donald e. stokes, pasteurõs quadrant: basic science and technological innovation, washington,d.c.: brookings institution press, 1997, pp. 5889.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10assessment of department of defense basic researchhad in mind, even as the potential of specific applications emerged. the currentdefinition, however, precludes basic research when specific applications havebeen identified.3regarding characteristics of basic research, the committee found that, whilethere may be differences in detail, there is a fairly strong consensus on a set ofcharacteristics of basic research that help guide research management. thecommittee found it useful to assemble a list of the most commonly acceptedcharacteristics. the following is such a listñnot a set of criteria. basic researchin universities, for example, should accommodate the following:¥a spirit that seeks first and foremost to discover new fundamental understanding,¥flexibility to modify goals or approaches in the near term based ondiscovery,¥freedom to pursue unexpected paths opened by new insights,¥highrisk research questions with the potential for high payoff in futuredevelopments,¥minimum requirements for detailed reporting,¥open communications with other researchers and external peers,¥freedom to publish in journals and present at meetings without restrictionand permission,¥unrestricted involvement of students and postdoctoral candidates,¥no restrictions on the nationality of researchers, and¥stable funding for an agreed timetable to carry out the research.some characteristics that are not consistent with the purposes of basicresearch include the following:¥inquiry directed to addressing only specified applications,¥restricted dissemination of results,¥specific capabilities as research deliverables,¥short time horizons for reporting, and¥contractually restricted direction, method, research staff, and problemstatement.3the complete proposed definition, included in recommendation 1 in this section, is the currentdod definition of basic research, slightly revised to address what the committee believes is the mostserious problem with the current definition. rather than propose an entirely new definition that mighthave its own shortcomings, the committee decided that it would be better to recommend the minimumchange necessary to the current definition.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research11findingsfinding 1. department of defense basic research funds under 6.1 have not beendirected in significant amounts to support projects typical of 6.2 or 6.3 funding.finding 2. research managers are well motivated and generally successful infocusing 6.1 funding on the discovery of fundamental knowledge in support ofthe range of department of defense needs.finding 3. having specific applications in mind is not a useful criterion for discriminating between basic and applied research.finding 4. the set of attributes and desirable characteristics of basic researchwidely shared among experienced basic research managers can be beneficial indistinguishing between basic and applied research.recommendationsrecommendation 1. the department of defense should change its definition ofbasic research to the following:basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledgeor understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and has thepotential for broad, rather than specific, application. it includes allscientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing fundamental knowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical,engineering, environmental, social, and life sciences related to longterm national security needs. it is farsighted highpayoff research thatprovides the bases for technological progress. basic research may leadto (a) subsequent applied research and advance technology developments in defenserelated technologies, (b) new and improved militaryfunctional capabilities, or (c) the discovery of new knowledge that maylater lead to more focused advances in areas relevant to the departmentof defense.recommendation 2. the department of defense should include the followingattributes in its guidance to basic research managers and direct that these attributesbe used to characterize 6.1funded research: a spirit that seeks first and foremostto discover new fundamental understanding, flexibility to modify goals orapproaches in the near term based on discovery, freedom to pursue unexpectedpaths opened by new insights, highrisk research questions with the potential forhigh payoff in future developments, minimum requirements for detailed reporting, open communications with other researchers and external peers, freedom toassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12assessment of department of defense basic researchpublish in journals and present at meetings without restriction and permission,unrestricted involvement of students and postdoctoral candidates, no restrictionson the nationality of researchers, and stable funding for an agreed timetable tocarry out the research.basic research in the wider cycle of discovery andtechnology exploitationon the basis of anecdotal evidence received during its briefings and discussions, the committee notes that there would be a significant difference in the basicresearch program of the department of defense if a literal interpretation of thecurrent definition of basic research in the dod regulations were followed, ratherthan the actual practices common to successful multiple levels of research in thedod and elsewhere. a literal interpretation could lead to the perception that thelevels of research in 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, and so on, are sequentialñthat is, it could leadto the erroneous view that basic research (funded as 6.1) provides fundamentalknowledge that, when it is to be directed at specific applications, transitions toapplied research (funded by 6.2), which, when appropriate, transitions to systemdevelopment (funded by 6.3, 6.4, and so on). this erroneous sequential vision ofresearch is illustrated in figure 1.the linear process and sharp lines of demarcation illustrated in figure 1 mayhave correctly described the innovation process in the past and may serve someperceived accounting and other important needs in the present. however, thatvision is inconsistent with the best practices in the process of discovery and innovation that support the development of new capabilities to meet national securityneeds. the sequentialandseparate description projects the understanding thattechnology pushes system development, whereas in practice, system development often pulls science and technology. a more accurate depiction of effectiveresearch activity is shown in figure 2.as basic research, applied research, and system development proceed in parallel, continuous communication and interaction take place among the levels offigure 1erroneous sequential and separate vision of research.6.16.26.3, 6.4broadly defined specific application identifiedtechnology ready for system developmentassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research13figure 2a more accurate vision: parallel fundamental research.multiple 6.2 effortscontinued basic workmultiple fundamental research effortsin support of applicationssystem development with continuedfundamental research supportresearch. basic research enables the potential for broadly defined specific applications and continues to contribute until basic and applied research together bringthe technology to system development. there is no formal or symbolic handoverfrom basic research to applied research to system development. even in late stagesof system development and testing, issues arise requiring continued or renewedfundamental discovery and applied research. this occurrence is common in themanagement of industrial product development as well. product developmentprocesses are recognized to involve both reentrant loops to earlier stages andcyclic performance of multiple stages until the product requirements are fullymet.4 hence, figure 2 is consistent with current best practices in industrialresearch and development (r&d).findingsfinding 5. the basic research needs of the department of defense are complexand do not end when specific applications are identified.finding 6. the need for ongoing discovery from basic research can, and usuallydoes, continue through the applied research, system development, and systemoperation phases.recommendationrecommendation 3. the department of defense should abandon its view ofbasic research as being part of a sequential or linear process of research anddevelopment (in this view, the results of basic research are handed off to applied4steven c. wheelright and kim b. clark, revolutionizing product development: quantum leapsin speed, efficiency, and quality, new york: free press, 1992, ch. 7 (see especially exhibit 74) andch. 9 (see especially exhibit 93).assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14assessment of department of defense basic researchresearch, the results of applied research are handed off to advanced technologydevelopment, and so forth). instead, the dod should view basic research, appliedresearch, and the other phases of research as continuing activities that occur inparallel, with numerous supporting connections among them.multiple missions, motivations, andmanagement approachesdepartment of defense 6.1funded research consists of multiple types ofactivities, and the mix varies over time in response to multiple missions andmotivations. the dodõs needs for the fundamental discovery expected of 6.1funded research are complex and variable, and they will not fit a simple, onedimensional mold. one type of research need seeks the unfettered5 exploration ofa fundamentally new frontier of knowledge, which, if developed, could have profound influence on military capabilities. examples of such research include thatin nuclear physics in the 1930s and 1940s, in solidstate electronics in the 1950sand 1960s, in photonics in the 1960s to 1980s, and the concept and creation of thearpanet as an exploratory, robust communications system in the 1970s. suchhighrisk research, although enormously valuable, cannot be the only basicresearch, even though some part of it leads to new military capabilities that havehistorically been major sources of u.s. military superiority.another type of basic research is the development of standard reference data,such as the properties of materials and their relationship to materials processing.although this purpose may sound somewhat routine, such information is mandatory for engineering design in the development process and for the assessment ofthe technical feasibility and cost assessment of incorporating a material inweapons and support systems.still another type of basic research constructs exploratory systems or devicesthat enhance functionality or performance without regard to the design of a robust,costeffective version. this basic research is usually focused on a welldefined,often nearterm technology need that can be relevant to a range of applications.a consistent and important observation of this committee, based on its interviews, was the current deemphasis on the first type of basic research describedaboveñthe highrisk, highpayoff discoveryñand an increased focus on thesecond and third types. r&d managers find the latter two types of research easierto òjustify,ó given the range of welldefined current needs, whereas the benefitsof the first type are more uncertain in the early stages of research. yet, as noted,5the term òunfetteredó as used by the committee does not mean unfocused or totally unconstrained.it does mean not being tied to shortterm goals or specific applications. it is the kind of research thatis truly exploratory and that may or may not, by itself, produce exploitable results. still, in those casesin which it does not, it is likely to advance knowledge in areas that will have a longerterm payoff.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research15projects exhibiting the attributes of the first type create the breakthrough benefitsfor military capabilities. as is the case in private industry,6 the abnormally largepayoffs of a few òbig hitsó make defense basic research a productive investmentoverall.dod resources committed to basic research create and deliver a portfolio offuture valuable returns. it is useful to think of these investments as resulting inoptions which, if exercised, will lead to solutions for future military challenges asthey emerge.7 the outputs of basic research are not the options themselves, butrather the raw materials used to construct the options in 6.2 and 6.3 research.three classes of key research participants generate these raw materials ofbasic research: universities (receiving about 60 percent of 6.1 funds), governmentlaboratories (receiving about 30 percent), and commercial firms (about 10 percent). each class has its role in developing the resulting options. universitiescreate raw materials in the form of new knowledge and human competenciesacross broad areas of science and engineering. dod laboratories create newknowledge, but normally in focused areas of importance to dod applications.both dod laboratories and commercial firms have the responsibility of converting the raw materials from basic research into particular technology investmentoptions. the value created by activities conducted by each of these classes can becategorized into several (somewhat overlapping) types that include the following:¥expansion of the base of technical knowledge underlying the dodõs needs,¥creation of new technology options,¥creation of a cadre of technical experts to provide expert advice whenneeded,¥recruitment of skilled technical people into the dod for key positions, and¥insight into future technology potential and military applications.these are the values expected from 6.1 investments in basic research. atevery level of the r&d chain of command, the values expected should be communicated, so that the sponsors of 6.1 research have a clear and explicit understanding of the value delivered by their investment.the characteristics, which determine the value of the returns on investment,depend on the broad mission of the investing organization (e.g., the army, air6lewis m. branscomb and philip e. auerswald, 2001, taking technical risks: how innovators,executives and investors manage hightech risks, cambridge, mass.: mit press (see, especially,ch. 4); and f.m. scherer and dietmar harhoff, 2000, òtechnology policy for a world of skewdistributed outcomes,ó research policy 29 (45): 559566. available online at http://dx.doi.org/doi:10.1016/s00487333(99)00089x. last accessed on november 16, 2004.7peter boer, the valuation of technology: business and financial issues in r&d, new york,n.y.: wiley, 1999; johnathan mun, real options analysis: tools and techniques for valuingstrategic investments and decisions, new york, n.y.: wiley, 2002.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16assessment of department of defense basic researchforce, navy, darpa, and so on). the values expected from a particular investment reflect strongly the mission of the organization performing the research(e.g., a university, government laboratory, or commercial firm). the mix of valuescreated is different for a university than it is for a government laboratory. for auniversity, the discovery and acquisition of knowledge and the development ofskilled personnel are primary values, and they are the values delivered to thedod for its investment. research internal to the service laboratories is focusedon exploiting knowledge and human assets to meet military needs. in some casesthis work satisfies the òpulló from gaps in the knowledge of science where thedod has interests that have not attracted the attention of universities andprivatefirms.to serve the needs of the dod, the overall values expected from 6.1 investments must be acquired on multiple levels for each service, laboratory, andinvesting organization. and the values expected evolve continuously, reflectingthe dynamic character of the need for military capabilities. strategic planning,investment decisions, and retrospective evaluation of the results achieved basedon the values expected are the core of an effective management system. donewell, this leads to strong and sustained support for basic research at all levels ofthe dod because the investments are well aimed and managed to provide valuedreturns.although the committee believes that the variety of missions, motivations,and management approaches is essential to the range of basic research needs, it isconcerned about the clear trend toward increasing shorttimescale research insupport of nearterm applications at the expense of longterm, unfettered exploration of highrisk but potentially largepayoff areas. in one instance among many,the relevance of the proposed work includes potential application to òland vehiclecontrol, sensor networks, control of networks of smart mines and weaponplatforms. . . .ó8other indicators of this trend toward sharply focused research are illustratedby darpaõs intent in ensuring a direct connection between 6.1 funding and thespecifics of funded projects9 and by the comment of senior leadership in theoffice of naval research that òmuch if not alló of the 6.1 efforts will transition to6.2 programs.10 at the same time, the committee found in its site visits anddiscussions that many research managers and researchers at universities do notknow whether 6.1 or 6.2 funds support a particular research effort. this latter factsupports the argument that the ambiguity has not been a serious impediment toattracting university talent and managing their basic research. in any case, given8u.s. army research laboratory (arl), òfunding by organization during fy 2003,ó emailprovided by carolyn nash to james garcia, june 15, 2004.9committee visit to the defense advanced research projects agency, june 15, 2004, arlington, va.10committee visit to the office of naval research, june 21, 2004, arlington, va.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research17the current research limitations discussed in the next section of this report, thereasons for the trend described here are understood but, if it is continued over thelong term, it will not serve national security interests. the committee alsoobserved that there are other sources of funding for basic research in which themission does not drive specific focus as strongly as in the dod. the nationalscience foundation is one of the more notable such sources.the existence of significant differences in research management approacheswithin the military departments and defense agencies is consistent with the rangeof needs. the air force, for example, through its air force office of scientificresearch, manages all 6.1 funding in the air force, while the army, navy, anddarpa manage 6.1 and 6.2 in the same organizations. furthermore, the navymanages 6.1 funding centrally in the office of naval research (onr), while thearmy manages 6.1 funding across a number of research organizations. each ofthese approaches has strengths and weaknesses, and the committee found noreason to recommend one approach over another. instead, the committee concludes that the key to effective management of basic research lies in having acadre of experienced, empowered, and respected 6.1 program managers, supported by uniformly understanding senior leadership deeply committed to basicresearch. from presentations by dod research managers, the committee has someconcerns relative to the degree of emphasis on maintaining a strong cadre ofprogram managers. in some of the services, particularly at onr, substantialnumbers of positions have not been refilled when senior people have left. furthermore, on the basis of the extensive experience of committee members withresearch in the dod, the committee feels strongly that an enduring and genuinecommitment to basic research needs to be authentic and visible at the serviceacquisition executive and senior military levels.findingsfinding 7. included in the range of values expected from basic research in thedepartment of defense are (1) discovery arising from unfettered exploration,(2)focused research in response to identified dod technology needs, and(3) assessment of technical feasibility.finding 8. a recent trend in basic research emphasis within the department ofdefense has led to a reduced effort in unfettered exploration, which historicallyhas been a critical enabler of the most important breakthroughs in militarycapabilities.finding 9. generated by important nearterm department of defense needs andby limitations in available resources, there is significant pressure to focus dodbasic research more narrowly in support of more specific needs.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18assessment of department of defense basic researchfinding 10. universities, government laboratories, and industry have overlappingroles in basic research: universities primarily address the creation of broad newknowledge and human competencies, and department of defense laboratoriesand industry are more sharply focused on discovery tied more directly to identified dod needs.finding 11. a clear understanding of the value expected from basic researchacross its full range provides the most reliable assurance of longterm department of defense leadership support for the basic research.finding 12. a variety of management approaches in the department of defenseis appropriate to the widely diverse missions and motivations for basic research.finding 13. the key to effective management of basic research lies in havingexperienced and empowered program managers. current assignment policies andpriorities (such as leaving substantial numbers of program manager positionsunfilled) are not always consistent with this need, which might result in negativeconsequences for the effectiveness of basic research management in the long term.recommendationsrecommendation 4. the department of defense should set the balance of support within 6.1 basic research more in favor of unfettered exploration than ofresearch related to shortterm needs.recommendation 5. senior department of defense leadership should clearlycommunicate to research managers its understanding of the need for longtermexploration and discovery.recommendation 6. personnel policies should provide for the needed continuityof research management in order to ensure a cadre of experienced managerscapable of exercising the level of authority needed to effectively direct researchresources. further, in light of the reductions in positions reported to the committee on department of defense basic research, the department of defenseshould carefully examine the adequacy of the number of basic research management positions.the demand versus the supplythe reason for the pressure for more focused basic research at the presenttime is the intense pressure on all science and technology resources throughoutthe dod. over the past decade, the expectations of military forces have grown toinclude a far wider range of technologies in far greater depth. the u.s. nationalassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research19military strategy no longer calls for incrementally better capabilities than those ofa known adversary. instead it calls for dominance over a wide range of adversariesin a wide range of circumstances. innovation is central to underwriting the concepts and supporting the transformation needed to meet these objectives.11the expansion of the range and depth of the dodõs needs should expand therange of researchers and research relevant to those needs. for many reasons, thedod needs to attract the best and brightest university researchers. the demandfor innovation across a wide range of disciplines places a premium on attracting abroad range of research talent. university programs provide proven access to newresearch vistas, offering new options for meeting challenges. the university programs also give the dod ready access to eminent scientists and engineers whosetalents are needed to address scientific and technical challenges.to meet these expectations, the expanding range of technologies essential tothe dod mission includes new levels of interest in biological sciences, socialsciences, environmental sciences, nanotechnology, robotics, and informationtechnologies. innovations in these and other areas are as essential to the successof future operations as past innovations in technology were to the success ofearlier weapons systems.12 this circumstance places much greater demand onboth basic and applied research. at the same time, pressures on the defense budgetare intense with the added costs of transformation and current operations.figure 3 shows the change in annual dod 6.1 funding in real terms (constantdollars) from the 1993 level. the graph shows three lines corresponding to threedifferent sets of inflation indexes (used to convert thenyear dollar amounts tobaseyear, constantdollar amounts). the figure shows that dod basic researchfunding decreased in real terms from 1993 to 1998, then started to increase until2002, when it began to level out.as shown in figure 3, in the face of competing pressures, the 6.1 fundingdecrease in 2004 from what it was in 1993 was about 10 percent in real termsaccording to the inflation indexes used by the dod. the decrease in 2004 wassignificantly more in real terms if it is calculated using the consumer price index(cpi) or higher education price index (hepi) instead of the indexes used by thedod. using the cpi, the decrease was about 18 percent. using the higher education inflation index, it was about 27 percent. the most common concern expressed by the university community is itsperception of shrinking support for university research (corresponding to11office of the joint chiefs of staff, joint vision 2020, washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice, june 2000. available online at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/jvpub2.htm. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.12defense science board, defense science board letter report on dod science and technologyprogram, washington, d.c., august 2000; and dsb, report of the defense science board taskforce on future strategic strike forces, washington, d.c., february 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20assessment of department of defense basic researchfigure 3constantdollar change in annual department of defense 6.1 funding (aspercentage change from 1993 value).ð40ð35ð30ð25ð20ð15ð10ð50199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004yearpercentchangedepartmentofdefense(dod)highereducationpriceindex(hepi)consumerpriceindex(cpi)decreases in dod 6.1 funding shown in figure 3). this is broader than the 6.1funding issue. as noted above, many researchers do not know whether they arefunded by 6.1 or by 6.2, and some see an advantage in seeking 6.2 research toattract more substantial funding. university interest in 6.2 should also be welcomed by the dod and brings many of the same benefits to the dod as university involvement in 6.1. however, dod sponsors of 6.2 work are more likely toseek restrictionsñsuch as those on the foreign researcher involvement, therequirement of prepublication review, short time horizons and frequent reporting,and demands for specific findingsñthat are inconsistent with basic research, andespecially with basic research conducted in universities.university research is also affected by reductions in basic research fundingby the states and industry, resulting in more reliance by universities on federalfunds. industry also competes for these funds. a number of the committeeõs discussions and interviews described the aggregate effects of this environment.while the committee was unable to compile statistically significant data, it foundthe described effects to be credible. they include the following:assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research21¥the funding reduction in 6.1 research is particularly difficult for university engineering and for mathematical and computer sciences. nsf andthe dod are the largest funders of engineering, with the dod fundingabout 40 percent, with major concentrations in electrical and mechanicalengineering. in these two fields, the dod provides over half of the federalfunding. regarding computer science and mathematics basic researchinvestment, the dod funds 17 percent and the department of energyfunds 3 percent, while nsf funds 75 percent.13¥the historical increases in the costs of supporting a graduate student, withno increase in research funding in real terms, results in shorter performanceperiods and/or fewer graduate students involved in support for dod needs.¥university research managers indicated that the shrinking support for university research makes it difficult for younger faculty members interestedin working on dod research to get started in dod research.14 consequently, they turn their research attention elsewhere.¥with the increased reporting requirements, principal investigators andgraduate students spend more time preparing reports and less time onresearch.¥the dod is funding larger grants with industry personnel as the principalinvestigators.¥industry funding for basic research has decreased sharply, and many hightech firms are shifting basic research offshore.an additional limitation on attracting the best and the brightest to the basicresearch needs of the united states and the department of defense could be thelimitation of access to foreign students and scholars. issues identified during committee discussions and interviews that may have an adverse effect on attractingthe best research talent include the following:¥visa problems that limit the number of foreign students and postdoctoralcandidates who are admitted, or who even apply for graduate study in the13all percentages are calculated for 2001 based on data found in national science foundation,division of science resources statistics, federal funds for research and development, research touniversities and colleges by agency and field of science: fiscal years 19732003, nsf 04332,arlington, va., 2004. available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/nsf04332/start.htm. lastaccessed on december 2, 2004.14all researchers are affected by funding shortages. during periods of shrinking funding, youngerresearchers who want to get started in dod research are at a particular disadvantage relative to thosewho already have established, ongoing support relationships with dod research sponsors. withshrinking funds, dod sponsorsõ first priority is to continue and complete ongoing research. there islittle funding to start new research. limited funding also means that younger researchers must attractdod research sponsor support at the expense of support that would have otherwise been given tomore established researchers who have already been òproven.óassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22assessment of department of defense basic researchfirst place (the number of international graduate student applicationsacross the nation has decreased by about onethird from fall 2003 to fall2004);15¥contracts that prohibit foreign student and postdoctoral candidateparticipation;¥recent threats to the exemption of basic research from export controlsunder national security decision directive (nsdd) 189;¥possible restrictions placed on the use in research of equipment underexport control by foreign students and scholars; and¥restrictions on foreign student and scholar participation in subcontractsby industry to universities for basic research.the issue of limitations of access to foreign students and scholars is particularly critical to engineering and the physical, mathematical, and computer sciences.in 1999, 49 percent of all engineering ph.d. graduates and 47 percent of themathematics and computer science graduates were foreign nationals (not permanent residents).16 those numbers have increased since 1999, and today more than50 percent of the ph.d.õs in these areas are on temporary visas. the positiveaspect of this problem is that more than 50 percent of these ph.d.õs remain in theunited states.recognizing the important contributions of foreign nationals in basicresearch, president reagan signed nsdd189 in 1985, stating that the productsof fundamental research should remain unrestricted to the maximum extent possible, and that classification (rather than regulation such as export controls) is themechanism for control of information.17 the current bush administration affirmedthat the policy in nsdd189 òshall remain in effect, and we will ensure that thispolicy is followed.ó1815heath a. brown and peter d. syverson, findings from u.s. graduate schools on internationalgraduate student admissions trends, washington, d.c.: council of graduate schools, 2004. available online at http://www.cgsnet.org/pdf/sept04finalintladmissionssurveyreport.pdf. last accessedon november 16, 2004.16national science board, science and engineering indicatorsð2002, arlington, va: nationalscience foundation, 2002, nsb021. available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind02/start.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.17national security decision directive 189 was a response to the 1982 report scientific communication and national security. the recommendations of the panel on scientific communication andnational security, chaired by dale corson, of the committee on science, engineering, and publicpolicy, concluded that there is no practical way to restrict international scientific communicationwithout also disrupting domestic scientific information (scientific communication and nationalsecurity, washington d.c.: national academy press, 1982).18letter from national security advisor condoleeza rice to harold brown, council on the futureof technology and public policy, november 1, 2001.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic research23however, recent reports from the inspectors general of the dod19 and thedepartment of commerce20 appear to restrict foreign student and scholar participation in university basic research. as a result, the joint association of americanuniversities (aau)/council on governmental relations (cogr) task force onrestrictions on research awards and troublesome research clauses found inapril 2004 that òdespite affirmations of nsdd189 by the administration . . . ,troublesome clauses restricting publication and participation by foreign nationalsin research awards continue to be a significant problem for universities.ó21if this trend continues or expands, inadequate access to engineering talentwill be a strategic problem. the solution to the problem will, at best, cost theunited states dearly; at worst the problem could cost the nation preeminence invital areas of technical competence.the net effect of the pressures on resources and the dod responses to thosepressures is that the increase in research resources is not keeping pace with inflation, let alone with the expanded demand for innovation across a broader set ofdisciplines. it is not surprising, then, that the dod seeks increased focus in 6.1research that will support identified capability shortfalls. this emphasis may servethe dod in the near term, but it certainly will not accommodate the longtermview that is essential to meeting the needs of the department. in short, we areeating our proverbial seed corn.an additional concern to the committee is the lack of visibility on whathappens to 6.1 funding during budget year execution. the committee could findno source of comprehensive information on this subject.findingsfinding 14. the breadth and depth of the sciences and technologies essential tothe department of defense mission have greatly expanded over the past decade.19department of defense inspector general, report of the department of defense inspectorgeneral, exportcontrolled technology at contractor, university, and federally funded researchand development center facilities, d2004061, washington, d.c., march 25, 2004. available onlineat http://www.dodig.osd.mil/audit/reports/fy04/04061.pdf. last accessed on december 2, 2004.20department of commerce inspector general, report of the department of commerce inspectorgeneral, deemed export controls may not stop the transfer of sensitive technology to foreignnationals in the u.s., ipe16176, washington, d.c., march 31, 2004. available online at http://www.oig.doc.gov/oig/reports/2004/bisipe16176032004.pdf. last accessed on december 2, 2004.21association of american universities, council on government relations, restrictions onresearch awards: troublesome clauses: a report of the aau/cogr task force, julie t. norris,chair. available online at http://206.151.87.67/docs/troublesomeclauses.doc. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24assessment of department of defense basic researchfinding 15. in real terms the resources provided for department of defense basicresearch have declined substantially over the past decade.finding 16. the demand for new discovery argues for significantly increasedinvolvement of university researchers. yet some younger university researchersin the expanded fields of interest to the department of defense are often discouraged by the difficulty in acquiring research support from the department.finding 17. recent pressures to apply restrictions on participation and publication through export controls on department of defensesponsored research fundedin 6.1 both disqualify it from being considered basic research as defined bynational security decision directive 189 and threaten to change fundamentallythe open and public character of basic university research. this finding does notapply to research funded in 6.2.recommendationsrecommendation 7. the department of defense should redress the imbalancebetween its current basic research allocation, which has declined critically overthe past decade, and its need to better support the expanded areas of technology,the need for increased unfettered basic research, and the support of new researchers.recommendation 8. the department of defense should, through its funding andpolicies for university research, encourage increased participation by youngerresearchers as principal investigators.recommendation 9. to avoid weakening the long and fruitful partnershipbetween universities and department of defense agencies, dod agreements andsubagreements with universities for basic research should recognize nationalsecurity decision directive 189, the fundamental research exclusion providingfor the open and unrestricted character of basic research. dod program managersshould also explicitly retain the authority to negotiate export compliance clausesout of basic research grants to universities, on the basis of both the programõsspecific technologies and its objectives.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.27appendix abiographical sketches ofcommittee memberslarry d. welch (chair) (u.s. air force, retired) is senior fellow and immediatepast president of the institute for defense analyses (ida). prior to joining ida,he was the 12th chief of staff of the u.s. air force, from 1986 to 1990. as chief,he served as the senior uniformed air force officer responsible for the organization, training, and equipage of a combined active duty, guard, reserve, andcivilian force serving at locations in the united states and overseas. as a memberof the joint chiefs of staff, he served with the other service chiefs as the principalmilitary advisers to the secretary of defense, national security council, and thepresident. general welch received a b.a. degree in business administration fromthe university of maryland and an m.s. degree in international relations from thegeorge washington university. he also completed the armed forces staffcollege and national war college. he was recently awarded the eugene g.fubini award for 2003. this award recognizes highly significant contributions tothe department of defense in an advisory capacity over a sustained period oftime and the providing of expert advice on a diverse range of issues includingballistic missile defense, weapons of mass destruction threats, strategic roadmaps,operational plans, and various transformational technologies.c.d. (dan) mote, jr. (vice chair) (nae) began his tenure as president of theuniversity of maryland and as glenn l. martin institute professor of engineering in september 1998. prior to assuming the presidency at the university ofmaryland, dr. mote served on the university of california, berkeley, faculty for31 years. from 1991 to 1998, he was vice chancellor at the university of california,berkeley, and held an endowed chair in mechanical systems. prior to this, heserved as chair of the department of mechanical engineering at berkeley.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28assessment of department of defense basic researchdr.motes research lies in dynamic systems and biomechanics. internationallyrecognized for his research on the dynamics of gyroscopic systems and biomechanics, he has authored more than 300 publications; holds patents in theunited states, norway, finland, and sweden; and has mentored more than50ph.d. students. he received all his degrees in mechanical engineering fromthe university of california, berkeley. dr. mote has received numerous awardsand honors, including the humboldt prize awarded by the federal republic ofgermany. he is a recipient of the berkeley citation and was named distinguishedengineering alumnus. he is a member of the american academy of arts andsciences and the national academy of engineering and currently serves on itscouncil. he was elected to honorary membership in the american society ofmechanical engineers international and is a fellow of the acoustical society ofamerica and the american association for the advancement of science. heserves on the technology council of maryland and heads its technology transfer committee of the greater washington board of trade.albert j. baciocco, jr. (u.s. navy, retired) completed his career in the u.s.navy as a vice admiral in 1987 after 34 years of distinguished service, principallywithin the nuclear submarine force and directing the department of the navyresearch and technology development enterprise. a graduate of the u.s. navalacademy in 1953, where he received a bachelor of science degree in engineering, he subsequently completed graduatelevel studies in nuclear engineering aspart of his training for the naval nuclear propulsion program. he served as chiefof naval research from 1978 to 1981 and as the director of research, development and acquisition from 1983 to 1987. since retirement, admiral bacioccohas been engaged in a broad range of business and pro bono activities withindustry, government, and academe, including memberships on the naval studiesboard and the army science board and on the boards of directors of severalcorporations, both public and private. he is a trustee of the south carolinaresearch authority and serves as a director of the research foundations of theuniversity of south carolina and the medical university of south carolina. he isa member of tau beta pi, a national engineering honor society, and is a recipientof an honorary doctorate in engineering from florida atlantic university. admiralbaciocco has been designated a lifetime national associate of the nationalacademies by the council of the national academies of sciences.jack r. borsting is professor of business administration and dean emeritus,marshall school of business, university of southern california (usc). from1994 to september 2001, he served as the executive director of the center fortelecommunications management (ctm) at usc, as well as the morgan stanleyprofessor of business administration. from 1988 to 1994, dr. borsting was deanof uscs school of business administration and robert dockson professor ofbusiness administration. from 1983 to 1988, he was dean of the school of busiassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a29ness administration at the university of miami. previously, dr. borsting wasassistant secretary of defense (comptroller) for the u.s. department of defense,appointed by presidents jimmy carter and ronald reagan. as comptroller, heacted as chief financial officer for the secretary of defense, with overall responsibility for the departments information and budgeting systems, and was amember of the defense resources board. dr. borsting has served as provost andacademic dean at the naval postgraduate school in monterey, california, and hasbeen the visiting distinguished professor at oregon state university. he served2 years with the air force as project officer at the air force special weaponscenter in albuquerque, new mexico. dr. borsting is past president of the operations research society of america and the military operations research society(mors), and he is a fellow of the institute for operations research and themanagement sciences, the american association for the advancement of science,the international engineering consortium, and mors. he is past chair and amember of the board of directors of the los angeles orthopaedic hospital andserves on the advisory council of the electric power research institute.dr.borsting is a trustee of the rose hills foundation and metlife investors trustand also serves on a number of corporate boards. he received his m.a. and ph.d.degrees in statistics from the university of oregon and his b.a. degree in mathematics from oregon state university. he has published articles on operationsresearch and statistics.john m. deutch is an institute professor at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit). he served as director of central intelligence from may 1995 todecember 1996. from 1994 to 1995, he served as deputy secretary of defenseand as undersecretary of defense for acquisition and technology from 1993 to1994. dr. deutch has also served as director of energy research (1977 to 1979),acting assistant secretary for energy technology (1979), and undersecretary(1979 to 1980) in the u.s. department of energy. in addition, he has served onthe presidents nuclear safety oversight committee (1980 to 1981), the presidentscommission on strategic forces (1983), the white house science council (1985to 1989), the presidents intelligence advisory board (1990 to 1993), the presidentscommission on aviation safety and security (1996), and the presidents commission on reducing and protecting government secrecy (1996). he served as amember of the presidents committee of advisors on science and technology(1997 to 2001) and as chair of the presidents commission to assess the organization of the federal government to combat the proliferation of weapons ofmass destruction (1998 to 1999). dr. deutch serves as director for the followingpublicly held companies: citicorp, cummins, raytheon, and schlumberger ltd.he has been a member of the mit faculty since 1970 and has served as chair ofthe department of chemistry, dean of science, and provost. dr. deutch has published more than 150 technical publications in physical chemistry, as well asnumerous publications on technology, international security, and public policy issues.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30assessment of department of defense basic researchcharles b. duke (nas/nae) is vice president and senior research fellow in thexerox innovation group. prior to holding this position, he was deputy directorand chief scientist of the pacific northwest division of the battelle memorialinstitute and affiliate professor of physics at the university of washington. from1972 to 1988 he held various technical and management positions at the xeroxresearch laboratories in webster, new york, and was an adjunct professor ofphysics at the university of rochester. from 1969 to 1972, he was a professor ofphysics and member of the materials research laboratory and coordinated science laboratory at the university of illinois in urbana, following 6 years as astaff member of the general electric corporate research and developmentcenter in schenectady, new york. he received his ph.d. in physics fromprinceton university in 1963, following a b.s. degree summa cum laude withdistinction in mathematics from duke university in 1959. he is a fellow and anhonorary member of the american vacuum society, a fellow of the americanphysical society, a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers,a member of the materials research society, and a life member of sigma xi. in1977, dr. duke received the medard w. welch award in vacuum science andtechnology. he served as president of the american vacuum society in 1979, onits board of directors for 7years, and as a trustee from 2003 to 2005. in 1981 hewas named one of the isi 1000 internationally most cited scientists. from 1985 to1986 he served as founding editor in chief of the journal of materials research,and from 1992 to 2001 he was editor in chief of surface science and surfacescience letters. he was on the council of the materials research society for7years, serving as treasurer from 1991 to 1992. in 1993 he was elected to thenational academy of engineering and in 2001 to the national academy of sciences. during the period 1995 to 1999 he served on the council and executiveboard of the american physical society. from 1997 to 2000 he served as generalchair of the physical electronics conference. he served on the governing boardof the american institute of physics for 11 years and continues to serve on itscorporate associates advisory committee. he has written more than 350 paperson surface science, materials research, semiconductor physics, and the electronicstructure of molecular solids. he holds several patents on the use of feedback inthe design of digital imaging and printing systems, wrote a monograph on electrontunneling in solids, and has edited three books: surface science: the first thirtyyears (1994), color systems integration (1998), and frontiers in surface andinterface science (2002).john s. foster, jr. (nae) is chair of the board of gnk aerospace transparencysystems; chair of technology strategies and alliances; a member of the board ofwackenhut services, inc., and dianahitech; and consultant to northrop grummanspace technology, sikorsky aircraft corporation, ninesigma, and defensegroup, inc. he retired from trw as vice president for science and technology in1988 and continued to serve on the board of directors of trw from 1988 to 1994.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a31dr. foster was also director of defense research and engineering for thedepartment of defense, serving for 8 years. he began his career at the radioresearch laboratory of harvard university. he spent 2 years as an advisor to the15th air force on radar and radar countermeasures in the mediterranean theaterof operations, and the two summers with the national research council of chalkriver, ontario. dr. foster became a division leader in experimental physics at thelawrence livermore national laboratory. he was promoted to associate director,and 3 years later was promoted to director of the livermore laboratory and associate director of the lawrence berkeley national laboratory. he received hisb.s. degree from mcgill university, montreal, in 1948. he received his ph.d. inphysics from the university of california, berkeley, in 1952.mary l. good (nae) is well known for her distinguished career. she has heldmany highlevel positions in academia, industry, and government. the 143,000member american association for the advancement of science (aaas) electeddr. good to serve as its president following the presidency of stephen jay gould.dr. good was the first female winner of the aaass philip hogue abelson prizefor outstanding achievements in education, research and development management, and public service, spanning the academic, industrial, and governmentsectors. two of her more than 27 awards include the national science foundationdistinguished service medal and the american chemical society priestley medal.dr. good is currently the dean of the donaghey college of information scienceand systems engineering at the university of arkansas, little rock. in addition,she serves as the managing partner of venture capital investors, llc, in littlerock. dr. good was voted one of arkansass top 100 women by arkansas business. during the terms of presidents carter and reagan, dr. good served on thenational science board and chaired it from 1988 to 1991. she was a member ofpresident george h.w. bushs council of advisors on science and technology.dr. good was the undersecretary for technology in the u.s. department of commerce and technology during president clintons first term. this agency assistsamerican industry to advance productivity, technology, and innovation in orderto make u.s. companies more competitive in the global market.robert j. hermann (nae) is currently a senior partner of global technologypartners, llc, a bostonbased investment firm, specializing in investments intechnology, defense, aerospace, and related businesses worldwide. in 1998,dr.hermann retired from united technologies corporation (utc), where hewas senior vice president, science and technology. prior to joining utc in 1982,dr.hermann served 20 years with the national security agency, with assignments in research and development, operations, and nato. in 1977, he wasappointed principal deputy assistant secretary of defense for communications,command, control, and intelligence. in 1979, he was named assistant secretaryof the air force for research, development, and logistics, and in parallel he wasassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32assessment of department of defense basic researchdirector of the national reconnaissance office. he received b.s., m.s., and ph.d.degrees in electrical engineering from iowa state university. he is currently amember of the following organizations: the defense science board, the nationalacademy of engineering, and the board of directors of orbital sciences corporation. his prior organizational memberships include the national society of professional engineers industry advisory group; chair of the visiting committee onadvanced technology of the national institute of standards and technology;board of trustees for the hartford graduate center; chair, cochair, nationalresearch council commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applications; the presidents foreign intelligence advisory board; the commission onthe roles and missions of the u.s. intelligence activities; chair, board of directorsof the american national standards institute; chair, board of directors of draperlaboratory; and board of directors, condor systems, inc.james c. mcgroddy (nae) retired from ibm corporation as a senior vicepresident for research at the end of 1996, after leading its research laboratoriesfrom 1989 to 1995. during his tenure, which spanned the period of ibms mostdifficult challenges, he led a major restructuring of its research efforts, building amodel and management system that is now widely emulated. one of the measuresof success was the creation during this period of two new laboratories, one inbeijing and one in austin, texas. his leadership was recognized by beingawarded the frederik philips medal of the ieee and the george pake award ofthe american physical society. he is currently an advisor to several governmentagencies, a participant in a number of national research council groups, and anadvisor and a visitor at several universities in the united states and europe.dr.mcgroddy is the chair of the board of miqs, a company providing clinicalinformation systems and electronic medical record capability aimed at improvingthe quality and costeffectiveness of the care of the chronically ill. as chair of theboard of the stellaris healthcare network in 2000 and 2001 and as former chairof the board of phelps memorial hospital center, he has been heavily involved inthe restructuring of the local health care delivery system in westchester county.he is a director of paxar, inc., a new york stock exchange traded company, andof advanced networks and services, inc. he is also a trustee of his alma mater,st. josephs university in philadelphia, as well as a member of the advisoryboards of a number of startup firms and university departments. dr. mcgroddyoriginally joined ibm in its research division in 1965 after receiving a ph.d. inphysics from the university of maryland. he earned his b.s. in physics fromst.josephs university in philadelphia in 1958. in his first years at ibm hefocused on research in solidstate physics and electronic devices, and as a resultof achievements in these areas was named a fellow of both the institute ofelectrical and electronics engineers and of the american physical society. in the19701971 academic year, he was a visiting professor of physics at the danish technical university. returning to ibm, he served in a number of management positionsassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a33in research, development, and manufacturing before being named ibms director ofresearch in 1989. he is a member of the national academy of engineering.c. bradley moore (nae) is a dynamic leader and internationally recognizedchemist. he went to northwestern university in 2003 from the ohio stateuniversity where, as vice president for research and president of the ohio stateuniversity research foundation, he spearheaded dramatic increases in researchgrowth. improvements in the universitys research support services and promotion of multidisciplinary programs across the campus were vital hallmarks ofdr.moores tenure at ohio state. while promoting growth and innovation asvice president for research, he was also a distinguished professor of mathematicaland physical sciences and a professor of chemistry at ohio state, where hedirected an active research program on molecular energy transfer, chemicalreaction dynamics, photochemistry, and spectroscopy. a member of the facultyat the university of california, berkeley, from 1963 to 2000, dr. moore alsoserved as chair of the chemistry department and dean of the college of chemistry.in addition, he was a faculty senior scientist at the lawrence berkeley nationallaboratory from 1974 to 2000, serving as director of its chemical sciencesdivision from 1998 to 2000. dr. moore received his undergraduate degree inchemistry from harvard university in 1960 and his ph.d. in chemistry from theuniversity of california, berkeley, in 1963.james g. oõconnor (nae) is the former president of pratt & whitney. his 34year career there started in engineering and included key assignments in customersupport, program management, manufacturing operations, and general management. he was involved in both military and commercial programs and businesses.his engineering assignments included development and certification of key commercial engines for the boeing and douglas aircraft companies. in early 1981,dr. oconnor was named vice president of pratt & whitney commercial enginebusiness in east hartford, connecticut, responsible for all product support. in1982, he joined pratt & whitneys government engine business in west palmbeach, florida, as senior vice president for the f100 engine program. he wasappointed executive vice president of the government engine business in january 1984 and assumed the post of president in march 1985. in this position he wasresponsible for all aspects of pratts $2 billion business with the u.s. governmentand 15 foreign governments. in october 1987, dr. oconnor returned to easthartford and was named vice president of manufacturing operations. in 1989 hebecame the chief executive for pratt & whitney. he was responsible for all of theaircraft engine manufacturers $7 billion operations. he retired in 1993. he iscurrently chair of the board of trustees of embryriddle aeronautical university.in addition, he is a member of the national academy of engineering, the connecticut academy of science and engineering, the presidents advisory councilat clemson university, and the wings club.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34assessment of department of defense basic researchrichard c. powell is currently vice president for research and graduate studiesand professor at the optical sciences center, university of arizona. he receivedhis b.s. in physics in 1962 from the u.s. naval academy, annapolis, maryland;his ph.d. and m.s. in physics in 1964 and 1967 from arizona state university,tempe. from 1964 to 1968, dr. powell was a staff scientist at the air forcecambridge research laboratories in bedford, massachusetts, where he workedon the development of new solidstate laser materials and radiation damage insemiconductor devices. between 1968 and 1971, dr. powell was a staff scientistat the sandia national laboratories in albuquerque, new mexico, where hisresearch involved exciton dynamics in organic crystals and polymers and saturation effects in plastic scintillators. in 1971, dr. powell moved to oklahoma stateuniversity in stillwater, where he was a professor in the physics department anddirector of the center for laser research until 1992. he also served as head of thephysics department and associate dean of the college of arts and sciences.during that period, his research involved laser spectroscopy of solids for use inlasers and nonlinear optics applications. in addition, he participated in severalprojects involving laser applications in medicine. dr. powell also had severaltemporary assignments, including positions at motorola semiconductor division,the california institute of technology, and the lawrence livermore nationallaboratory. during his scientific career, he has published more than 200 articles,two books, and participated in many national and international conferences.fawwaz t. ulaby (nae) is the vice president for research and the r. jamisonand betty williams professor of electrical engineering and computer science atthe university of michigan. he is a member of the national academy of engineering and serves on several national scientific boards and commissions. sincejoining the university of michigan faculty in 1984, professor ulaby has beendirecting large, interdisciplinary national aeronautics and space administration(nasa) projects aimed at the development of highresolution satellite radarsensors for mapping earths terrestrial environment. he also served as the founding director of the nasafunded center for space terahertz technology. thecenters research focuses on the development of microelectronic devices andcircuits that operate at wavelengths intermediate between the infrared and themicrowave regions of the electromagnetic spectrum. professor ulaby has authoredeight books, contributed chapters to several others, and published more than 600scientific papers and reports. his recent undergraduate textbook, applied electromagnetics, published by prenticehall in january 1997, has been adopted by some80 universities across the united states. professor ulaby is the recipient ofnumerous awards, including the eta kappa nu association c. holmes macdonaldaward as an outstanding electrical engineering professor in the united statesof america for 1975, the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee)centennial medal (1984), the american society of photogrammetrys presidential citation for meritorious service (1984), the kuwait prize in applied scienceassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a35(1986), the nasa group achievement award (1990), the university ofmichigans distinguished faculty achievement award (1991), the university ofmichigan regents medal for meritorious service (1996), the ieee millenniummedal for outstanding achievements and contributions (2000), and the 2001ieee electromagnetics award. over his 30year academic career, professorulaby has supervised more than 100 m.s. and ph.d. graduate students and servedas principal investigator on about $40 million in research grants and contracts. injanuary 2001 he assumed the position of editor in chief of the ieee proceedings,the most highly cited journal in electrical and computer engineering. in 2002 hereceived the william pecora award, a joint recognition by nasa and the department of the interior.barbara a. wilson is currently a program manager in the solar system exploration programs directorate at the nasa jet propulsion laboratory (jpl), whereshe manages the development of communications, computing, electronics, andimaging technologies for nasas office of exploration systems. from 2001 to2003, she served as the chief technologist of the air force research laboratoryunder an intergovernmental personnel act loan agreement between nasa andthe air force, and as jpls chief technologist from 1999 to 2001. after earningher ph.d. in physics from the university of wisconsinmadison in 1978, sheworked in basic research at at&t bell laboratories, with a focus on quantumstructures. her research contributions were recognized with an at&t exceptional contribution award. she moved to jpl in 1988, where she has also servedas director of the center for space microelectronics, as manager of the microdeviceslaboratory, and as deputy manager and chief technologist of nasas newmillennium flight validation program. her leadership in the new millenniumprogram earned her both jpl and nasa achievement awards. dr. wilson is afellow of the american physical society (aps) and former general councilor andmember of the aps executive board. she was appointed to the internationalacademy of astronautics in 2000. she is currently serving her second term on theair force scientific advisory board (sab). as an sab member, she has participated in a number of u.s. air force studies and was appointed science and technology chair of the sab in 2004. in this capacity she will lead the external reviewof the air force science and technology programs. dr. wilson has also served onnumerous other national science foundation, national research council, andnasa panels.johnnie e. wilson (u.s. army, retired) is the president and chief operatingofficer of dimensions international, inc. (di), an information technology company specializing in information integration and providing solutions for theacquisition, analysis, management, and transformation of data into information.his primary responsibility is on the program side, providing oversight to the technical directors and program managers. he assists them in managing, marketing,assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36assessment of department of defense basic researchand expanding their operations. his extensive network, both military and civilian,is a great asset in maturing opportunities that will enhance dis growth and development. general wilson entered the army in august 1961 as an enlisted soldier,attaining the rank of ssg before attending officer candidate school (ocs). oncompletion of ocs in 1967, he was commissioned a second lieutenant in theordnance corps. he was awarded a b.s. degree in business administration fromthe university of nebraska at omaha. general wilson also holds an m.s. degreein logistics management from the florida institute of technology. additionally,his military education includes completion of the ordnance officer basic andadvanced courses, the army command and general staff college, and theindustrial college of the armed forces. general wilson has held a wide varietyof important command and staff positions, culminating in his last assignment asthe commanding general, u.s. army materiel command (amc), an organization of 80,000 people serving throughout the world. as the commanding generalof amc, he was responsible for the armys wholesale logistics, acquisition, andtechnology generation operations. as a result, general wilson possesses extensive knowledge in supplychain management, acquisition reform, and strategiclogistics planning. general wilson also served as the deputy commanding general,21st theater army area command (taacom), the armys largest and mostdiverse logistics unit. based on his wide experience with leading soldiers, generalwilson was selected to command the ordnance center and school responsiblefor the training and professional development of thousands of soldiers, noncommissioned officers, and officers every year. following this successful assignment, he served as the chief of staff, amc, where he was responsible for resourceand personnel management for a workforce with more than 80,000 military andcivilian members. from 1994 to 1996, general wilson served as the deputy chiefof staff for logistics, department of the army, where he was responsible forworldwide logistics.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.37appendix bguest speaker presentationsto the committeethe committee on department of defense basic research conducted twomeetings in may 2004 at which it received presentations by invited speakers. thetitles of the presentations and speakers are listed in this appendix. (see appendix cfor a list of committee interviews and site visits to department of defense [dod]basic research organizations and universities.)the committee devoted its first meeting, on may 56, 2004, to understandingthe dod definitions for basic and applied research and the characteristics associated with fundamental research and to gathering data and information relevant tothe study from representatives of the research community.the second meeting, held on may 2627, 2004, was devoted to reviewing thedodõs basic research program. presentations were made by representatives ofthe army, navy, air force, defense advanced research projects agency,defense threat reduction agency, and the office of the secretary of defense.meeting 1, washington, d.c., may 56, 2004òdepartment of defense s&t management definitions/policies regarding basicresearchówilliam o. berry, director for basic researchoffice of the director of defense research and engineeringòbackground leading to congressional taskingócarolyn hanna, special assistant for science and technology community affairsdepartment of homeland securityformer staff member, senate committee on armed servicesassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38assessment of department of defense basic researchòdepartment of defense basic research funding: some personal experiencesand reflectionsógreg voth, professor of chemistryuniversity of utahchair, public policy committee, american chemical societyòsome omb thoughts on proper counting of department of defense basicresearchógreg henry, senior program examiner and operations research analystnational security division, office management and budgetòthe federal investment in defense researchókei koizumi, director of research and development budget and policy programamerican association for the advancement of scienceòassociation of american universities insightsókenneth f. galloway, dean of the school of engineering and professor ofelectrical engineeringvanderbilt universityòdod comptroller definitions/policies regarding basic researchócaral spangler, director for investmentoffice of the under secretary of defense (comptroller)òbasic research: the leading edge of science and engineeringómary e. clutter, assistant director for biological sciencesnational science foundationòbasic research and the office of science insightsówalt stevens, director, chemical sciences, geosciences, and biosciences division,office of sciencedepartment of energyòdepartment of defense sponsored basic researchóclaude r. canizares, associate provost, and bruno rossi professor of experimental physicsmassachusetts institute of technologyòuniversity of southern california insight on basic researchócornelius w. sullivan, vice provost for research and professor of biologicalsciencesuniversity of southern californiaassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b39òdepartment of defense research and the historically black college and universities community: challenges and opportunitiesóorlando taylor, vice provost for research, dean, graduate school, and professor,school of communicationshoward universityò6.1ð6.x?órobert a. frosch, senior research associatebelfer center for science and international affairsharvard universityò6.1, 6.2, 6.3? the end of ôr&dõóphilip auerswald, director, center for science and public policy, and assistantprofessor of public policygeorge mason universityòwhat dod wants to get from studyówilliam o. berry, director of basic researchoffice of the director of defense research and engineeringmeeting 2, washington, d.c., may 2627, 2004òarmy basic research . . . accelerating the pace of transformationójohn parmentola, director for research and laboratory managementoffice of the assistant secretary of the army for acquisition, logistics, andtechnologyòarmy research laboratory basic researchójohn pellegrino, acting deputy directorarmy research laboratoryòarmy medical research and materiel command basic research overviewócol. james romano, deputy commanderarmy medical research and materiel commandòarmy research institute for the behavioral sciences basic researchójonathan kaplan, program managerarmy research institute for the behavioral sciencesòarmy corps of engineers: engineer research and development center basicresearchórick morrison, deputy directorarmy corps of engineers, engineer research and development centerassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40assessment of department of defense basic researchòbasic research at army research, development and engineering centersórobin keesee, acting deputy directorarmy research, development, and engineering commandòair force basic researchólyle schwartz, directorair force office of scientific researchòbasic research at air force research laboratory technical directoratesóbarry farmer, chief scientist, materials and manufacturing directorateair force research laboratoryònavy s&t overview and introductionóstephen lubard, technical director, science and technologyoffice of naval researchònaval basic researchñoffice of naval research contributionsójames murday, chief scientistoffice of naval researchònaval basic researchñnaval research laboratory contributionsóbhakta rath, associate director of research, materials science, and componenttechnology directoratenaval research laboratoryònaval s&tñwarfare center contributionsórobert kavetsky, warfare center liaison to office of naval researchoffice of naval researchòdefense experimental program to stimulate competitive researchókeith thompson, manager, defense experimental program to stimulate competitive researchoffice of the director of defense research and engineeringòoverview of darpa basic research programósteven g. wax, director, defense sciences officedefense advanced research projects agencyòchemical and biological defense program basic researchócharles gallaway, director, chemical and biological defensedefense threat reduction agencyassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.41appendix cdod basic research organizationsand universities:committee site visits and/or interviewsthe site visits and interviews conducted by the committee on department ofdefense basic research included discussions with approximately 140 peoplefrom 7 department of defense (dod) research organizations and 14 universities,as listed in this appendix. (see appendix b for a list of guest speaker presentations to the committee at its two meetings in washington, d.c., in may 2004.)dod basic research organizations visitedthe committee conducted site visits at the seven (including the armyresearch office) dod basic research organizations listed below. committeemembers met with key organization leadership in addition to one or more groupsof researchers and/or research managers at each site. discussion topics includedthe dod definition of basic research; the perceptions of those in leadershippositions, researchers, and managers about how well their research fits this definition and about characteristics associated with basic research; trends; concerns;and suggested improvements. the basic research organizations visited are these:¥air force office of scientific research (afosr)arlington, virginia¥air force research laboratory (afrl)wrightpatterson air force base, ohio(included video conference participation by several afrl directoratesacross the united states)assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42assessment of department of defense basic research¥army research laboratory (arl)adelphi, maryland(included participants from army research office [aro], researchtriangle park, north carolina)¥defense advanced research projects agency (darpa)arlington, virginia¥naval research laboratory (nrl)washington, d.c.¥office of naval research (onr)arlington, virginiavisits and/or interviews at universitiescommittee members made site visits and/or conducted interviews withresearch leaders of 14 universities. each visit included a meeting with the keyperson responsible for research at the university, as well as one or more groups ofdodsponsored researchers. in addition to the same topics addressed during thedod site visits, these discussions addressed the importance of dod researchfunding to the university research enterprise. (these same topics were discussedduring interviews of university research leaders who were not visited in person.)the 14 universities are these:¥cornell universityithaca, new york¥massachusetts institute of technology institute for soldier nanotechnologiescambridge¥north carolina state universityraleigh¥northwestern universityevanston, illinois¥ohio state universitycolumbus¥pennsylvania state universitystate collegeassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c43¥university of arizonatucson¥university of california, los angeles¥university of california, santa barbara¥university of michiganann arbor¥university of new mexicoalbuquerque¥university of southern california information sciences institutelos angeles¥university of texas at austin¥university of washingtonseattleassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44appendix ddefinitions of basic, applied, andfundamental researchthis appendix contains definitions of basic, applied, and fundamentalresearch quoted from various sources.basic researchdod financial management regulation, dod 7000.14r, vol. 2b, ch. 5:basic research is systematic study directed toward greater knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable factswithout specific applications towards processes or products in mind. it includesall scientific study and experimentation directed toward increasing fundamentalknowledge and understanding in those fields of the physical, engineering, environmental, and life sciences related to longterm national security needs. it isfarsighted high payoff research that provides the basis for technological progress.basic research may lead to: (a) subsequent applied research and advanced technology developments in defenserelated technologies, and (b) new and improvedmilitary functional capabilities in areas such as communications, detection, tracking, surveillance, propulsion, mobility, guidance and control, navigation, energyconversion, materials and structures, and personnel support. program elementsin this category involve premilestone a efforts. available online at http://www.dod.mil/comptroller/fmr/02b/chapter05.pdf. last accessed on november16, 2004.the objective of basic research is to gain more comprehensive knowledge orunderstanding of the subject under study, without specific applications in mind.in industry, basic research is defined as research that advances scientific knowledge but does not have specific immediate commercial objectives, although itassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d45may be in fields of present or potential commercial interest. [national sciencefoundation, directorate for social, behavioral & economic sciences, us definitions for resource surveys, 1996.] available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind96/ch4defn.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.scientific efforts that seek to gain more comprehensive knowledge or understanding of the subject under study, without specific applications or commercialobjectives in mind. available online at http://energytrends.pnl.gov/glosnz.htm.last accessed on november 16, 2004.basic research analyzes properties, structures, and relationships toward formulating and testing hypotheses, theories, or laws. as used in this survey, industrialbasic research is the pursuit of new scientific knowledge or understanding thatdoes not have specific immediate commercial objectives, although it may be infields of present or potential commercial interest. available online at http://caspar.nsf.gov/nsf/srs/indrd/glossary.htm. last accessed on november 16,2004.the investigation of the natural phenomena as contrasted with applied research.available online at http://www.onlineethics.org/glossary.html. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.systematic study directed toward greater knowledge or understanding of thefundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable facts without specificapplications towards processes or products in mind. [omb circular a11, june1996.] see conduct of research and development. available online at https://radius.rand.org/radius/demo/glossary.html. last accessed on november 16,2004.fundamental scientific inquiry to understand the unknown and contribute toimproved general knowledge (cf. with applied research). available online athttp://www.ipmrc.com/lib/glossary.shtml. last accessed on november 16, 2004.research done to further knowledge for knowledgeõs sake. available online athttp://www.modernhumanorigins.com/b.html. last accessed on november 16,2004.fundamental research; it often produces a wide range of applications, but theoutput of basic research itself usually is not of direct commercial value. theoutput is knowledge, rather than a product; it typically cannot be patented. available online at http://www.wwnorton.com/stiglitzwalsh/economics/glossary.htm.last accessed on november 16, 2004.research aimed at expanding knowledge rather than solving a specific, pragmaticproblem. available online at https://www.quirks.com/resources/glossary.asp.last accessed on november 16, 2004.focused, systematic study and investigation undertaken to discover new knowledge or interpretations and establish facts or principles in a particular field. seeresearch. available online at http://www.siu.edu/orda/general/glossary.html.last accessed on november 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46assessment of department of defense basic researchfundamental research; it often produces a wide range of applications, but theoutput of basic research itself usually is not of direct commercial value; theoutput is knowledge, rather than a product; the output of basic research typicallycannot be patented. available online at http://wellspring.isinj.com/sample/econ/micro/glossb.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.research emphasizing the solution of theoretical problems. binomial probabilitydistribution: the probabilities associated with every possible outcome of anexperiment involving n independent trials and a success or failure on each trial.bivariate analysis: the analysis of relationships among pairs of variables.available online at http://www.prm.nau.edu/prm447/definitions.htm. lastaccessed on november 16, 2004.basic research is research undertaken to advance the knowledge of methodologies and techniques of research. (compare applied research.) available online athttp://www.rigneyassoc.com/glossary.html. last accessed on november 16, 2004.research that is directed at the growth of scientific knowledge, without anynearterm expectations of commercial applications. available online at http://highered.mcgrawhill.com/sites/0072443901/studentview0/chapter4/glossary.html. last accessed on november 16, 2004.research which adds something new to the body of knowledge of a particular field.available online at http://researchoffice.astate.edu/glossaryofproposalterms.htm.last accessed on november 16, 2004.designed to test and refine theory. the purpose is to increase our knowledgeabout communication phenomena by testing, refining, and elaborating theory.available online at http://www.uky.edu/~drlane/cohort/define.htm. lastaccessed on november 16, 2004.the purpose is to increase knowledge without concern for practical application.available online at http://www.ied.edu.hk/csnsie/ar/chap1/1glossary.htm. lastaccessed on november 16, 2004.in basic research the objective of the sponsoring agency is to gain more complete knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena andof observable facts, without specific applications toward processes or productsin mind. available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/fedfunds/glossary/def.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.nsf definition of basic research: basic research is defined as systematicstudy directed toward fuller knowledge or understanding of the fundamentalaspects of phenomena and of observable facts without specific applicationstowards processes or products in mind. (in bill berryõs presentation, meeting 1,committee on department of defense basic research.)in basic research the objective of the sponsoring agency is to gain fuller knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspects of phenomena and of observable facts without specific applications toward processes or products in mind.available online at http://www.aaas.org/spp/cstc/pne/pubs/regrep/alaska/appendices.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d47omb (circular a11, 2003): basic research is defined as systematic studydirected toward fuller knowledge or understanding of the fundamental aspectsof phenomena and of observable facts without specific applications towards processes or products in mind.research directed toward the increase of knowledge, the primary aim being agreater knowledge or understanding of the subject under study. available onlineat http://usmilitary.about.com/library/glossary/b/bldef00823.htm. last accessedon november 16, 2004.commission of the european communities: while there is no strict,unanimously accepted definition of what constitutes basic research, in practice one can identify and distinguish from other types of research, thosewhich are carried out with no direct link to a given application and, if notexclusively, in any case and above all with the objective of progressingknowledge. available online at http://europa.eu.int/comm/research/press/2004/pdf/acteenversionfinal15janv04.pdf. last accessed on november 16,2004.applied researchomb (circular a11, 2003): applied research is defined as systematic study togain knowledge or understanding necessary to determine the means by which arecognized and specific need may be met.the investigation of some phenomena to discover whether its properties areappropriate to a particular need or want. in contrast, basic research investigatesphenomena without reference to particular human needs and wants. availableonline at http://www.onlineethics.org/glossary.html. last accessed on november 16, 2004.aimed at gaining knowledge or understanding to determine the means by whicha specific, recognized need may be met. in industry, applied research includesinvestigations oriented to discovering new scientific knowledge that has specificcommercial objectives with respect to products, processes, or services. [nationalscience foundation, directorate for social, behavioral & economic sciences,us definitions for resource surveys, 1996.] available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/seind96/ch4defn.htm. last accessed on november 16,2004.applied research is undertaken either to determine possible uses for the findingsof basic research or to determine new ways of achieving some specific, predetermined objectives. as used in this survey, industrial applied research is investigation that may use findings of basic research toward discovering new scientificknowledge that has specific commercial objectives with respect to new products,services, processes, or methods. available online at http://www.caspar.nsf.gov/nsf/srs/indrd/glossary.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48assessment of department of defense basic researchinquiry aimed at gaining the knowledge or understanding to meet a specific,recognized need of a practical nature, especially needs to achieve specific commercial objectives with respect to products, processes, or services. availableonline at http://energytrends.pnl.gov/glosnz.htm. last accessed on november16, 2004.any research which is used to answer a specific question, determine why something failed or succeeded, solve a specific, pragmatic problem, or to gain betterunderstanding. available online at https://www.quirks.com/resources/glossary.asp.last accessed on november 16, 2004.focused, systematic study and investigation undertaken to discover the applications and uses of theories, knowledge, and principles in actual work or in solvingproblems. see research. available online at http://www.siu.edu/orda/general/glossary.html. last accessed on november 16, 2004.systematic study to gain knowledge or understanding necessary to determinethe means by which a recognized and specific need may be met. [omb circulara11, june 1996.] see also conduct of research and development.available online at https://radius.rand.org/radius/demo/glossary.html. lastaccessed on november 16, 2004.the investigation of some phenomena to discover whether its properties areappropriate to a particular need or want. in contrast, basic research investigatesphenomena without reference to particular human needs and wants.available online at http://www.unmc.edu/ethics/words.html. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.is designed to solve practical problems of the modern world, rather than to acquireknowledge for knowledgeõs sake. available online at http://ventureline.com/glossarya.asp. last accessed on november 16, 2004.research designed for the purpose of producing results that may be applied toreal world situations. topic areas: accountability and evaluation. availableonline at http://www.nonprofitbasics.org/searchentiresite.aspx?source=2&sitesearchtext=research&pw=no&previousword=research&c0=178&c4=1&c3=4&c5=36&c6=18&c1=92&c2=1. last accessed on november 16, 2004.research that studies the relationship or applicability for theories or principlesof a particular field to a particular problem. available online at http://researchoffice.astate.edu/glossaryofproposalterms.htm. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.research done with the intent of applying results to a specific problem. evaluation is a form of applied research. this can be conducted as part of an actionresearch approach. available online at http://www.sachru.sa.gov.au/pew/glossary.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.research aimed at improving the quality of life and solving practical problems.available online at http://highered.mcgrawhill.com/sites/0072358327/studentview0/chapter1/glossary.html. last accessed on november 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d49the aim is to address an immediate problem. the purpose is to try ideas inthe context of educational (classroom) settings. available online at http://www.ied.edu.hk/csnsie/ar/chap1/1glossary.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.applied research is that effort that (1) normally follows basic research, but maynot be severable from the related basic research, (2) attempts to determine andexploit the potential of scientific discoveries or improvements in technology,materials, processes, methods, devices, or techniques, and (3) attempts toadvance the state of the art. applied research does not include efforts whoseprincipal aim is design, development, or test of specific items or services to beconsidered for sale; these efforts are within the definition of the term development. available online at http://wwwagecon.ag.ohiostate.edu/class/aede601/glossary/glossa.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.conducted to solve particular problems or answer specific questions.available online at http://www.nelson.com/nelson/hmcanada/ob/glossary.html.last accessed on november 16, 2004.in applied research the objective of the sponsoring agency is to gain knowledgeor understanding necessary to determine how a recognized need may be met.available online at http://www.nsf.gov/sbe/srs/sfsucni/method99/help/glossary.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.utilizing pure research to develop realworld products. available online at http://www.investorwords.com/236/appliedresearch.html. last accessed on november 16, 2004.as opposed to basic research, applied research is the type of research which isconducted to solve practical problems, find cures to illnesses, develop therapieswith the purpose of helping people, and other similar types of practical problemsolving research. available online at http://www.alleydog.com/glossary/definition.cfm?term=applied%20research. last accessed on november 16, 2004.fundamental researchnational security decision directives: òfundamental researchó means basicand applied research in science and engineering, the results of which ordinarilyare published and shared broadly within the scientific community, as distinguished from proprietary research and from industrial development, design, production, and product utilization, the results of which ordinarily are restricted forproprietary or national security reasons. available online at http://www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/nsdd/nsdd189.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.fundamental research is basic and applied research in science and engineeringwhere the resulting information is ordinarily published and shared broadly withinthe scientific community. it is distinguished from proprietary research and fromindustrial development, design, production, and product utilizations, the resultsof which ordinarily are restricted for proprietary and/or specific national secuassessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50assessment of department of defense basic researchrity reasons. normally, the results of òfundamental research.ó are published inscientific literature, thus making it publicly available. research which is intendedfor publication, whether it is ever accepted by scientific journals or not, is considered to be òfundamental research.ó a large segment of academic research isconsidered òfundamental researchó. because any information, technological orotherwise, that is publicly available is not subject to the export administrationregulations (ear) (except for encryption object code and source code in electronic form or media) and thus does not require a license, ôfundamental researchõis not subject to the ear and does not require a license. available online athttp://www.umbi.umd.edu/rcc/fundamentalresearch.pdf. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.national security decision directive 189: fundamental research defined: basicand applied research in science and engineering, the results of which are available to interested scientific community. national policy: no restriction may beplaced upon the conduct or reporting of federally funded fundamental researchthat has not received national security classification. this is reflected in itar at22 cfrr 120.11(8). executive order 12356 (1985). available online at http://www.epic.org/opengov/eo12356.html. last accessed on november 16, 2004.federal acquisition regulation 27.404 (g) (2): in contracts for basic or appliedresearch universities or colleges, no restrictions may be placed upon the conductof or reporting on the results of unclassified basic or applied research, except asprovided in applicable u.s. statutes. available online at http://supply.lanl.gov/property/ecco/history/2004/presentations2004/default.shtml. last accessed onnovember 16, 2004.dod supplement to the far: it is dod policy . . . to allow the publication andpublic presentation of unclassified contracted fundamental research results. themechanism for control of information generated by dot funded contractedfundamental research . . . is security classification. available online at http://supply.lanl.gov/property/ecco/history/2004/presentations2004/default.shtml.last accessed on november 16, 2004.otherdefense of basic research by joseph henry: in 1852, henry defended basicresearch. it was òprofitable,ó he said, when that word was defined properly.òthe true, the beautiful, as well as the immediately practical, are all entitled to ashare of attention. all knowledge is profitable; profitable in its ennobling effecton the character, in the pleasure it imparts in its acquisition, as well as in thepower it gives over the operations of mind and matter. all knowledge is useful;every part of this complex system of nature is connected with every other.nothing is isolated. the discovery of today, which appears unconnected withany useful process, may, in the course of a few years, become the fruitful sourceof a thousand inventions.ó available online at http://www.si.edu/archives/ihd/jhp/joseph04.htm. last accessed on november 16, 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51appendix euniversities that receiveddepartment of defense 6.1 and 6.2 fundingin fiscal year 2002tables e1 through e3 show the top 50 university recipients of dod 6.1,6.2, and 6.1 + 6.2 funding in fiscal year 2002. the tables were constructed on thebasis of data provided in personal communication from mark herbst, a memberof the staff of the office of the director of basic research, within the office ofthe secretary of defense, to james garcia of the national research council.institution names in boldface type and shaded background are those of universities at which committee members conducted site visits and interviews and/or helddiscussions with university research leaders who were not visited in person.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52assessment of department of defense basic researchtable e1top 50 university recipients of dod 6.1 funding in fiscal year2002institution namestatetotal 6.1 ($000)1massachusetts institute of technologyma43,8022pennsylvania state university, all campusespa35,3573university of california, los angelesca31,7844university of washingtonwa29,8845stanford universityca25,8116university of southern californiaca25,7587duke universitync25,6078university of michigan, all campusesmi24,2459university of california, san diegoca24,11710university of california, santa barbaraca19,96411university of illinois at urbanachampaignil19,92512california institute of technologyca19,47813georgia institute of technology, all campusesga19,09814johns hopkins universitymd18,88815university of texas at austintx17,04416carnegie mellon universitypa16,52717cornell university, all campusesny15,20918princeton universitynj13,45219state university of new york, system officeny12,59820woods hole oceanographic institutionma12,49321university of pennsylvaniapa12,28222virginia polytechnic institute & state universityva11,47623university of new mexico, all campusesnm11,03224university of arizonaaz10,97725university of wisconsin  madisonwi10,38926university of maryland system administrationmd10,33427university of colorado, all campusesco10,30328harvard universityma10,08129northwestern universityil9,69230purdue university, all campusesin9,47931north carolina state university at raleighnc9,31132ohio state university, all campusesoh9,19033arizona state university mainaz9,05134university of minnesota, all campusesmn8,66735university of virginia, all campusesva8,33536rutgers, state university of new jersey, all campusesnj8,26237university of miamifl8,10538university of california, davisca7,77639university of california, irvineca7,67240brown universityri7,49141baylor college of medicinetx7,04042rice universitytx6,91843san diego state universityca6,89344university of north carolina at chapel hillnc6,57645university of pittsburgh, all campusespa6,30546new mexico institute of mining and technologynm6,12947boston universityma6,00548university of south carolina, all campusessc5,96749university of floridafl5,94750university of texas southwestern medical center, dallastx5,862source: based on data provided in personal communication from mark herbst, office of thedirector of basic research, office of the secretary of defense, washington, d.c., to james garcia,national research council, june 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e53table e2top 50 university recipients of dod 6.2 funding in fiscal year2002institution namestatetotal 6.2 ($000)1university of southern californiaca32,5862university of hawaii system officehi20,1313pennsylvania state university, all campusespa16,7574university of south floridafl15,7295university of daytonoh14,5286carnegie mellon universitypa12,8837georgia institute of technology, all campusesga10,4298johns hopkins universitymd9,6879auburn university, all campusesal7,57210university of central floridafl7,36911massachusetts institute of technologyma7,20612university of texas at austintx6,79413vanderbilt universitytn6,05114florida state universityfl6,00015university of washingtonwa5,72716stanford universityca5,27417university of pennsylvaniapa4,72718northwestern universityil4,67719florida atlantic universityfl3,64020university of maryland system administrationmd3,51921university of california, los angelesca3,44122university of california, irvineca3,42623university of mississippi, all campusesms3,39124boston universityma3,28725university of illinois at urbanachampaignil3,26926washington state universitywa3,22127university of delawarede3,05128cornell university, all campusesny2,83929ohio state university, all campusesoh2,82130rutgers, state university of new jersey, all campusesnj2,70931new york universityny2,68632utah state universityut2,51933university of california, san diegoca2,51334washington universitymo2,38835university of rhode islandri2,32236university of massachusetts at amherstma2,28237university of california, santa barbaraca2,20238colorado state universityco2,09039purdue university, all campusesin2,01540university of california, riversideca1,99641university of north carolina at charlottenc1,98042georgetown universitydc1,92243princeton universitynj1,90944university of texas at dallastx1,87945yale universityct1,85446columbia universityny1,82147university of arizonaaz1,80148rensselaer polytechnic instituteny1,78949university of colorado, all campusesco1,77750drexel universitypa1,694source: based on data provided in personal communication from mark herbst, office of thedirector of basic research, office of the secretary of defense, washington, d.c., to james garcia,national research council, june 2004.assessment of department of defense basic researchcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54assessment of department of defense basic researchtable e3top 50 university recipients of dod 6.1 + 6.2 funding infiscal year 2002institution namestatetotal 6.1 + 6.2 ($000)1university of southern californiaca58,3432pennsylvania state university, all campusespa52,1143massachusetts institute of technologyma51,0074university of washingtonwa35,6115university of california, los angelesca35,2256stanford universityca31,0857georgia institute of technology, all campusesga29,5278carnegie mellon universitypa29,4109johns hopkins universitymd28,57510university of california, san diegoca26,62911university of michigan, all campusesmi25,93512duke universitync25,77413university of texas at austintx23,83814university of illinois at urbanachampaignil23,19415university of hawaii system officehi22,26916university of california, santa barbaraca22,16617university of south floridafl20,40918california institute of technologyca20,36319cornell university, all campusesny18,04820university of daytonoh17,76221university of pennsylvaniapa17,00922princeton universitynj15,36123northwestern universityil14,36924state university of new york system officeny13,96925university of maryland system administrationmd13,85326woods hole oceanographic institutionma13,54927university of central floridafl13,22428university of arizonaaz12,77829virginia polytechnic institute and state universityva12,22130university of colorado, all campusesco12,08031ohio state university, all campusesoh12,01132university of wisconsinmadisonwi11,99033university of new mexico, all campusesnm11,86934purdue university, all campusesin11,49435harvard universityma11,34636university of california, irvineca11,09837rutgers, state university of new jersey, all campusesnj10,97138vanderbilt universitytn10,64339auburn university, all campusesal10,48440north carolina state university at raleighnc10,16841arizona state university mainaz9,89342university of miamifl9,68243university of minnesota, all campusesmn9,33344boston universityma9,29245university of virginia, all campusesva9,22046brown universityri9,14747florida state universityfl9,13548university of delawarede8,31349university of california, davisca7,87650yale universityct7,700source: based on data provided in personal communication from mark herbst, office of thedirector of basic research, office of the secretary of defense, washington, d.c., to james garcia,national research council, june 2004.