detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11205an assessment of potential health effects from exposure topave paws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energy214 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309093095 | doi 10.17226/11205committee to assess potential health effects from exposures to pave pawslowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energy; board on radiation effectsresearch; division on earth and life studies; national research councilan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee to assess potential health effects from exposures to pave pawslowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energyboard on radiation effects researchdivision on earth and life studiesan assessment ofpotential health effectsfromexposuretopave pawslowlevel phasedarrayradiofrequency energyan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosenfor their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract f0560401c9000, between the national academyof sciences and the u.s. air force. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number 0309093090additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500fifth street, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2005 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of america.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr.bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter ofthe national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. itis autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government.the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superiorachievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy ofengineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under theresponsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter tobe an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues ofmedical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a. wulf are chairand vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.organ assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ivcommittee to assess potential health effects fromexposures to pave paws lowlevel phasedarrayradiofrequency energyfrank s. barnes (chairman), university of colorado, boulder, corobert c. hansen (vicechairman), r. c. hansen, inc., tarzana, calarry e. anderson, battelle, pacific northwest national laboratories,richland, wagraham a. colditz, harvard medical school, boston, mafrancesca dominici, johns hopkins university, baltimore, mdkenneth j. mcleod, state university of new york, binghamton, nykeith d. paulsen, dartmouth college, hanover, nhleslie l. robison, university of minnesota cancer center,minneapolis, mnsusan l. santos, university of medicine and dentistry of new jerseyschool of public health and east orange new jersey veteransadministration medical center war related illness and injury studycenter, medford, majan a. j. stolwijk, yale university school of medicine (emeritus),beltsville, mdgayle e. woloschak, northwestern university, chicago, ilconsultantdavid r. challoner, university of florida, gainesville, flnational research council staffrick jostes, study directorevan b. douple, brer directorcourtney gibbs, program assistantdoris e. taylor, staff assistantan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vboard on radiation effects researchs. james adelstein (chairman), harvard medical school, boston, maharold l. beck, department of energy environmental laboratory(retired), new york, nyjoel s. bedford, colorado state university, fort collins, cojames e. cleaver, university of california san francisco cancer center,san francisco, casarah c. darby, university of oxford, oxford, united kingdomsharon l. dunwoody, university of wisconsin, madison, wic. clifton ling, memorial sloankettering cancer center, new york, nydaniel krewski, university of ottawa, ottawa, canadatheodore l. phillips, university of california, san francisco, caandrew m. sessler, lawrence berkeley national laboratory,berkeley, cajohn c. villforth, food and drug law institute (retired), derwood, mdpaul l. zeimer, purdue university, west lafayette, inedward r. epp (board liaison to the committee), massachusetts generalhospital (retired), boston, manational research council staffevan b. douple, director, board on radiation effects researchisaf alnabulsi, senior program officerrick jostes, senior program officercatherine s. berkley, administrative associatedoris e. taylor, staff assistantcourtney gibbs, program assistantan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacein a january 11, 2001, letter from senator edward m. kennedy to the secretary of the air force, f. whitten peters, senator kennedy asked that the airforce fund an independent study through the national research council of thenational academies òto examine the health effects of the pave paws system.ókennedy further requested that òthis followon study (to the previous 1979 national research council report) should address, at a minimum, the effects, if any,of the pave paws radar over the past two decades and should also examine thevalidity of using continuouswave and pulsed nonionizing radiation biologicaleffects data as surrogates for phasedarray nonionizing radiation biological effects data.ó the offices of senators kennedy and kerry, and congressmandelehunt, participated in discussions with the air force and the national research council to establish the task that is addressed by this committee in thisreport.a committee composed of individuals with engineering, biology, epidemiology, risk communication, and biostatistics expertise was established by the national research council to address the task. the committee heard from interestedcitizens in a public forum held in sandwich, ma on may 28, 2002. in additionalopen sessions of the committee, the committee gathered information from the airforce, the massachusetts department of public health, the pave paws publichealth steering group, various experts from universities and other institutions,and the cape cod public.the committee also evaluated information provided to the committee by interested parties, surveyed the scientific literature, and conducted a preliminarystatistical correlation analysis to evaluate the potential for biological and healtheffects from the pave paws radar. a letter report was published providingan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.advice regarding the air force waveform measurement effort and a second interim letter report was published that commented on the adequacy, at that time, ofavailable information and outlined the general characteristics of information thatthe committee deemed useful in its evaluation of the potential biological andhealth effects of the pave paws radar.this report is an update of a prior 1979 national research council report(analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologic effects of the pavepaws radar system) and addresses the following:1.the applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, usingdata derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing pulsedand continuouswave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effectsfollowing phasedarray exposures;2.the extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy fromthe pave paws system;3.potential biological and health effects of the pave paws radar system; and4.recommendations for appropriate followon study design issues, including the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potentialvalue of the proposed work.frank s. barnes, ph.d.chairviiiprefacean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixreviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by persons chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise in accordance with procedures approved by the national research councilõs report review committee. the purposes of this review are to provide candid and critical comments that will assistthe institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensurethat the report meets institutional standards of objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remainconfidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thankthe following for their participation in the review of this report:thomas f. budinger, university of california, berkeley, cadavid g. hoel, medical university of south carolina, charleston, scdaniel krewski, university of ottawa, ottawa, canadasteven c. lewis, university of texas, dallas, txfrank prato, st. josephõs health centre, london, canadaandrew m. sessler, e.o. lawrence berkeley national laboratory,berkeley, cazenon sienkiewicz, national radiological protection board, chilton, unitedkingdombernard veyret, university of bordeaux, pessac cedex, francealthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. thereview of this report was overseen by john f. ahearne, sigma xi and dukean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.university, research triangle park, nc, and richard b. setlow, brookhavennational laboratory, upton, ny. appointed by the national research council,they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination of thisreport was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that allreview comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final contentof this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the national research council.xreviewersan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacknowledgmentsthe committee would like to thank dr. richard albanese for directing thecommitteeõs attention to aspects of the pave paws waveform that merited investigation. richard and sharon judge, charles kleecamp, ron cronin, jimtomlin, and victor vyssotsky provided many insightful comments to the committee. we thank the massachusetts department of public health, the pavepaws public health steering group, the coalition to operate pave pawssafely, and the u.s. air force for providing information to the committee.we would also like to thank the following speakers at committee informationgathering sessions: stephen cleary, stetson hall, robert s. knorr, josephrotiroti, kurt oughstun, thomas roberts, daniel wartenberg, robert torres,and donald mclemore.the committee is especially indebted to the conscientious support and guidance provided by the study director, rick jostes. he sought and provided important information from a number of sources and he diligently kept the committeefocused on its timeline and its charge. dr. jostes was well assisted in the administration of the committeeõs work by courtney gibbs and doris taylor. courtneyslack, a christine mirzayan science & technology policy graduate fellow, provided additional valuable assistance to nrc staff.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontentspublic summary1executive summary9introduction, 9task for the report, 10applicability of using nonphasedarray data, 10radar characteristics, 11uncertainties involved in using nonphasedarray data forevaluation of potential adverse health effects followingphasedarray exposures, 11biology, 13epidemiology, 14recommendations, 151introduction18history of the facility, 18origin of present study, 21statement of task, 22information available to this committee, 23uncertainties associated with the evaluation ofpave paws health effects, 232assessment of classified research relevantto pave paws26introduction 26an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontentsvisit details, 26conclusions and findings, 293physical mechanisms for rf effects onbiological systems31summary, 354 exposure levels37overview, 37pave paws operation, 37the beam characteristics, 38pave paws powerdensity estimates and measurements, 40population exposure to other rf sources, 48summary of pave paws exposure data, 515pave paws exposure conditions53exposure characteristics, 53waveform decay, 55precursors, 68summary, 76annex 51: dispersion in biological tissues, 78annex 52: papers on precursor measurements, 78annex 53: papers on precursor calculations, 82annex 54: related papers on precursors, 88annex 55: papers by professor oughstun and colleagues, 906evidence of biological effects of rf exposurerelevant to pave paws radar system94introduction, 94literature review, 97indirect molecular effects, 100phenotypic responses, 101summary and conclusions, 1057animal and human studies addressing healtheffects110introduction, 110cancerñhuman studies, 111cancerñstudies in animal models, 111human behavioral studies, 114animal behavior, 115other physiological studies, 116an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvimmune and endocrinefunction studies, 119teratology, reproduction, and development, 120in vivo studies: conclusions, 1238epidemiological studies of the possible adversehealth effects of pulsed radar emissions133exposures at the u.s. embassy in moscow, 133exposures at the mit radiation laboratory, 134two studies of a u.s. navy cohort, 134radio location station at skrunda, 135polish military studies, 136summary, 1379health considerations in the cape codpopulation139introduction, 139issues in epidemiologic research, 140health on cape cod, 142massachusetts military reservation, 147sample size and statistical power to investigatehealth risks of the pave paws radar, 154statistical analyses, 157exposure assessment study, 158geographic correlation study, 169summary, 172annex 91: data sources, 174annex 92: geobugs code, 17510summary of conclusions and recommendations176radar characteristics, 176exposure levels, 177biology, 177epidemiology, 180appendixesainterim letter report183bacronyms and abbreviations189committee biosketches194an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.map of cape cod in massachusetts showing the òupper capeó as a shaded area. theupper cape is the portion of the cape which is closest to the mainland and is commonlytaken to extend to barnstable. the location of the pave paws radar is indicated by thesolid triangle near the town of sagamore. the dashed lines extending from the radarindicate the approximate boundaries of the main beam when the radar is scanning (radarbeam projects angled upward and to the east). from http://www.wordiq.com/definition/capecod on 10/27/2004.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1introductionthis report examines the potential biological and humanhealth effects fromexposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energy. thepave paws radar system, part of the u.s. air force space command, is located at the cape cod air force station in cape cod, massachusetts (see mapthat precedes the public summary). the facility has been in continuous operationsince 1979. òpaveó is an air force program name and òpawsó stands forphased array warning system. the primary purpose of the facility is to detectand track sealaunched and intercontinental ballistic missiles. the systemõs secondary function is to track earth satellites and identify other space objects.even before the facility began operation, there had been concerns expressedby at least some members of the public regarding its safety and whether or not thefacility had the potential to cause adverse health impacts. in 1979, concerns voicedby the public included the possibility of thermal effects, disruption of implantedmedical devices (such as pacemakers), and secondary radiation effects from improperly grounded structures exposed to the radar. those concerns in part led to a1979 national research council (nrc) report on exposure levels and potentialbiological effects of the pave paws radar. that committee found that ò. . . thepave paws radar may be anticipated to expose a limited number of membersof the general public intermittently to low intensities of pulsemodulated microwave fields with maximal intensities of 100 w/cm2 or less and timeaveragedintensities lower by two orders of magnitude. there are no known irreversibleeffects of such exposure on either morbidity and mortality in humans or otherspecies.ó that committee also recommended that the air force conduct addipublic summaryan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2assessment of potential health effects from pave pawstional research and surveillance to evaluate the potential exposure effects ofpave paws. specifically, the 1979 report recommended:¥òadditional research is recommended to clarify further the possible effects of longterm exposure to microwave radiation at low power densities,ó and¥ òin view of the known sensitivity of the mammalian central nervoussystem to electromagnetic fields, especially those modulated at brainwave frequencies, the possibility cannot be ruled out that exposure to pave paws radiation may have some effects on exposed people. because these effects are stillhypothetical, it is not feasible to access their health implications. such assessment will require additional research and surveillance and must be addressed infuture evaluations of the potential exposure effects of pave paws and otherhighpoweroutput radar systems.óthe present nrc committee found no evidence that the air force or others followed up substantially on the above two recommendations.public concerns over the possibility for adverse effects from the pavepaws facility have continued over the years since the time of the 1979 nrcreport. in recent years, public concerns have shifted away from thermal effects ofthe radiofrequency (rf). concerns instead have focused on:¥the possible biological relevance of the waveform itself;¥the inherent time delay of the phasedarray radar including the secondary beams or sidelobes that are below the main beam; and¥the possible implications for health arising from the propagation of therf energy in tissue. some members of the public have questioned whether radiation from the pave paws system is unique such that existing safety measuresmay not adequately protect the public. others have stated that the systemñinspite of its unique configurationñis not that dissimilar from the other sources ofrf energy to which the public is constantly exposed such as fm radio stations,tv stations, or continuouswave radar systems.in an effort to try to address the questions that have been raised regarding thesafety and uniqueness of the system, in january 2001, senator edward m.kennedy asked the u.s. air force to fund an independent study through thenational research council of the national academies òto examine the healtheffects of the pave paws systemó and to address, in a followon report to the1979 nrc report, the effects if any, of the pave paws radar over its twoplusdecades of operation.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.public summary3what the committee didthe committee undertook an extensive data and informationgathering effort. that effort included 4 sessions that members of the public were invited toattend and at which researchers whose work was referenced as important by members of the public, or considered important by the committee, were invited toprovide the committee with information. an additional meeting of the committeewas held as a public forum in which interested members of the public were encouraged to present their viewpoints to the committee. in addition, there wereseveral members of the public, who, on a number of occasions, requested that thecommittee review specific information they wished to be made available to thecommittee. over 200 submissions of information were made to the committee byinterested parties. because there have been no studies of a phasedarray systemsimilar to pave paws in the public domain, we reviewed all the relevant available data (i.e., peer reviewed and scientifically available) in the radiofrequencyrange most applicable to the pave paws system (see appendix a). further, inresponse to concerns raised by some members of the public that classified datamight exist showing effects of a phasedarray radar, a number of committee members with sufficient scientific expertise and security clearances also examinedand assessed whether there was any classified research done by the u.s. airforce that might show any evidence of biological effects with potential relevanceto humanhealth effects of radiation similar in characteristics to pave paws.the committee found no evidence of any classified, phasedarray experiments that either were relevant to the pave paws exposure conditions or indicated a potential for pave paws humanhealth effects. thus, we do not believethere is any classified data showing potential harm from the pave paws system.results/conclusionsthe committeeõs conclusions address three primary areas: the implicationsof the pave paws waveform, the potential for biological effects, and the potential for humanhealth effects.the pave paws waveformthe recently collected waveformcharacterization data that the committeereviewed has answered many questions. based on that review and some additional statistical analyses we performed, we reached the following conclusions:1.the pave paws narrowband radiation is in fact similar to that ofcontinuous narrowband reflectors or socalled dish antennas. those large parabolic reflector (dish) antennas are widely used for satellite earth terminals and foran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsradars. both reflectors and phased arrays have time delays, and comparable sizereflector antennas also have comparable delays.2.the large number of pave paws active elements (1792) and theirirregular spacing make the discrete beam formation almost indistinguishable froma continuous formation.3.the existence and possible biological significance of precursors (additions to a signal waveform that may occur before, during, or after the signal waveform) forming would be extremely small and probably not measurable for thenarrowband pave paws system.potential for biological effectsthe committee concluded:4.relevant data exist from experiments with animals and cells exposedunder certain rf conditions that contribute to an understanding of rf biologicaleffects and to an understanding of the potential for humanhealth effects frompave paws.5.there is no risk of cancer, reproductive or developmental effects, orneurobehaviorial effects based on a comprehensive review of animal studies orstudies in other biological systems. a few statistically significant biologicalchanges have been reported from rf exposures, but the relevance of those biological changes is not known and may or may not have any impact on humanhealth.potential publichealth effectsthe committee recognizes the concerns of some of the members of the public regarding the ongoing operation of the facility, especially in light of the increase in colorectal, breast, prostate, and lung cancers that have been reported inthe upper cape over time. to date, those observed elevated cancerincidence ratesamong residents of upper cape cod have not been adequately explained throughprevious investigations exploring a variety of environmental factors includingpave paws. the inability of investigators to explore the possibility of healtheffects from the pave paws radar was due principally to the lack of pavepaws rf powerdensity information at that time.to determine the potential for health effects, it is important to have an estimate of exposure. one of the consistent problems in most epidemiologic studiesis the lack of adequate exposure data. this was true in the relevant epidemiologicstudies evaluated by the committee for other populations exposed to either pulsedor continuous radiofrequency energy. unfortunately, there are too many limitations in those epidemiological studies to rely on them for making a determinationof the potential impact of radar exposure on human health. with regard to pavean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.public summary5paws exposures, the historic lack of waveform characterization data and exposure data (in the form of powerdensity measurements) at locations where exposure to the cape cod population occurs has made assessment of the potential forhealth effects difficult. recent waveform and powerdensity models and measurements by the air force and broadcast signal laboratories have enabled someanalyses by this committee and enabled a forthcoming health study by the international epidemiology institute.the committee concluded:6.the available powerdensity measurements are generally consistent andshow that the spatial distribution of the pave paws radiofrequency energy, andthus potential for exposure, is strongly influenced by sitespecific local topography and intervening terrain at any given location. the measured data show thataverage power densities are consistently below 0.1 mw/cm2 and generally in the0.0010.01 mw/cm2 range at locations where the public would be expected to beexposed. measured peak levels are generally less than 1 mw/cm2, although values as high as 15 mw/cm2 have been found at a few elevated locations near theradar where exposure might occur. the levels of exposure can be compared toenvironmental protection agency studies of fm and tv broadcast bands (54900 mhz) in the 1970s. those studies estimated that the median exposure inurban areas was 0.005 mw/cm2 and that 95% of the urban population was exposed to less than 0.1mw/cm2 from fm and tv broadcasts. recent studies oncellphone base stations in great britain, canada, and australia show rf frequencies in the vicinity of base stations ranging from 0.01 mw/cm2 to a highreading of 2.6 mw/cm2.7.the potential for an individualõs exposure over time is determined byhow long he or she resides at any possible point(s) where exposure might occur,and the level of exposure at that particular point, which will vary with time andother factors. in spite of recent sitespecific measurements and estimates of thepave paws waveforms and power densities that now exist for a number ofgeographic locations, there are still no data currently available to determine anindividualõs personal exposure to rf radiation from the pave paws radar.8.using information on population density, topography, and direction ofthe pave paws radar beam, we estimated that, based on the 1990 census, 12,773of the total resident population (11.8% including children) of upper cape codwere living in the line of sight1 of the pave paws antenna and most likelyreceiving some exposure from the sidelobes of the pave paws radar beam (butnot the primary beam, which is angled upward). based on 2000 census data, the1line of sight means that there are no hills between the resident and the radar that would block theradar emissions. the main beam is aimed above the population and residents in the line of sight areexposed to the sidelobes of the main beam.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsestimated number of population living in the area exposed to the pave pawsradarbeam sidelobes was 16,403 (12.4%).9.using powerdensity information from models provided by mitre andrecent powerdensity measurements and models provided by broadcast signallaboratories, this committee also did its own statistical analysis. based on ourown statistical analyses, we did not identify any increase in cancer risk with exposure to the pave paws beam using peak and average powerdensity estimates. the analyses looked at the reported occurrences of all cancers combinedon the upper cape as well as specific cancers, including colorectal, breast (female), prostate, and lung. we are also aware of the epidemiologic investigationthat is currently being conducted by the international epidemiology institute, butdata from that study were not available to review as of the writing of this report.10.socioeconomic status does not appear to influence results. we performedadditional analyses to see whether some indicators of socioeconomic status mightinfluence the results (an adjustment routinely made in health or epidemiologicstudies). we found that adjusting for the proportion of the population below thepoverty level did not influence the results.11.as another overall measure of health for the upper cape cod towns, thecommittee looked at premature mortality before age 75 as a useful indicator.based on 2001 data, barnstable, falmouth, mashpee, and sandwich have lowermortality than the massachusetts state average, while bourne has elevated mortality.12.further analysis by the committee indicates that increasing duration ofexposure to the pave paws radiofrequency energy has not resulted in increasedincidence of cancer over time. the committee compared the standard cancerincidence rates, or sirs, for 5 categories consisting of total cancers, breast, colon,lung, and prostate cancer for the period of 19871994 versus 19951999 (whichare the periods that the state of massachusetts reports data) for the 5 towns inupper cape cod and found that there was no consistent pattern of increase. during those two time periods, a decrease in sir was observed in 15 out of 25 sirs,an increase in 6 out of 25 sirs, and no change in 4 out of 25 sirs. again, theresults indicate that increasing exposure to pave paws over time has not resulted in an increased incidence of cancer.summaryin summary, based on the available scientific evidence, the committee concludes there are no adverse health effects to the population resulting from continuing or longterm exposure to the pave paws radiation. in particular, thecommittee concludes that there is no increase in total cancers or cancers of theprostate, breast, lung, or colon due to exposure to the pave paws radiation.further, there are many studies and data that support the finding of no health orbiological effects from rf exposures. there are a number of possible mechaan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.public summary7nisms and pathways by which electric and magnetic fields could lead to changesat higher powerdensity levels than the public is exposed to from the pavepaws radar. however, at this time, the committee has not found evidence of amechanism shown to change biologic processes at power levels that are associated with the pave paws radar. the recent waveformcharacterization datacollected for the pave paws radar have also shown that they are similar toexposures from òdishó radars to which the public is also continuously exposed.it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to prove ultimate safety. in theunited states, various forms of safety or risk assessment are used along withregulatory guidelines to ensure that facilities, products, technologies, and otherfactors will not pose undo risk or harm to the public or environment. the scientific community, including medical professionals, is often reluctant to call something òsafeó and so often speaks of having or not having some degree of evidenceof harm or lack thereof. there is also growing interest in what is referred to as theòprecautionary principle,ó which seeks to avoid taking actions that might havethe potential for harm unless a relative degree of safety can be assured. thosedecisions are policy or management decisions and not solely a matter of science.this committee has focused on the scientific evidence and carefully evaluated allthe scientific evidence available to determine whether there is a reasonable degree of certainty regarding the presence or absence of harm from exposure to thepave paws phasedarray radar. to those who live in the vicinity of that system, no less would be acceptable.recommendations regarding further studiesthe committee was also tasked to recommend further studies if warranted.the committee recognizes that while biological responses do not necessarilytranslate into humanhealth effects, studies on the biological effects of rf exposures should be done that build upon several existing studies demonstrating astatistically significant response to rf exposure, such as the effect of radars onstudies of tree growth. future studies should approximate the pave paws exposure characteristics as closely as possible. specifically, we recommend thatstudies of tree growth in the vicinity of the pave paws facility should be done.a study of longterm exposures under conditions similar to human exposuresmight provide useful information as to any possible mechanisms for a biologicalresponse that currently does not exist. in addition, we recommend that a replication of a central nervous system endocrine function study be undertaken to confirm or refute previous air forcesponsored studies showing a significant andextended influence on brain dopamine levels during lowlevel rf exposures similar to that of pave paws. the toler and other studies demonstrating a significant and longlastingeffect on serum dopamine levelsdoes point to a biological effect that might resultin a detrimental health effect. thetoler study is one of the few studies we arean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsaware of that utilized 435 mhz, and effects on brain activity were a major concern of the 1979 nrc review committee, so this study holds additional importance. moreover, the study utilized a 1 khz modulation that would not be expected to have as profound an effect as a modulation frequency similar to that ofpave paws, which is in the 10100 hz range. for those reasons, it is recommended that this study be refined and repeated.finally, because of the limitations and uncertainties that exist in estimatedexposure at the individual level and the number of health outcomes of interest,future health investigations or epidemiologic studies should look at exposures atboth the censustract2 and censusblock levels, and try to better estimate personalexposure and consider the types of factors known to complicate humanhealthinvestigations. future or ongoing health studies should also specifically addresspossible early age of exposure and/or early age at onset of an adverse healtheffect. finally, future epidemiologic studies should not be conducted unless theyare expected to have sufficient statistical ability, or socalled power, to be able todetect any possible health effects in the cape cod population.2for census reasons, states are divided into counties, which are in turn are divided into censustracts, which are further subdivided into census blocks. most census tracts have between 1500 and8000 people and they average about 4000 inhabitants. census blocks are subdivisions of a census tractand are the smallest area for which decennial census data are available to the public.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9 executive summaryintroductionthis report, prepared by the national academies committee to assess potential health effects from exposures to pave paws lowlevel phasedarrayradiofrequency energy is the fifth academies report on the pave paws radarlocated at the massachusetts military reservation in cape cod, massachusetts.two previous reports evaluated the engineering and potential for population exposure associated with the pave paws radar in 1979, just prior to the radarbecoming operational.1 two recent letter reports by this committee provided advice on the phase iv waveform measurement effort and evaluated the status ofinformation available to the committee.2individuals in the cape cod community have raised concerns that exposureto pave paws radiation represents a unique type of radiation exposure due tothe possibility that there are:1nrc (national research council). 1979a. analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologiceffects of the pave paws radar system. washington, dc: national academy press; nrc. 1979b.radiation intensity of the pave paws radar system, engineering panel on the pave pawsradar system, final report. washington, dc: national academy press.2nrc. 2002. letter report to the department of the air force from the committee to assesspotential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequencyenergy: recommendations for phase iv measurements. washington, dc; nrc. 2002. interim letterreport to the department of the air force from the committee to assess potential health effectsfrom exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energy: adequacy ofavailable research data (see appendix a of this report). washington, dc.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10assessment of potential health effects from pave paws¥particularly òsteepó risetimes associated with the pave paws waveform, and¥overlapping wave fronts originating from multiple antennas on thepave paws radar.it has been suggested that if those temporal characteristics exist, then the pavepaws radar signal could give rise to precursor formation that might result ingreater exposure to biological tissue.task for the reportthis committee has been tasked to provide an update of the 1979 academyreport that includes a discussion of:1.the applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, usingdata derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continuouswave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects followingphasedarray exposures;2.the extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy fromthe pave paws system;3.potential biological and health effects of the pave paws radar system,and4.recommendations for appropriate followon studydesign issues, including the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potentialvalue of the proposed work.the executive summary addresses the task items in order of appearanceabove.1. the applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, using data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continuouswave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse healtheffects following phasedarray exposures.applicability of using nonphasedarray databecause there were essentially no pave paws data provided to or discovered by the committee that specifically addressed pave paws health effects,the first task of the committee was to determine whether continuous and pulsedradiofrequency (rf) energy research are adequate for determining the biologicaland potential health effects of the pave paws phasedarray system. as statedin our interim report, the committee concluded that certain waveforms and powerdensity levels are applicable in the evaluation of biological effects and their relan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11evance to potential health effects. for the purposes of this study the committeehas reviewed cell, plant, animal, and epidemiological data derived from pulsemodulation rf exposures. a major focus of the committee was a review of datawith exposure characteristics defined in the committeeõs interim report (for adescription of these exposure characteristics, see the committeeõs interim reportin appendix a).the conclusions above were based in part on the committeeõs understandingof the pave paws radar characteristics as noted below.radar characteristicswhile minor differences have been measured in sidelobe energy characteristics, phasedarray radar characteristics are substantially equivalent to those ofdish radars. that observation is based on the following results of measurementsmade during the phase iv waveform measurement investigation carried out bythe air force research laboratory:¥pave paws is a narrowband system (5 mhz) consistent with itstheory of operation.¥phasedarray antennas and reflector antennas have measurable time delays at wide angles. both arrays and dishes of comparable size have comparabledelays.¥the large number of pave paws active elements (1792) and theirirregular spacing make the discrete beam formation almost indistinguishable froma continuous formation and thus, the role of individual elements is usually notevident.¥precursors are additions to a signal waveform, and may occur before,during, or after the signal waveform. they have been calculated andmeasured, but only for wideband signalsñtypically, 10,000 mhz bandwidth indispersive media. they may decay slowly, but only after significant attenuationin the cellular media. for the narrowband pave paws radar, any precursorswould be extremely small and probably not measurable. precursor formation isdirectly related to bandwidth (rise time), and dispersion, but not to electric fieldslope (v/m/nsec).uncertainties involved in using nonphasedarraydata for evaluation of potential adverse healtheffects following phasedarray exposures.there are a number of uncertainties associated with using data derived fromcell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continuouswave and pulsedrf exposures for evaluation of potential adverse health effects in humans following phasedarray exposures. those uncertainties relate to the significance ofan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsthe waveforms, their repetition rates and power levels on the biological systems,and the significance of induced biological responses as a predictor of humanhealth effects. those uncertainties are summarized at the end of chapter 1.2. the extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energyfrom the pave paws system.various measurements of pave paws powerdensity levels in the capecod community have been made by the air force and by citizen groups. pavepaws powerdensities were also modeled by mitre corporation, a contractor tothe air force. a recent analysis by broadcast signal labs included measured andmodeled powerdensity information. after evaluating the information, the committee concludes that:¥the measured data show that average power densities are consistentlybelow 0.1 w/cm2 and generally in the 0.0010.01 w/cm2 range at locationswhere the public would be expected to be exposed.¥measured peak levels are generally less than 1 w/cm2, although valuesas high as 15 w/cm2 have been found at elevated locations near the radar.¥powerdensity measurements recorded by different groups at differenttimes within the communities surrounding the cape cod pave paws radar aregenerally consistent with each other and with modeled results.¥the measurements show distribution patterns that are strongly influencedby sitespecific local topography and intervening terrain at any given location.¥the modeled data are generally consistent with the measured data withthe exception that the modeling results are higher overall than the measured results. however, this is to be expected from the approximations that were made insetting up the simulations that do not include scattering and other losses.¥the available measurement data and models of the pave paws powerdensity emissions provide a good firstorder characterization of the spatial distribution of the exposures occurring throughout the communities of cape cod.¥in spite of the measurements and estimates of the pave paws waveforms and power densities, currently there are no data for estimating personalexposure at the level of an individual.¥using information on population density, topography, and direction ofthe pave paws radar beam, the committee estimated that the proportion of thepopulation of upper cape cod whose primary residence is in direct line of sight3to the pave paws beam was 11.8% in 1990 and 12.4% in 2000.3line of sight means that there are no hills between the resident and the radar that would block theradar emissions. the main beam is aimed above the population and residents in the line of sight areexposed to the sidelobes of the main beam.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary133. potential biological and health effects of the pave paws radarsystem.after a review of the information available to this committee at this time, thecommittee concludes that there is no health hazard from exposure to the pavepaws radiation. there are however, a few statistically significant biological responses that have been reported. since biological effects do not necessarily translate into adverse health effects, the implications of the biological observations arenot known. at this time it is not known which characteristics of rf radiation, atthe power levels associated with the exposures to the general public from thepave paws radar, are biologically significant, if any.the committeeõs conclusions from its review of biology and epidemiologyrelevant to the pave paws radar are outlined below.biology mechanismsthere are a number of physical mechanisms by which electric and magneticfields of radiofrequencies are known to lead to biological changes. there are noknown physical mechanisms that predict a physical interaction with tissue resulting in a biological response at power densities, on the order of 1 w/cm2, that areassociated with the pave paws radar.animal studies¥evidence from animal studies does not provide a case for an increase incancer risk with lowlevel rf exposure.¥there is no evidence of adverse effects on mammalian reproduction anddevelopment during exposure of animals to rf at levels that do not produce asignificant temperature rise in tissues.¥there is some evidence of lowlevel rf exposure being capable of significantly reducing dopamine (a neurotransmitter in the brain involved in thecontrol of movement) levels. given the magnitude of the reduction observed,and the extended duration of the effect, we believe these studies merit replication.¥alteration of behaviors, both learned and unlearned, can occur at exposure levels as low as 1 mw/cm2 (a thousandfold higher than pave paws exposures); however, those changes appear to be reversible with no longterm or permanent effects.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsother biological studies¥few biological studies have been completed using rf exposures whosephysical characteristics are similar to the pave paws system; however, a widevariety of biological studies have been undertaken based on rf exposures in thefrequency range of pave paws. no biological experiments have employed theexposure durations that some cape cod residents have experienced.¥no endpoints traditionally associated with carcinogenesis have beenfound to be reproducibly affected by rf exposure in cell systems.¥longterm exposure (multipleyear) studies on plant growth undertakenwith radar exposures very similar to that of pave paws showed a dose anddistancedependent decrease in tree growth, but there is currently no means forextrapolating from the biological responses reported in these studies to any healtheffect in humans.epidemiologyepidemiology of radiofrequency exposures other than pave paws¥studies reported in the peerreviewed scientific literature describinghealth outcomes among human populations exposed to pulsed or continuouswaveradiofrequency exposures vary in scientific quality and provide conflicting results.¥the methodological issues associated with those investigations primarily relate to the lack of precision in the exposure assessments, which seriouslylimits the use of the data in making a determination of the potential impact ofradar exposure on human health.epidemiology of the cape cod populationgeneral cancer incidence rates on cape cod¥using the upper cape cod cancerincidence review of 19861994 fromthe massachusetts department of public health, statistically significant increasesin the standardized incidence ratio (sir) are seen on cape cod for the followingcancers: colorectal (sir 112), breast (sir 110), prostate (sir 130), and lung (sir112). the observed elevated cancerincidence rates among residents of uppercape cod have not been adequately explained through subsequent investigations.¥as an overall measure of health for the upper cape cod towns, premature mortality before age 75 is a useful indicator. based on 2001 data, barnstable,falmouth, mashpee, and sandwich have lower mortality than the massachusettsstate average, while bourne has elevated mortality.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary15¥contrasting the calculated sirs for 5 categories (total cancers, breast,colon, lung, and prostate cancer) during 19871994 versus 19951999 for 5 townsin upper cape cod demonstrated no consistent pattern of increase. during thosetwo time periods, a decrease in sir was observed in 15 out of 25 sirs, no changein 4 out of 25 sirs, and an increase in 6 out of 25 sirs, suggesting that increasingduration of the presence of the pave paws radar has not resulted in increasedincidence of cancer. analyses covering longer durations may be required to confirm this initial observation.committee analysis of cancer incidence and the pave paws radar¥healthoutcome data on cancers in the population surrounding the pavepaws radar have been published in the upper cape cod cancerincidence reviewof 19861994. a statistical analysis was conducted by this committee using the19861994 data and peak and average power density as the measure of residentialexposure. the committee evaluated the occurrence of all cancers combined, aswell as specific cancers, including colorectal, breast (female), prostate, and lung,and did not identify any increase in cancer risk with exposure to the pave pawsradar.¥adjustment for socioeconomic status (utilizing the percent of population below the poverty level) had little impact on the observed lack of correlationbetween the radar and health outcomes evaluated.¥the population size of upper cape cod places limits on the ability toconduct welldesigned and wellconducted research to evaluate health outcomesassociated with pave paws; however, moderately low levels of increased riskranging between 40% and 100% (i.e., relative risks between 1.4 and 2.0) could beinvestigated, with acceptable statistical power, for some of the more commonforms of cancer.4. recommendations for appropriate followon studydesign issues, including the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested andthe potential value of the proposed work.recommendations¥because of the limitations of humanexposure assessment, confounders,and range of health outcomes, the committee does not recommend that furtherpave paws health investigations be conducted unless they integrate: (1) exposure assessment and health outcomes at the censusblock level; (2) strategies toquantify personal exposure in addition to residential location; and (3) appropriateconsiderations of potential confounders. in addition, it is recommended that future geographical correlation studies should be carried out for agespecific strataan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsthat address early age of exposure and/or early age at onset of adverse healthoutcomes.¥to determine the levels of extremely lowfrequency (elf) sideband energy in the pave paws radar signal, a fourier analysis should be made of arepresentative search pulse pattern, including the dead (maintenance) interval.nonlinearities in tissue impedance (which need to be determined) might convertthe sideband energy to elf energy that may have biological effects. this relatively simple analysis could identify or rule out potential effects from elf thatmay be generated by the pave paws rf exposure. many other radar systemsemploy diagnostic and calibration pulse sequences and it should be noted thatmany radars may have small elf sideband energy; the possible elf is due to thewaveform characteristics, not to the phasedarray antenna.¥theoretical work is needed to establish connections between the physics of the electromagnetic fields and changes in chemical reaction rates and thebinding of molecules to membranes. such investigations would lend insightinto possible mechanisms of biological effects of rf exposures. the strength ofsuch theoretical investigations is that they can help determinewhich of a largenumber of possible experiments are likely to identify changes that lead to biological effects and how such effects are a function of parameters such as the fieldstrengths, frequency, and exposure times.the limitation of such theoreticalwork is that the models that are analyzed may not accurately describe the problems of interest and may miss some important parameters.¥selected studies on the biological effects of rf exposures are warranted,particularly those that build upon existing studies demonstrating statistically significant responses to rf exposure. while biological responses do not necessarilytranslate into health effects, it is important to follow up on known biologicaleffects to determine if they relate to an identifiable health effect.therefore, we suggest two types of biological studies:1. studies are recommended that should include largescale genomic andproteomic screening to identify gene and protein expression patterns in cells andanimals after exposure to simulated pave paws radiation, both at levels approximating peak exposure levels to the cape cod population and at higher powerlevels to identify potential threshold power densities for biological effects. thecommittee recognizes that the limitation to these in vitro and animal studies isthat they may have limited applicability to the human situation. however, thestrength of these studies is that they will provide information covering a widerange of cellular activity in a limited number of experiments and the informationgained may be useful in generating mechanismrelated hypotheses of the effectsof pave paws exposures in cell and animal systems.2. studies of plant growth in the vicinity of the pave paws facility, such astree ring width before and after the facility became operational, are also recoman assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary17mended. while these studies have the limitation of not being directly applicableto human health, they have the specific strength of involving longterm exposures(years) under very similar conditions as the human exposures. in addition, it isanticipated that the information from these studies could relate to mechanismgenerating hypotheses, particularly if initial plant investigations are followed upwith more detailed analytical studies that investigate the mechanism of effect.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.181introductionthis report contains the results and process of the national research council committee to assess the potential health effects from exposure to pavepaws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energy. the pave pawsradar system is located on cape cod, massachusettsñnear several populatedresidential areas and in a region known for its scenic beauty and ecological richness as well as being a popular tourist area. the purpose of this section is todescribe the history of the facility and, in particular, the history of public concerns that have led to the committeeõs charge as well as to a number of otherstudies and investigations.while the committee was established to perform an independent assessmentof the possible biological and potential health effects of the pave paws phasedarray radar system, and has a very specific statement of work (see below), thecommittee has taken very seriously the genesis for this study and, in particular,the specific concerns expressed by some members of the public.history of the facilitythe pave paws phasedarray radar system on cape cod was first conceived by the joint chiefs of staff in 1972. the raytheon company was selected as the primary contractor on april 12, 1976, to build the facility. onmarch 17, 1976, the air force issued an environmental assessment of the pavepaws radar system. for the purposes of that assessment, a power desity of 10milliwatts per square centimeter (mw/cm2) as averaged over any 6minute period was established as a guideline for limiting occupational exposure. thisguideline was provided by the u.s. air force school of aerospace medicine onan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19the basis of existing occupational safety and health administration guidelines.in understanding the history of the communityõs concerns, it is important to notethat these guidelines were not specified for nonoccupational, continuous exposure. the air forceõs assessment considered a number of potentially detrimentalscenarios to the environment due to the construction and operation of the radarand judged the impact to be minimal. it also noted considerations that werethought to offset the identified potential adverse environmental effects. the airforce environmental assessment concluded in part that the proposed installation and operation of pave paws òis not a major federal action with significant adverse impact on the quality of the human environment.ó a report wasalso issued by a department of defense contractor, the illinois institute of technology research institute, in may of 1976 that evaluated the impact of the proposed pave paws radar system on the electromagnetic environment at andnear the proposed facility (iitri 1976). subsequently, on december 22, 1977,the environmental protection agency (epa) issued an environmental impactanalysis of the pave paws system at the request of massachusetts representative gerry e. studds. for locations selected for evaluation that were beyondthe boundaries of otis afb, the report concluded that òthe predicted values oftimeaveraged power density are considered to be well below values that shouldhave any health impact.ófollowing those studies, the cape cod environmental coalition, inc.(ccec), a citizens group, undertook court action in the u.s. district court againstvarious air force officials on march 3, 1978. the suit contended that the pavepaws project was in violation of the national environmental policy act of 1969because an environmental impact statement (eis) had not been prepared. onoctober 31, 1978, the ccec and the air force entered into an agreement temporarily suspending further litigation brought by the citizens group. under the agreement, the air force was allowed to continue construction of the facility while itcompleted an eis. the eis was prepared by stanford research international under a contract with the air force in may of 1979.prior to completion of the eis, the air force asked the national academy ofsciences to perform two studies relevant to the eis. one study was to focus onthe safety measures inherent in the engineering design of the radar system and thesecond study was to focus on the extent of human exposure from the radar. thesestudies were completed in 1979. the results from the studies concluded that theòpave paws system may be anticipated to expose a limited number of members of the general public intermittently to low intensities of pulsemodulatedmicrowave fields with maximal instantaneous intensities of 100 w/cm2 or lessand timeaveraged intensities lower by two orders of magnitude. there are noknown irreversible effects of such exposure on either morbidity or mortality inhumans or other species. thus it is improbable that exposure will present anyhazard to the public.ó however, the report went on to add, òin view of the knownsensitivity of the mammalian central nervous system to electromagnetic fields,an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsespecially those modulated at brainwave frequencies, the possibility cannot beruled out that exposure to pave paws radiation may have some effects onexposed people. because these effects are still hypothetical, it is not feasible toassess their health implications. such assessment will require additional researchand surveillance and must be addressed in future evaluations of the potentialexposure effects of pave paws and other highpoweroutput radar systems.ófinally, the report recommended that additional research be conducted to clarifythe possible effects of longterm exposure to the radar system. it is this recommendation that has formed the basis, in part, for some of the concerns expressedin the intervening 23 years by some local citizens prior to the start of thiscommitteeõs current study.some of the concerns voiced by the public at the time of the 1979 studyincluded concerns about possible thermal effects, disruption of implanted medical devices (such as pacemakers), and secondary radiation effects from improperly grounded structures exposed to the radar. in recent years, public concernshave shifted away from thermal effects of rf energy emitted by the radar andhave centered on theories that relate to the waveform of the phasedarray radarand concerns over the possible health ramifications from the propagation of therf energy in tissue. a number of hypotheses have been advanced that proposepossible mechanisms for health effects. in particular, some community membershave made mention of studies done, and possible mechanisms of action advanced,by dr. richard albanes.1dr. albaneseõs concerns include potential biological effects on cells and tissues from:¥òsteepó risetimes in the pavepaws waveform,¥overlapping wave fronts originating from multiple antennas on thepave paws radar, and¥the possibility of precursor formation in tissue.public concern over the potential for health effects from pave paws havebeen heightened by the massachusetts department of public health cancer registry reports, which for the last 10plus years have reported on several excesscancers in the cape cod area, and, for certain cancers, on the upper cape. chapter 9 includes a summary and review of the available health studies and cancerregistry information. concern over the potential excess in cancers has been linked,for some members of the public, to potential environmental sources includingpave paws.citizens expressed further concern over the pave paws radar system when1dr. albanese is an air force employee who has raised concerns about the safety of the pavepaws radar.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction21the air force announced in 1999 its proposed plans to upgrade the pave pawssystem. the air force has noted that the upgrades only involve system upgradesand do not involve physical expansion of the system. following the air forceõsproposal, the sandwich board of selectman and senator kennedy called for asitespecific eis. the sandwich board of selectman also requested that the airforce perform laboratory studies of the effects of longterm exposure to pavepaws and that a retrospective epidemiological study be done on cape cod toinvestigate the elevated cancer rates.since the time of this committeeõs inception, there have been citizens statingconcerns on behalf of at least some members of the public about the absence ofphased array sitespecific measurement data on pave paws from the air forcefor the past 23plus years. that lack of data and failure to follow through on therecommendation made in the original nrc report have appeared to heighten thepublicõs generalized concern and, for some, resulted in severe distrust of the airforce. one such citizenõs group is the coalition for the operation of pave pawssafely (copps). there has also been concern expressed by some members of thepublic that the group currently tasked with recommending and overseeing healthor epidemiological studiesñthe local pave paws public health steering group(ppphsg)ñis not totally objective or independent of the air force, and thus,might not wholly represent some of the citizens who have been expressing concern. distrust has been further elevated by a concern over potential informationcontained in the classified air force environmental health and safety (ehs)program to which citizens requested that the current nrc committee be providedaccess. the committeeõs review of the ehs program and the committeeõs evaluation of the classified information are contained in chapter 2 of this report.although laboratory studies of the effects of longterm exposure to pavepaws waveforms have not been done, a retrospective epidemiological study andsupporting powerdensity analysis have been commissioned by the ppphsg. thepowerdensity study was completed in may of 2004 and this committee anticipates an nrc review of the epidemiological study when it is completed in 2005.the committeeõs evaluation of the ppphsg powerdensity study appears in chapter 4 (exposure levels).in summary, there are members of the cape cod public who have had longstanding concern over the potential health effects of the pave paws radar system. the absence of measured data and further specific studies since the facilitywas constructed and became operational have increased concerns and frustratedmany residents.origin of present studyin a january 11, 2001, letter from senator edward m. kennedy to the secretary of the air force, f. whitten peters, kennedy asked that the air force fund anindependent study through the national research council of the national acadan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsemies òto examine the health effects of the pave paws system.ó kennedy further requested that this followon study (to the previous 1979 report) should address, at a minimum, the effects, if any, of the pave paws radar over the pasttwo decades and should also examine the validity of using continuouswave andpulsed nonionizing radiation biologicaleffects data as surrogates for phasedarray nonionizing radiation biologicaleffects data. the following statement oftask evolved out of discussions between the massachusetts congressional delegation (senators kennedy and kerry, and congressman delehunt), the air force,and the national academies.statement of taskthe committee will first determine whether continuous and pulsed radiofrequency (rf) energy research data are adequate for determining the biologicaland potential health effects of the pave paws phasedarray system. this determination will be communicated to the sponsor as a letter report. if the research data from continuous and pulsed rf energies are considered to be applicable for the determination of possible health effects of phasedarray rf energy,the committee will use this information to update the 1979 national researchcouncil analysis of the exposure levels and potential biological effects of thepave paws radar system. if the data are not applicable, the committee willuse other information that it determines to be relevant to phasedarray healtheffects to update the 1979 report. in this update the committee will evaluatepotential biological and health effects, evaluate exposures of the public to electromagnetic energy from the pave paws system, and make recommendationsfor the need for, and focus of, additional scientific studies to address continuedscientific uncertainty related to health outcomes and exposure to lowlevelradiofrequency energy emitted by the pave paws radar system. at thecompletion of its work, the committee will provide an update of the 1979 research council report that includes a discussion of:1.the applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, usingdata derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continuouswave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects followingphasedarray exposures;2.the extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy fromthe pave paws system;3.potential biological and health effects of the pave paws radar system; and4.recommendations for appropriate followon studydesign issues, including the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potentialvalue of the proposed work.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction23within the above specific scope, the committee has reviewed the informationprovided to us by members of the public, outside scientists, and the air force.the committeeõs scientific review process and deliberations in carrying out thestatement of task have been performed with the highest level of scientific andprofessional integrity. it was also our intent that the process we used be made astransparent as possible. furthermore, the draft report went through a rigorousindependent peer review before the national academies approved its issuance.the peer reviewers were anonymous to the committee until publication and thecommittee was required to respond to the satisfaction of the national academiesreport review committee before the draft was approved for release as a report ofthe national academies. it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to provesafetyñit is, however, possible to examine whether there is a reasonable degreeof certainty regarding the presence or absence of harm. in carrying out our statement of work and writing this report, the committee has attempted to evaluate thebest available science and used this information and evaluation to address thepublicõs concerns.information available to this committeea large body of information on radiofrequency effects was available to thiscommittee including rf information databases and recent reviews such asagnir (2001, 2003), boice and mclaughlin (2002), gao (2001), hcn (2000,2002, 2003), icnirp 2001), krewski and others (2001a, 2001b), ncrp (2002),nrpb (2004), ssi (2003), and zmirou (2001). in addition to these databases andreviews, the committee had access to personal libraries accumulated during yearsof research by committee members on this and related subjects. to evaluate information the committee felt was most relevant to the pave paws issue, a tablewas constructed to focus the literature review on those components that the committee felt would be most useful to the present study. that table of criteria waspublished in a letter report delivered to the air force on november 15, 2002, andis included in this report as appendix a.secondly, the air force made a pave paws waveform study available tothe committee (afrl 2003) and the pave paws public health steering groupmade a pave paws powerdensity study available to the committee throughtheir contractor, broadcast signal laboratories (bsl 2004).finally, a large amount of information was made available to the committeeby citizens and other individuals interested in the academies pave paws study.uncertainties associated with the evaluation ofpave paws health effectsthe statement of task asks the committee to discuss the level of uncertaintyassociated with using data derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studiesan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsemploying continuouswave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse healtheffects following phasedarray exposures. some of the uncertainties associatedwith using data derived from studies employing continuouswave or pulsedwaveexposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects following phasedarray exposures include:¥the extent to which pulse shape, repetition rate, and carrier frequencyaffect biological systems;¥the extent to which power levels and exposure duration for a givenwaveform affect biological systems; and¥identification of the relevant biological effects and how they relate tohealth outcomes, including the state of the biological system and the pathways bywhich biological changes occur. biological test systems may not closely approximate the physiological state in humans, and human physiological conditions varywidely. the approaches to extrapolate from biological effects to health effects arefrequently not well defined.the committee emphasizes that uncertainties are associated with all scientific information and analyses and these uncertainties and others were taken intoaccount in reaching the committeeõs conclusions and recommendations.referencesafrl (the air force research laboratory). 2003. phase ivñtimedomain waveform characterization measurements of the pave paws radar. air force research laboratory, kirtland airforce base, albuquerque, nm.agnir (advisory group on nonionising radiation). 2001. possible health effects from terrestrialtrunked radio (tetra). report of an advisory group on nonionising radiation. docs nrpb,(12)2 153. available from http://www.nrpb.org/publications/documentsofnrpb/abstracts/absd122.htm.agnir. 2003. health effects from radiofrequency electromagnetic fields. report of an independent advisory group on nonionising radiation. docs nrpb, 14 1177. available from http://www.nrpb.org/publications/documentsofnrpb/abstracts/absd124.htm.boice, j.d. and j.k. mclaughlin. 2002. epidemiologic studies of cellular telephones and cancerriskña review. ssi report 2002:16. stockholm: statens str„lskyddsinstitut. available fromhttp://www.ssi.se/english/pressreleaserapp200116.html.bsl (broadcast signal lab). 2004. a survey of radio frequency energy field emissions from thecape cod air force station pave paws radar facility: final test report, prepared for pavepaws public health steering group by broadcast signal lab, medfield ma.gao (general acct. office). 2001. telecommunications: research and regulatory efforts on mobilephone health issues. report to congressional requesters. gao01545. washington dc:united states general accounting office. available from http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d01545.pdf.hcn (health council of the netherlands). 2000. electromagnetic fields committee. gsm base stations. publication number 2000/16e. the hague: health council of the netherlands.hcn. 2002. electromagnetic fields committee. mobile telephones: an evaluation of health effects. publication number 2002/01e. the hague: health council of the netherlands.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction25hcn. 2003. health effects of exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields: recommendations for research. publication number 2003/03. the hague: health council of the netherlands.icnirp (international commission on nonionizing radiation protection). 2001. biological effects,health consequences and standards for pulsed radiofrequency fields in proceedings of theinternational seminar on biological effects, health consequences and standards for pulsedradiofrequency fields, erice, italy, november 2125, 1999, r. matthes, j.h. bernhardt, andm.h. repacholi eds. international commission on nonionizing radiation protection isbn3934994008.iitri (illinois institute of technology research institute). 1976. emc analysis of otis afb pavepaws site. electromagnetic compatibiliy analysis center ecacpr76020, annapolis, md.krewski, d., c.v. byus, b.w. glickman, w.g. lotz, r. mandeville, m.l. mcbride, f.s. prato, andd.f. weaver. 2001a. potential health risks of radiofrequency fields from wireless telecommunication devices. j toxicol env heal b 4:1143.krewski, d., c.v. byus, b.w. glickman, w.g. lotz, r. mandeville, m.l. mcbride, f.s. prato, andd.f. weaver. 2001b. recent advances in research on radiofrequency fields and health. j toxicolenv heal b 4:145159.ncrp (national council on radiation protection and measurements). 2002. biological effects ofmodulated radiofrequency fields. nrcp commentary no 18. bethesda, maryland: nationalcouncil on radiation protection and measurements.nrc (national research council). 1979. analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologiceffects of the pave paws radar system. washington, dc: national academy press.nrpb (national radiological protection board). 2004. review of the scientific evidence for limiting exposure to electromagnetic fields (0300 ghz). docs nrpb 15 (3) 1215. available fromhttp://www.nrpb.org/publications/documentsofnrpb/abstracts/absd153.htm.ssi (swedish radiation protection institute). 2003. recent research on mobile telephony and cancer and other selected biological effects: first annual report from ssiõs independent expertgroup on electromagnetic fields. available from http://www.ssi.se/english/emfexpeng2003.pdf.zmirou, d. 2001. mobile phones, their base stations, and health. report to the french health directorate. france, direction g”n”rale de la sant”. available from http://www.sante.gouv.fr. summary in english available from http://www.sante.gouv.fr/htm/dossiers/telephonmobil/pdf/telephuk.doc.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.262assessment of classified researchrelevant to pave pawsintroductionbecause radars are an important feature in the operation of the military intimes of peace and war and because microwave and laser systems have beendeveloped as strategic weapons to deliver energy as well as systems for guidanceor surveillance, one would expect that the u.s. air force and perhaps otherbranches of the military might have conducted research to explore effects of microwaves on biological systems. a major source of that type of research has beena responsibility of the directed energy bioeffects division in the human effectsdivision (hed) of the air force research laboratories (afrl) at brooks airforce base in san antonio, texas. for obvious reasons, some of that work hasbeen classified by the u.s. government, while other results in biological systemshave been published in the open scientific literature or in unclassified u.s. department of defense documents. the congressionally mandated study conductedby the nrc committee included a charge to examine and assess all classifiednational security data that might be relevant to pave paws.visit detailsin order to ascertain whether research by the u.s. air force had producedany evidence for biological effects that might relate to potential health effects ofelectromagnetic radiation with characteristics relevant to the radiations producedby the pave paws beam, members of the nrc committee with appropriatepersonnel security clearances and expertise in the engineering and biological disciplines were asked to review the air forceõs classified research and results. toan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of classified research relevant to pave paws27do that part of the charge, two site visits were conducted. the first was a preliminary visit conducted on april 25, 2002, in which the goal was to examine thereports and documents summarizing all of the classified research results that mightbe relevant to the pave paws study and to determine whether additional expertise and a second visit would be necessary to review the air forceõs results ofclassified research. the director of the board on radiation effects research andtwo committee members, one with biological expertise and one with physics expertise, examined the classified reports and data summaries in the directed energy bioeffects division of the laboratories at brooks afb. the sitevisit teamasked the air force to provide all reports and data summaries for all electromagnetic radiation research related to the pave paws beam characteristics. thisvisit included an extensive presentation by dr. albanese, in addition to presentations by other scientists, including air force personnel and civilians who wereassociated and familiar with the air forceõs research activities related to electromagnetic radiation interactions with biological systems. the team was hosted inbuilding 1162 (tejeda laboratory) at brooks air force base by richard l.miller, ph.d., chief, directed energy bioeffects division (afrl/hed). alsopresent were major lester ogawa, dr. johnathan kiel, the senior scientist inelectromagnetic radiation effects, and dr. walter rogers. at the time of thenrc committeeõs visit, dr. rogers was a research electrophysiologist forveridian, but he had been the key investigator on the electromagnetic health andsafety program report when he was an employee for southwest research institute. part of the review included a discussion and answer session with scientistsand air force administrative staff and part of the review included an executivesession in which the nrc sitevisit team examined reports and data summaries.the second site visit was conducted on january 3031, 2003. for the secondvisit, two additional committee members with appropriate personnel securityclearance and scientific expertise (the additional expertise requirement was basedon the review conducted by the first review team) were added to the team. inaddition, a physician with appropriate personnel security clearance was includedas an unpaid consultant. a total of four committee members, plus an m.d. consultant (a member of the institute of medicine of the national academies) and thenrc board director, reviewed the classified information provided during the twoday visit.prior to the sitevisit teamõs arrival, the full committeeõs members developeda series of questions that they instructed the review team to ask of the air forceduring their visit. those questions included:1. where did the parameter ò1 volt/meter/nanosecond rise timeó come from?2. does the air force have any evidence for actual measurements ofprecursors?3. does the department of defense have any other data (molecular, cellular,or animal) that are relevant to the pave paws exposures (i.e., other experimenan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28assessment of potential health effects from pave pawstal results known to the air force from experiments conducted using relevantwavelengths and power densities that are below thermal thresholds)?in addition to focusing on a discussion of the air forceõs answers to theabove questions, a major focus of the review was a final report of the u.s. airforceõs electromagnetic health and safety (ehs) research program. the resultsof the air forcesponsored studies conducted over a period of approximately 15years (from the 1980s to 1996) were reviewed from the perspective of whetherany of the results obtained are relevant to exposure of humans to the pave pawssystem or informative about effects that might relate to potential human healtheffects from exposures to pave paws. as stated in the final report provided bythe air force, the thrust of the ehs program is summed up by the unclassifiedtitle biological effects of exposure to ultrawideband electromagnetic energy(u) (afrlhex 2002). copies of the final classified report were provided toeach reviewteam member for use during the twoday visit.in its review of the classified data, the review team had to rely on the responsible air force personnel to provide access to all data as requested by the committee. the air force administrative personnel were very cooperative in makingthe classified materials of the ehs program available to the committee. in thisparticular review, the committee has no evidence to suggest that summaries ofdata obtained by the air force in research related to the ehs research programwere withheld from the committee. because of the large volume of data obtainedover several years in this multimilliondollar research program, the reviewedmaterials were primarily summary and tabulated material. information providedin the summary reports did not indicate the existence of biological effects in theaccumulated data that are relative to pave paws exposures. it was helpful thatthe review team was able to meet separately with dr. albanese, given that he hadraised his personal concerns on several occasions to the full nrc committee andto the sitevisit team. dr. albanese was able to observe the materials and briefings that were provided to the review team, and was asked specifically whetherthere was any additional information that should be reviewed by the team. thetwo suggestions made by dr. albanese were followed up by the team: first, thesuggestion that the u.s. navy might have conducted some relevant research; andsecond, the suggestion that contractors at other sites conducted experiments thatmight be relevant (see chapter 5, annex 52). finally, members of the reviewteam and the full nrc committee feel that it would be prudent for the air forceto declassify as much of the classified ehs material as possible in the interest ofimproving the publicõs confidence in the u.s. air forceõs disclosure, even thoughthe review team saw no evidence of results that would change the nrccommitteeõs conclusions or recommendations related to its assessment.the nrcõs review team members produced an unclassified summary andpresented it to the full committee at its meeting the following month in washington, dc, february 1011, 2003. based on the report by the reviewteam members,an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.assessment of classified research relevant to pave paws29and following discussion by the full committee, the following conclusions andfindings were made:conclusions and findings1. as best as could be determined from materials provided at our request, theair force did not design or conduct any classified studies addressing longtermexposure effects experiments directly relevant to the pave paws exposure conditions and therefore did not respond to the recommendations in the 1979 nrcreport.12. however, the air force has completed a series of studies using highpower,shortduration rf exposures that include energy in the frequency range and average power of pave paws.3. there are no classified experimental studies in the ehs program relatingto carcinogenesis.experimental results reviewed by the sitevisit team, while not generally statistically significant or at exposure conditions representative of pave paws,suggest that stimulation of cardiac or skeletal muscle might be demonstrated athigh power levels and subsecond exposures. it was somewhat disappointing tothe review team that some of the data summaries could not be easily traced backto certain key experimental characteristics.the 1 volt/meter/nanosecond slope appears to be based on dr. albaneseõstheoretical modeling and measurements in òbiologically relevantó models thathave been declassified.the visit did not reveal any additional measurements of, or demonstration of,precursors in biological or model systems.the review team learned that the u.s. navy has conducted studies of transient microwave propagation in ocean media. the navy was contacted and thecommittee received an unclassified report from naval surface weapons center(nswc) (see chapter 5 this report).1the 1979 report recommended: òadditional research is recommended to clarify further the possible effects of longterm exposure to microwave radiation at low power densities. . . . in view of theknown sensitivity of the mammalian central nervous system to electromagnetic fields, especiallythose modulated at brainwave frequencies, the possibility cannot be ruled out that exposure to pavepaws radiation may have some effects on exposed people. because these effects are still hypothetical, it is not feasible to access their health implications. such assessment will require additionalresearch and surveillance and must be addressed in future evaluations of the potential exposure effectsof pave paws and other highpoweroutput radar systems.óan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsreferencesnrc (national research council). 1979. analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologiceffects of the pave paws radar system. washington, dc: national academy press.afrlhex (air force research laboratoryðhealth effects classification). 2002. biological effectsof exposure to ultrawideband electromagnetic energy (u). afrlhex classified report.brooks air force base, san antonio, tx.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.313physical mechanisms for rf effects onbiological systemsthere is a long chain of events that must be followed to go from fundamentalphysical interactions between electromagnetic fields and molecules or ions to theproduction of changes in biologic systems that could lead to adverse human healtheffects. this chain of events has yet to be described in detail. this section willoutline a small portion of those events, beginning with the forces of electric andmagnetic fields on electrons, ions, atoms, and molecules, and changes in theirenergy, configuration, or orientation. these changes in turn can lead to furtherchanges in chemical reaction rates and in the binding of molecules to membranes.this progression can then lead to changes in cell activity that in turn can affectthe biology of the organism. a subset of these biologic changes can lead to adverse health effects. the body has many feedback processes so that many biologic deviations from the norm are corrected before they become adverse healtheffects. this section of the report will focus on the physics involved in the initialportion of this chain of events.the depth of rf penetration is dependent on the conductivity and dielectricconstant of the biological material; usually in the range of 3 to 4 cm at 433 mhzfor typical biological materials and ranges up to 16 cm in bone. thus one canexpect a significant fraction of the field to penetrate into the body.maxwellõs equations, the lorentz force law, and the electrical characteristicsof the material in question describe the basic interaction between electromagneticwaves and that material. the electric field is defined so that the force on a chargedparticle is given by the product of the charge, q, and the electric field, e. similarlythe force exerted by the magnetic flux density, b, is given by the vector productof the velocity, v, of a charged particle and the magnetic flux density. the vectorproduct means that this force is at right angles to both the velocity of the particlean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsand b or it is perpendicular to the plane formed by these vectors. given the valueof the fields e and b, one can calculate the forces, f, being exerted on an electron,an ion, or a charged molecule. these relations can be expressed by the followingformula:f= q(e + v x b).from these forces and the equations of motion, one can calculate changes inmotion and kinetic energy of the particles as a result of the application of thefields as a function of time and space. it should be noted that at the pave pawsradar frequency of 420 mhz, the direction of the force reverses every half cycleor every 1.2 10ð9 seconds. therefore, the average displacement of these chargedparticles in a uniform field is zero. thus the dominant result of a uniform field isheating. an average incident power density of 1 w/cm2 on a standing man wouldlead to a specific absorption rate, sar, of approximately 5 10ð5 w/kg. this isabout four orders of magnitude lower than the metabolicenergy generation rateof a resting man.in a nonuniform field the gradient of these fields can induce a directionalforce in atoms and molecules. if for example, the electric field induces a dipolemoment that oscillates with the field, then the gradient of the field will exert aforce on the particle that is in a constant direction. thus the gradient of the fieldcan lead to a drift current density, j, that is given by the formula:j = n v(e ¥ )e,where is the polarizability, n is the density of the particles, v is the volume ofthe ion or molecule, and is the mobility. for the fields under consideration, thisinduced drift current density will be very small and is expected to be very smallwith respect to the diffusion current and the drift currents associated with thefields that occur naturally around cells associated with biological activity that areon the order of microamps per centimeter squared.the applied fields can also change the state or energy of the bound electronsin an atom or molecule. for weak fields these changes are associated with theabsorption of a quantum of energy from the rf field. the amount of energy, w,associated with a single quantum of the rf field is given by the formula:w = hf,where h is planckõs constant and f is the frequency. the quantum of energy associated with a photon of microwave energy is about 10ð5 times smaller than thephoton of energy associated with room temperature radiation. the thermal radiation has its maximum energy in the infrared. this thermal background radiationnearly equalizes the population of low energy states that are separated by eneran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.physical mechanisms for rf effects on biological systems33gies corresponding to a microwave photon at thermal equilibrium so that manyquantum effects are completely masked by the thermal background radiation.one area in which this may not be true is associated with excited states wheremost of the energy is supplied by another process such as a chemical reaction orultraviolet radiation. for these excited states, spin selection rules may control therate at which they decay or react with other materials and the population of molecules in these states may be changed by rf radiation. examples where theseprocesses may be important are free radicals in which relatively low levels of rfpower have been shown to change the absorption spectra. in the 180 mhz regionof the spectra, and at field strengths of 0.1 to 0.5 mt, stass and others (2000) haveshown a magnetic field effect on the photochemical reaction of anthracened10with 1,3dicyanobenzene in a cyclohexanol/acetonitrile solution correspondingto changes in the free radical life times. these transitions are associated withhyperfine spectra of the molecules.in general, the fields are attenuated as they propagate through the tissue. it isa relatively complicated problem to estimate how strong the fields will be afterthey go through the skin and other anatomy taking into account the geometry ofthe body and the differing electrical properties of the skin, bone, fat, and othertissues to find the field strengths at the site of interest for a given biologicaleffect. tables for the electrical properties of many tissues, are given by gabriel,lau, and corthout as a function of frequency in three papers . using this kind ofdata, numerical models have been used to calculate the field distributions in thehead and the body in various positions (hagmann and gandhi 1979; jensen andsamii 1995; iskander and others 2000). for a review of computational methodsfor computing field distributions see the handbook of biological effects of electromagnetic fields, chapter 9 (lin and gandhi 1996). in general, the fields willbe weaker the farther away the biological site of interest is from the surface facing the source. in brain tissue the attenuation coefficient is 31.1 mð1 and the depthof penetration is about 3.2 cm. the fields in membranes and other low watercontent material will be larger than in the high water content material by the ratioof the dielectric constants. this is about a factor of 20 at 420 mhz for membranesin a fluid.the effect of the rf fields on the biological system may take place by changing chemical reaction rates or the binding of molecules to a membrane surface.this could occur in at least five ways (barnes 1996). first, it may affect thetransport of ions or charged molecules and thus the probability of the two particles coming close enough to each other to react. second, it may affect the energy with which they collide. third, it may affect the orientation or configurationof the colliding particles. fourth, it may change the energy state of one of themolecules. fifth, it may affect the average temperature of the environment. ofthese effects, only those related to changes in the average temperature are wellstudied and are generally accepted by the scientific community at large as described in a review article by adair (2003).an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34assessment of potential health effects from pave pawseffects that are currently being studied include changes in the molecularconfiguration of large biological molecules as a result of the application of rffields, dielectrophoresis or the effects of the gradients of the fields on the transport of molecules in the vicinity of membranes, and the effects of rf fields onfree radical lifetimes. for dielectrophoresis to be important the resulting currentmust be a significant fraction of the natural current of the same material. initialresults of the studies of these mechanisms indicate that to be important, the fieldstrengths need to be sufficient so that the energy absorbed from the rf fields is areasonable fraction of the thermal energy, kt.other physical changes that have been suggested include changes in the diffusion constants, (seto and hsieh 1976) and rectification of the electric field bymembranes (crc 1996). for these to occur, the signals must be large enough fornonlinearities to become significant. nonlinearities are expected to be mostimportant in biological systems with gain. at low frequencies, one such system isthe cardiac pacemaker where cells were shown to have nonlinear effects on theoscillation frequency on the order of a hundred microvolts (crc 1996). however, at frequencies above 10 mhz the membrane capacity shorts out the appliedfield and the field reverses direction so rapidly that ions cannot transit a membrane. measurements of rf field range applied to cell membranes have not shownany rectification (pickard and barsoum 1981). an important problem is determining the minimum signal that a biological system can detect in the presence of noise. for reliable communicationssignaltonoise ratios of greater than one are usually required and typical valuesare one hundredtoone and one thousandtoone. sources of noise include thermal noise, shot noise, 1/f noise, and the electrical signals generated by other partsof the biological system. at low frequencies, the electrical signals from muscleactivity of the heart are usually the largest source of electrical noise. in biologicalsystems, repetitive pulses that have a pattern that can be distinguished from thenoise are usually required to initiate important changes or to put information intomemory. these signals often have both space and time coherence. for signalsthat are coherent in space, the signaltonoise ratio grows as the square root of thenumber of events in parallel with respect to random noise. for signals that arecoherent in time one gets a similar increase in signaltonoise ratio with the squareroot of the length of time for which the signal is applied (weaver and astumian1990).at 420 mhz, the thermal noise is expected to be the largest source of noise.the noise from this source leads to meansquared averagevoltage fluctuationacross a membrane that is given by<v2> = 4ktfr,where k is boltzmannõs constant, t is the absolute temperature, f is the bandwidth, and r is the resistance.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.physical mechanisms for rf effects on biological systems35the value of the resistance and the effective bandwidth of cell membraneswill depend on the geometry of the cell. additionally, because cells are electrically coupled to each other, the effective values for the resistance and capacitanceof a cell will depend on its environment and thus the noise voltage will also bedependent on the geometry of the cells. for an externally applied voltage, thevoltage across a particular cell is dependent on the geometry of the cell and thestructure of the surrounding tissue. typical models for a cell membrane wouldconsist of resistor and capacitor in parallel. another resistor and capacitor in parallel would model the fluid portion of the cell and the applied field would extendacross a large number of cells in series. at high frequencies, this would behavelike a capacitive voltage divider so that the applied voltage to a given membranewould be roughly equal to the applied field divided by twice the number of cellsper unit distance.at low frequencies the currents through a cell membrane are nonlinear functions of the applied voltage. these nonlinearities are such that cell membranes innerve cells can behave as poor rectifiers with a typical efficiency of about 0.1%.at radiofrequencies, this efficiency has typically not been measured and there isat least one proposal that is outstanding to make measurements of this kind.a single molecular event can be amplified by a variety of means. forexample, the binding of a single neural transmitter at a synaptic junction can leadto the release of thousands of calcium ions that in turn become a part of the signalthat is used to excite the next synapse. it typically takes approximately 20 dendritic inputs to a summing junction to fire an axon. repetitive stimulation canlead to persistent changes that either increase or decrease the threshold for firing.stochastic resonance is another means of amplification that can lead to an increase in the signaltonoise ratio. in these processes a small periodic signal in anonlinear system can be amplified by extracting energy from the noise. gains onthe order of 100 and similar improvements in the signaltonoise ratios have beenshown for physical systems, and stochastic resonance has been shown to be onemethod for improving the sensitivity of biological systems to weak signals(gammaitoni and others 1998).summarythere are a number of possible mechanisms and pathways by which electricand magnetic fields could lead to biological changes at highpower exposure levels. however, at this time, the committee does not know of a physical mechanismthat has been shown to change biological processes at the fieldstrength levelsassociated with exposures to the pave paws radar.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsreferencesadair, r.k. 2003. biophysical limits on athermal effects of rf and microwave radiation.bioelectromagnetics 24:3948.barnes, f.s. 1996. effect of electromagnetic fields on the rate of chemical reactions. biophysics41:801808.crc. 1996. interaction of dc and elf electric fields with biological materials and systems. in: thecrc handbook on biological effects of electromagnetic fields, c. polk and e. postow, eds.boca raton, fl: crc press.gabriel, c.s., c. gabriel, and e. corthout. 1996a. the dielectric properties of biological tissues. i.literature survey. phys med biol 41:22312249.gabriel, c.s., r.w. lau, and c. gabriel. 1996b. the dielectric properties of biological tissues. ii.measurements in the frequency range 10 hz to 20 ghz. phys med biol 41:22512269.gabriel, s., r.w. lau, and c. gabriel. 1996c. the dielectric properties of biological tissues: iii.parametric models for the dielectric spectrum of tissues. phys med biol 41:2271 2293.gammaitoni, l, p. h−nggi, p. jung, and f. marchesoni. 1998. stochastic resonance. rev mod phys70:223287.hagmann, m.j. and o.p. gandhi. 1979. numerical calculation of electromagnetic energy depositionin models of man with grounding and reflector effects. radio science 14:2329.iskander, m., z. yun, and r. quinteroillera. 2000. polarization and human body effects on the microwave absorption in a human head exposed to radiation from handheld devices. ieee transmtt 48(11):19791987.jensen, m. and y. rahmat samii. 1995. em interaction and handset antennas and a human in personalcommunications. p ieee 83:717.lin, j. and o. gandhi. 1996. computer methods for predicting field intensity. in handbook of biological effects of magnetic fields, edited by charles polk and elliot postow. crc press.pickard, w.f. and y.h. barsoum. 1981. radiofrequency bioeffects at the membrane level: separation of thermal and athermal contributions in characeae. j membrane biol 61:39.seto, y.j. and s.t. hsieh. 1976. biotechnol bioeng 18:813.stass, d.v., j.r. woodward, c.r. timmel, p.j. hore, and k.a. mclauchlan. 2000. radio frequencymagnetic field effects on chemical reaction yields. chem phys lett 320:1522.weaver, j.c. and r.d. astumian. 1990. the response of living cells to very weak electric fields: thethermal noise limit level. science 247:459461.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.374exposure levelsoverviewthis chapter summarizes the current data on exposure levels produced bypave paws. it begins with an overview of the operating characteristics of theradar and then discusses the existing exposure data measured in terms of peak andaverage power density (in w/cm2). recent measurements of pave pawspower density recorded by census tract obtained as part of the current initiative toreexamine the potential health effects of exposure to lowlevel phasedarray rfenergy are included. discussion also considers exposure levels of the generalpopulation to other broadcast radiation sources of comparable spectral content.pave paws operationthe environmental impact and safety questions related to human health forradar installations (and other broadcast sources) have traditionally been characterized in terms of the power density produced as a function of time and locationwithin the surrounding population (often neglecting details of the local terrain).power density remains an important metric for safe operation of a radar in apopulated area. as such, the primary physical characteristics of pave pawsthat determine its powerdensity distribution (e.g., its beam attributes) are brieflyreviewed (detailed descriptions of the full operational behavior of pave pawshave appeared in prior reports [nrc 1979a, b]). historically, power levels belowthe limits known to cause thermal effects in tissue have been deemed acceptable.current safety standards, which have been in place in this country for a number ofyears, continue to evolve and are periodically revised, but are essentially basedan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38assessment of potential health effects from pave pawson this threshold (e.g., ieee standard c95.11999). however, concerns have recently been raised regarding the safety of exposure to phasedarray radiofrequencyenergy. specifically, two questions have been articulated. the first is whether ornot the human body responds differently (and detrimentally) to a radar beamformed from a large number of individual antenna elements radiating waveformsthat are slightly shifted in time (to form a beam whose direction can be electronically scanned by controlling the phasing between elements) relative to a singlesource generating an equivalent beam (in terms of radar function) that is mechanically redirected. the second is whether or not the transient characteristics ofthe waveforms generated by pave paws are sufficient to produce socalledprecursorsñspectral components of the composite signal created through interactions with the human body that have been hypothesized to propagate to distances into tissue extending beyond that expected from the primary (signal) frequency comprising the pave paws emission. as a result, the summary ofpave paws operation presented here will focus on its beamforming capabilities. the characteristics of the timedomain signal measured from pave pawsand the conceptual and experimental basis for the existence/nonexistence of precursors generated in tissue by pave paws exposure will be developed morefully in chapter 5.the beam characteristicspave paws consists of two planar arrays of active antenna elements (thecenters of each array face are pointed 20 above horizontal and 120 apart inazimuth) that are phased to radiate a directed narrow (main) beam (2 in width,broadside) in short, highenergy bursts (pulses) containing approximately 90% ofthe total transmitted power at the intended rf frequencies (any one of 24 discretefrequencies between 420 to 450 mhz). the remaining energy is distributed insidelobes to the main beam which form clusters of surrounding auxiliary beamsthat transmit significantly reduced intensities pointed in directions fanning outfrom the orientation of the main beam with respect to the horizontal. for example, the first and second sidelobes radiate powers that are no more than 1% and0.1% of the main beam, respectively are directed approximately 4 (1st sidelobe)and 6 (2nd sidelobe) off the central axis of the main beam (horizontally). giventhe local topography of the cape cod pave paws installation (which slopesaway from the radar at 1 or more below horizontal), it is primarily the secondarysidelobes that intersect the ground when the main beam is pointed at its lowest (3above horizontal) elevation.transmitted powereach face of the pave paws radar consists of a regular grid of 2677 antennas of which 885 are inactive, leaving 1792 active that are directly connected toan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exposure levels39individual solidstate transmitters radiating about 320 watts at peak power. thepeak transmitted power of pave paws is rated at 580 kw (320 w 1792),since typically only one of the two antenna faces radiates at a time. as describedin more detail below, the sequence of pulses radiated depends on the function thatthe radar is performing at the time. controls built into the system limit the rate atwhich pulses are transmitted so that the fraction of total time during which poweris radiated does not exceed 25%, making the average transmitted power less than145 kw (580 kw 0.25). correspondingly, the average radiated power in thefirst and second sidelobes is approximately 1.45 kw and 145 w, respectively.waveform generationpave paws operates by transmitting pulses of radiated power interspersedwith periods of time dedicated to signal reception, the details of which depend onthe radarõs immediate functional task (e.g., searching, tracking), making the typeof pulse or pulse burst that is emitted, and the timing between bursts, complexand dynamic. further, the variability in the pulse pattern is coupled to directionalchanges and small pulsetopulse frequency shifts in the mainbeam transmissions that create sidelobe radiation patterns that are constantly changing at anygiven location on the ground. it is, therefore, difficult to quantify precisely exposure conditions over time because the patterns of pulses emitted by pave pawsdepend on the scanning directions being searched by the main beam along withthe number and location of targets being tracked at a particular instant in time.the operation of pave paws is synchronized to a 54 msec cycle time inwhich one or more pulses may be transmitted in each of several directions atslightly different frequencies. seventeen (17) consecutive 54 msec cycles are devoted to radar function with an 18th used for selftesting. within a cycle, pulsewidths ranging from 0.25 to 16 msec may be generated. within some pulses, themain transmission frequency is varied (modulated or òchirpedó) by 2 mhz or lessdepending on radar function. hence, the maximum possible duty cycle (fractionof time that power is transmitted) during a single pulse repetition interval is 30%(16/54 msec) and 28% over 18 consecutive cycles (17/18 30%), although onaverage the maximum duty cycle does not exceed 25%.although the waveform modulation scheme is complicated by the multitaskoperation of pave paws, the modulation of transmitted power experienced at afixed location on the ground has been estimated based on the assumption that theradar is functioning in an enhanced search mode (where the main beam targets120 different azimuthal locations at 3 above the horizon every 2.5 seconds) (nrc1979b). in this analysis, the signal (assumed to be a nominal 435 mhz carrier)was considered to be modulated both by the pulse pattern of the burst transmissions and by the scanning of the sidelobes as the main beam is repositioned. thepower spectrum of the envelope of the enhanced search mode pulse train with arepetitive period of 54 msec contains a small amount of energy at 18.5 hz (1/54an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsmsec) and its harmonics. the periodic interruptions (once every 18 cycles forantenna selftesting) in transmissions create small sidebands about these frequencies spaced approximately every 1 hz (18 54 msec = 0.972 sec; 1/0.972 = 1.03hz). the 1979 nrc report (nrc 1979b) incorrectly states that 30% of the totalpower is at zero frequency. this finding was based on the envelope of the pulses.in reality, each pulse is filled with oscillations at the radar frequency (420450mhz); each pulse has a very small dc component. because of this, the 18 msecmaintenance sequence used every 972 msec (one of 18) also has very small dccomponents.as noted in nrc 1979b, continuous operation in enhanced search mode isnot probable in practice, meaning that the 18.5 hz peak would be reduced withmore power distributed around its overtones (37 hz, 74 hz, 148 hz) resultingfrom the factors of two reduction in pulse widths that occur with the variation intransmission bursts. additional sidebands would be present as well due to thequasiperiodic recurrence of the shorter interval pulses occurring within the 54msec repetition rate. further spectral spreading results from the pulsetopulsesampling of the antenna pattern sidelobes experienced at the fixed location on theground as the direction of the main beam is changed. this net effect was estimated to create a uniform loss (~6.6 db) across the band with further spectralspreading into the sidebands of the pulsetrain envelop spectrum leading to adistribution dominated by sidelobe power in the 03 hz band with less than 1% ofthe total in the 1520 hz range (nrc 1979b). the report describes a sample stripchart recording of power measurements in the field ,which showed a 2 hz fluctuation with a peak amplitude of approximately 0.4 w/cm2 on which spikes inamplitude of about 1.4 w/cm2 were superposed with a regular period of 0.4 hz.these findings tend to confirm the estimate that the modulation of the sidelobepower is a few hertz or less on the ground.pave paws powerdensity estimates and measurements exposure levels on the ground from pave paws have been estimated andmeasured a number of times at various locations under several different assumptions and conditions. six sources of such data are reviewed and summarized here:(1) the 1979 nrc (national research council) engineering panel report on radiation intensity of the pave paws radar system (nrc 1979b); (2) the1979 nrc report on exposure levels and potential biological effects of thepave paws radar system (nrc 1979a); (3) the 1986 engineering report (#8633) issued by the 1839 engineering installation group (eig) from the engineering division at keesler air force base entitled òradio frequency radiation surveyó for the an/fps115 pave paws radar (eig 1986); (4) the 2000 reportby mitre corporation on òrf power density exposure at ground level for thepave paws radar at cape codñquestions and answersó (mitre 2000); (5)the broadcast signal laboratory (bsl) final test report òa survey of radio frean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exposure levels41quency energy field emissions from the cape cod air force station pavepaws radar facilityó issued in april of 2004 (bsl 2004b); and (6) the powerdensity measurement data analysis from the coalition to operate pave pawssafely (copps) provided in may 2004.1979 nrc engineering panel reportthe 1979 national research council engineering panel reviewed measurement data obtained from june 1978 through august 1978 as well as other recordings presented to that committee in september 1978 (nrc 1979b). these measurements were obtained with the radar operating in the enhanced search mode ata fixed carrier frequency with 20% duty cycle and were corrected for equivalencyto measurements at 1 km distance from the radar with a 25% duty cycle (forcomparison purposes). data from 4 station locations ranging from 1600 to 3900feet from the radar (at 0 to 63 in azimuth from boresight) resulted in averagepower densities of 0.38 to 3.26 mw/cm2, which when converted to equivalent 1km, 25% duty cycle data, ranged from 0.64 to 0.98 mw/cm2 with an average(from the 4 locations) of 0.82 mw/cm2.the panel concluded that the measurement protocol and instrumentationused followed good engineering practice and that the variability in the measurement data (nearly 2 db) was acceptable given the calibration procedures employed and differences in line of sight to the various measurement locations.interestingly, in this same report (nrc 1979b), the panel made its own estimation of nominal and worstcase estimates of average power density on the mainaxis of a secondary sidelobe taking into account characteristics of the radar, andreported numbers of 8.2 w/cm2 (nominal) and 11 mw/cm2 (worstcase) at1 km, which are approximately an order of magnitude larger than the actualmeasurements but reassuring as conservative estimates. when factoring in moreof the pulsetrain specifics associated with enhanced search mode, the panelõsestimate reduced to 1.8 w/cm2 at a distance of 1 km, which is only about 6 dbgreater than the measurement data.1979 nrc exposure level reportthis report (nrc 1979a) reviewed similar data measured by the air force in1978 (august and october) at various points within, and up to 5 miles beyond,the restricted area, which is 1000 feet from the radar. it also considered analyticalresults for pave paws produced by the environmental protection agency(epa) in 1977. the august 1978 data were the same as reviewed in the 1979nrc engineering panel report, although much more information was included innrc 1979b. specifically, at each of the 4 measurement sites, data from mainbeam elevations of 3, 6, and 10 were evaluated along with both peak andaverage powerdensity recordings. the results showed a 344 w/cm2 peak poweran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsdensity at 3 elevation at the closest distance (1600 feet) dropping to a peak powerdensity of 179 w/cm2 at 10 beam elevation with average power densities corresponding to 3.26 to 2.90 w/cm2, respectively, for these two beam elevations. atthe largest distance (3900 feet), the 3 peak power density reduced to 48 w/cm2with an average of 0.38 mw/cm2, while at 6 beam elevation these numbers were17 w/cm2 peak and 0.20 w/cm2 on average (the 10 beam elevation was notreported).measurements were also summarized for 21 sites in surrounding locations(bourne, sandwich, mashpee, and falmouth, ma ranging in distance from 1.0to 22.2 km from the radar) on 2 days in october 1978 using both faces of theradar with an 18% duty cycle and 3 beam elevation. the committee comparedthese data to calculated values of electric field strength and average power density predicted to be emitted by the radar. it found that, in general, (1) exposuresdecreased with distance from the radar (but not uniformly), (2) measured valuesdecreased more rapidly than calculated quantities farther from the source (likelydue to attenuation not modeled from terrain, atmosphere, etc.), and (3) the ratioof peak to average power density varied significantly depending on beam elevation, azimuthal angle, and distance from the radar. more specifically, the committee concluded that average power density outside the air force base was notlikely to exceed 1 mw/cm2, the average power density at the exclusion fencesurrounding pave paws was approximately 5 w/cm2, while the averagemeasured intensity at locations where the public would most likely be exposedwas 0.06 mw/cm2 (route 6, 1.0 km from the radar).1839 eig engineering report (#8633)in the fall (september 1830) of 1986, timeaveraged powerdensity measurements were recorded to document the rf exposures in the lighting and security camera areas within and around the security fence surrounding the pavepaws radar facility on cape cod (eig 1986). these data were requested because installation contracts for new lighting and camera systems at all four pavepaws sites were being issued and construction workers would need access tolocations directly in front of the radar. at the same time, the state of massachusetts department of public health was investigating possible causes of largerthan normal cancer clusters on cape cod and the opportunity arose to also recordrf power density levels at locations within the local community around theradar.on site, measurements were reported for 17 lighting pole locations and 7security camera positions immediately inside the security fence (approximately120 feet from the radar face). data were recorded at heights of 6 and 40 feet(above ground level) for the light poles and 6 and 20 feet (above ground level) forthe security cameras. additionally, groundlevel (6 feet above) measurementswere recorded at 10 other locations: 4 of these were outside the security fence butan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exposure levels43inside a secondary fence (between 120 and 200 feet from the radar face); 3 wereoutside the second fence (but within 250 feet of the radar); 2 were inside thesecurity fence (one at the access gate lateral to the north face of the radar and theother directly in front of the north face 5060 feet away); and 1 was not labeled onthe map of measurement sites contained in the report but was listed in the datatable of powerdensity recordings (presumably, it was associated with an 18thlighting pole not explicitly shown in the diagram, although data were only recorded at the 6 foot height). powerdensity data were acquired at the 20 and 40foot elevations (above the ground) using a bucketloader truck that raised the testantenna and an operator to a height typically expected for maintenance personnelservicing either the security cameras (20 feet) or the lighting system (40 feet). asurveying transit was used to estimate the height of each measurement locationrelative to the bottom edge of the radar face. because of the sloping terrain aroundthe radar, these distances varied depending on the antenna test position. for the 6foot (above ground) measurements, the heights ranged from even with to 14 feetbelow the bottom edge of the radar (at the greatest distance away, approximately250 feet). the 20foot elevations (at the security cameras) ranged from 5 to 14feet above the bottom edge of the radar, while the 40foot elevations (at the lighting poles) ranged from 31 to 45 feet above the radarõs bottom edge.the equipment used during the recording sessions was calibrated and certified by the keesler air force base precision measurement equipment laboratory based on specifications issued by the national bureau of standards. resultsshowed that the timeaveraged powerdensity recordings had an overall accuracy of 2.0 db when measuring a pulsed rf signal. when measurements wereacquired, the pave paws radar was operating in its normal mode. the resultsshowed that the highest timeaveraged powerdensity at 6 feet above groundlevel was 1850 w/cm2 with a minimum of 38 w/cm2. the average was 529w/cm2 at the 33 locations comprising the lighting poles, security cameras, andselected positions in and around the security fence. data at the elevation of the 7security camera locations (20 feet above ground) had a maximum power densityof 745 w/cm2, a minimum of 100 w/cm2, and a mean of 273 w/cm2. data atthe elevation of the 17 lighting poles (40 feet above ground) had a maximumpower density of 3716 w/cm2, a minimum of 127 w/cm2, and a mean of 1190w/cm2.the same equipment and procedures were used to measure power densitieswithin surrounding cape cod communities at a height of 6 feet above the groundfor all except two locations: (a) the sandwich fire tower, which was 86 feetabove the ground and in direct line of sight of the radar, and (b) the otis centralcontrol tower which was 106 feet above ground. locations were selected bythe massachusetts department of public health to represent areas of dense population and to augment data obtained from earlier measurement efforts (nrc1979a, b). once a location was selected, the test antenna was placed in directline of sight of the radar whenever possible or in an open area to record maxian assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsmum signal intensities. data were measured at 15 locations in the surroundingcommunities ranging in distance from 1.2 to 8.8 miles from the radar. at 10 ofthe sites, powerdensity levels were below the measurable threshold of the equipment (determined to be 0.001 w/cm2). at locations where levels above thisthreshold were received, the largest value, 0.139 w/cm2, was documented atthe sandwich fire tower (3.2 miles away) at the 86foot elevation, which was indirect line of site of the radar. the minimum measurable value, 0.003 w/cm2,was recorded at the otis central tower (5.9 miles away elevated 106 feet aboveground). of the measurable levels at 5 sites, the average power density was0.041 w/cm2. these locations averaged 3.2 miles away from the radar (rangingfrom 1.2 to 5.0 miles away).2000 mitre reportin that report (mitre 2000), twodimensional peak and average powerdensity maps on the ground were presented for cape cod based on simulationstudies of pave paws. areas with line of sight to the radar were consideredbased on digital terrain elevation data for the cape over a distance of 50 nauticalmiles. at these locations, the power density was calculated by considering thedistance from the radar, the main beam elevation angle, and the timeaveragingfactors associated with the pulsetransmission scheme. for the peakpower calculation, a peak radiated power (543 kw), antenna gain (38.4 db), and antennapattern (beam at 3 elevation), along with a scan loss for offbroadside angles,were used to construct the maps. generally, the peakpower densities in the 15mile range from the radar cluster in the 110 w/cm2 level but fall off to 0.31.0w/cm2 at distances 510 miles from the radar, although some variation withazimuthal angle is evident.to estimate an average powerdensity map, the peakpower calculation wasmodified by the duty cycle, the scan revisiting time, and the azimuthal weightingfactor. a duty cycle of 25% was used, a scan revisit factor (fraction of time themain beam is pointed in a particular direction given its beam width) of 0.066 wasassumed, and an azimuthalweighting factor that increased the average power 4times (far from broadside) was applied. the map shows that beyond the firstcouple of miles from the radar, the average power density is within 0.010.1 mw/cm2 and generally less than 1 mw/cm2 within the first couple of miles (exceptvery close to the radar).to simplify the analysis, peak and average intensity maps that assume theterrain is flat at a height of either 0 or 100 feet above sea level (with the radar at aheight of 270 feet above sea level) are also included in this report. these resultsshow peakpower densities (assuming sealevel terrain) of 1.010.0 mw/cm2 upto 5 miles or more away from the radar and a similar distribution of peak intensityat 100 feet above sea level with several isolated òhot spotsó of 10100 w/cm2 atdistances up to 2 nautical miles from the radar. the average powerdensity mapsan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exposure levels45at sea level yielded values between 0.01 and 0.1 w/cm2, with pockets havingexposures between 0.1 and 0.3 w/cm2 approximately 2 miles from the radar.the 100foot elevation map is similar but with more uniform exposure between0.1 and 0.3 w/cm2 in a zone extending up to 4 miles from the radar with levelsbetween 0.01 and 0.1 w/cm2 existing beyond this zone.the broadcast signal lab reportduring the first quarter of 2004, the broadcast signal lab, medfield, ma(bsl 2004a, b), executed a survey of rf emissions from the pave paws radarfacility located at the massachusetts military reservation on cape cod. thefinal test plan was approved by the pave paws public health steering group(ppphsg) based on its solicitation for competitive proposals to complete thework. it consisted of three distinct tasks: (1) measurement of radar emissionsduring its normal operation at 50 open, publicly accessible locations throughoutcape cod; (2) measurement of ambient emissions from all other sources in thevhf and uhf radiofrequency spectrum (30 mhz to 3 ghz) at 10 locations oncape cod (these data are discussed in the subsection on other environmentalexposures); and (3) estimation of the radar exposure on cape cod based oncalculations from a mathematical description of the pave paws antenna usedin conjunction with propagationmodeling software provided by the mitrecorporation.all measurement methods and procedures were consistent with guidelinesand consensus standards for performing such work, and the 50 field locations forassessing radar exposures were selected in consultation with the ppphsg and theinternational epidemiology institute (iei). a number of factors including (1) distance, (2) elevation, (3) population density, and (4) beam sweep coverage wereconsidered in the site selection process. a detailed discussion of these parametersand the 50 field measurement locations is available elsewhere (bsl 2004a). table41, reproduced from the final test plan (bsl 2004a), is a useful summary of thenumber of measurements fulfilling certain site criteria regarding height, intervening terrain, distance, etc. maps of the specifics of locations by town, county, andapproximate coordinates can be found in the test plan (bsl 2004a) and finalreport (bsl 2004b). the actual measurement site locations were modified slightlyat the time of data acquisition to ensure safety, accommodate access issues, andimprove measurement quality as determined by the field crew. measurementswere recorded for 90minute periods (as six 15minute routines where the detector was moved 3 feet after each acquisition sequence) in order to acquire realisticestimates of the average and peak radar emissions at each location.summary tables of powerdensity measurements at the 50 sites within thecommunities of cape cod show that the average values of the recordings at eachlocation are extremely small. the largest average value was 0.035 w/cm2, whichwas recorded in shawme crowell state park (site #15) at a location close to thean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsradar (less than 1 mile) that was relatively high (167 feet above sea level). thenext highest sets of recording levels were nearly an order of magnitude lower(~0.0020.005 w/cm2) and occurred at 4 other locations (site # 9, 21, 23, and40) that generally tended to be closer to the radar (within 3 miles) although atvariable heights (9167 feet above sea level). one interesting exception was thescargo hill site whose average power density was 0.0038 w/cm2 at some 18.5miles from the radar (65 foot elevation). direct line from the radar to this locationdoes cut across the coast line of the cape, which may explain its relatively high(compared to radar distance) values, although the direct paths to sites 15 and 9cut across mostly water (at distances ranging from 24 to 31 miles from the radar)and do not appear elevated compared to other locations. the 5 sites (# 9, 15, 21,23, and 40) with the highest average values, not surprisingly, also shared thehighest peakpower recordings in the 1415 w/cm2 range. these peaks were,again, nearly an order of magnitude greater than peaks measured at the other 45locations. the next cluster of peak values hovered in the range of 1.41.5 w/cm2and were found at 10 other sites (# 14, 16, 1820, 22, 2527, 47), which were allwithin 6 miles of the radar and averaged a distance of 2.6 miles away.of the 5 sites with the highest average and peak powerdensity measurements, 4 were located in the sidelobe overlap zone (the 5th was in the northernface sweep zone). the majority of the 10 sites with the next highest levels of peakpower density (all but one, #14) appeared in either the northern sweep (5 sites) orsidelobe overlap (4 sites) zones. although there is an overall decrease in detectedsignal levels with distance, sites close to the radar (e.g., route 6e canal overlook, #29, 1.9 miles away) can have low levels (0.135 w/cm2 peak), while locations at much further distances (e.g., rock harbor parking, #5, 27.5 miles away)can exhibit relatively higher levels (0.153 w/cm2 peak), reflecting the importance of the intervening and local terrain in addition to the directline distance.comparisons between the current measurements and those recorded withintable 41measurement site characteristicno. of sites% of sitesmeasured with 30 fthigh antenna1530radio line of sight to radar3672terrain obstruction to radar1326manmade obstruction to radar 1 2beneath beam sweep4080beyond beam sweep (includes rear)1020less than 3 miles from radar16323 10 miles away from radar1938more than 10 miles away from radar1530barnstable county4488plymouth county 612an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exposure levels47the community in either 1978 (nrc 1979a,b) or 1986 (eig 1986) show that thepresent equipment was significantly more sensitive and able to achieve recordings of weaker signals than was possible during the earlier efforts. at sites within7 miles of the radar (previous studies did not measure responses at greater distances), the 2004 data are consistently lower than the prior recordings. specifically, the average powerdensity readings for sites within 7 miles were below0.01 w/cm2 in the 2004 data with many points below 0.0001 w/cm2. the1978 and 1986 results showed average power densities between 0.1 and 0.01w/cm2 for most sites within 3 miles of the radar with the largest value beingabove 0.1 w/cm2 at 3plus miles from the radar in the 1986 data set. aboutonehalf (4 locations) of the 1978 readings were between 0.01 and 0.001 w/cm2 and a third (2 sites) of the 1986 results were in this range (levels below0.001 w/cm2 were not considered to be measurable with the instrumentationused in the earlier powerdensity surveys).the modeling effort produced results from the propagation model combinedwith an antenna pattern to generate a matrix of publicexposure estimates to thepave paws emissions. the propagation model was evaluated by comparing itspredictions to measurements obtained in 3849 latitudelongitude cells acquiredduring a 250mile drive test. the comparison between computed and measuredvalues indicates that the model is accurate to within the uncertainty of the measurements. specifically, the average variance between the propagation model prediction and the drivetest recordings was ð1.6 db. a mitre antenna model wasused to create an antenna pattern for the propagation software. this led to thecreation of the exposure matrix for cape cod, indexed by latitude and longitude,containing values for each position in terms of dbw/cm2. to validate the resultswhen combining the antenna and propagation models, measurements at 35 siteswere compared with the corresponding calculations. departure between the modelestimates and the measured data was 6.5 db on average over all sites with astandard deviation of 8.5 db. excluding 4 sites behind the radar reduced the average departure to 5.9 db. overall, the model estimates slightly overpredicted thelevels measured in the field.copps datathe coalition to operate pave paws safely (copps) performed powerdensity measurements on cape cod at 26 sites (23 firehouses, 2 commuter parking lots, and 1 lighthouse) spanning 311 days beginning in may of 2003. analysisof existing data as of april 2004 was made available to the committee throughwebsite postings (see coops 2004). specifically, a townbytown map of measurement sites, a colorcoded rank ordering by measured (http://www.pavepaws.com/measuredsites.pdf) peakpower density (in w/cm2) of the towns wheredata were recorded (http://www.pavepaws.com/peakmeasurements.pdf), andplots of peakpower versus various parameters of interest (e.g. elevation, disan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48assessment of potential health effects from pave pawstance, obstruction, bearing, weather, season) (http://www.pavepaws.com/additionalfindings.pdf) were provided. the results are generally consistent withthe broadcast signal lab (bsl) report (bsl 2004b) in a number of importantrespects, although the details of specific measurements may be different (and arenot easily compared given information presently available). the copps datashow peakpower densities of less than 1 w/cm2 regardless of location, withmore than 75% of the 40 peak values reported (http://www.pavepaws.com/additionalfindings.pdf) being near or below 0.1 w/cm2. these levels are lowerthan the highest peak values recorded by bsl but consistent with the second andthird tiers of peak values into which the majority of the bsl measurement sitesalso fall. both the bsl and the copps data sets reveal that the locations withhigher peak powerdensity recordings are preferentially distributed in the northern sector of the radar. both data sets also indicate that some of the highest peakpowerdensities occur at locations having the greater distances from the radar,especially when the straightline distance from the radar to the measurement sitecuts across the coastal waters of cape cod bay. other findings in the coppsdata are consistent with expectations (and the bsl results) that the degree oftopological obstruction between the measurement location and the radar facilityis a critical determinant of the measured powerdensity exposure. positive correlations between powerdensity levels and clear weather and the fall/winter seasons were reported in the copps analysis. again, these results are reasonablyanticipated from the perspective that inclement weather, increased foliage, andother factors are expected forms of obstruction to radiowave propagation at pavepaws frequencies.population exposure to other rf sourcesit is informative to consider general and specific population exposures toother rf sources that have some similarities to pave paws for gaining a perspective on the powerdensity levels described in this chapter. interestingly, the1979 engineering report (nrc 1979b) compared the transmitter characteristics ofpave paws with two other radar installations that radiate much higher peakpowers (megawatts) and higher (for one) and lower (for the other) average powers but no powerdensity measurements on the ground were reported. in nrc(1979a), data obtained by the epa in the 1970s (epa 1978a) from populationexposures in 12 large u.s. cities over the fm and tv broadcast bands (54900mhz) were summarized. these studies estimated that the median exposure inurban areas was 0.005 w/cm2 and that 95% of the urban population is exposedto less than 0.1 mw/cm2. these numbers are generally consistent with the pavepaws data in terms of powerdensity exposure. the epa has also reportedpowerdensity measurements in tall buildings that either house, or are near, broadcast antennas (epa 1978b). these studies show that, depending on the locationwithin the building and/or the degree of shielding from the antenna site, valuesan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exposure levels49can range from less than 1 w/cm2 to 97 w/cm2 on the inside to as much as 230w/cm2 outside (and near) the source.the broadcast signal laboratory study (bsl 2004b) selected 10 sites forassessing the ambient rf exposure that were chosen in consultation with theppphsg and iei, and a detailed discussion of the rationale for their selectionappears in bsl 2004a. a bracketing strategy was adopted because, as with thepave paws radar, itself, the levels of ambient vhf and uhf radiation measured at a given location depend on distance from the source, the interveningterrain, and local topological environment. at least a dozen fm radio stations (anumber of which operate with radiated powers of 45 kw or more) and a couple oftv stations (including one uhf station licensed to operate at 1150 kw) arepresent in the area. numerous (more than 5000) landmobile facilities, typicallylicensed for 100 to 1000 watts per channel emissions (e.g. police, fire, businesssystems) were also identified. the final 10 sites selected attempted to representhigh, low, and middlelevel exposure conditions to these sources as a means ofproviding a representative sampling of the ambient rf exposures on cape cod.the propagation model was used to define the power levels and associated locations that would be expected to bracket exposure conditions given the relevantsources of radiation identified. descriptions of the final site selections are reported (bsl 2004b). four premeasurement bracketing level estimates spanning10ð110ð5 (i.e., 10ð1, 10ð2, 10ð4, 10ð5) w/cm2 were used to categorize the 10sites.measurements at the 10 sites selected to bracket the levels of ambient rfexposure across the vhf and uhf signal bands were reported in terms of themaximum permissible exposure (mpe) for low (30320 mhz), mid (320950mhz), and high (9503050 mhz) bands that were combined into a final figure ofmerit that could be compared to the mpe for pave paws. these findings weretabulated as db below mpe. for example, the mpe for pave paws (determined by applying the ieee weighting for the 420450 mhz band) is 290 w/cm2 thus the maximum and minimum measured power densities from pavepaws (at the 50 measurement sites) convert to ð48 db (below mpe) and ð103db, respectively, whereas the equivalent values for the ambient signals from the10 sites resulted in maximum and minimum measured values of ð19 db and ð50db (relative to mpe). these results indicate that the ambient exposure level at themost energetic site (near the fm tower at the exit 6 commuter parking lot onroute 6) was 100 times less that the mpe for the general population. the othersites were an additional 10 to 1000 times less exposed to vhf and uhf emissions. overall, the highest average pave paws exposure at any of the 50 measurement sites was comparable to the lowest ambient levels observed at the 10locations sampled. further, the variation between ambient sites was no more thana factor of 1000 (30 db), while the lowest observed pave paws signal wasabout a million (60 db) times weaker than the highest.cellphone exposure has generated considerable interest, and there have beenan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsa number of efforts to quantify exposure. two issues are relevant: first, the exposure level to the cellphone user due to the radiated power during a call, andsecond, the exposure of the general population to cellphone relay stations. theformer issue has been studied in some depth. the power radiated for a typical cellphone is generally less that 0.6 w and it has been shown that approximately halfof this power is absorbed in the hand and head of the user, leading to specificabsorption rates on the order of 1 w/kg (jensen and rahmatsamii 1995).the committee is not aware of extensive studies of powerdensity levels nearrelay stations (base stations) in the united states, but there are 3 informativeevaluations from canada, the united kingdom, and australia.1 in vancouver,canada, thansandote and others (1999) measured rf levels in 3 schools withbase stations on or near their campuses and 2 schools with no antennas nearbythat served as controls. maximum measured exposures in the 3 schools with adjacency ranged from 0.16 w/cm2 to 2.6 w/cm2 depending on the location of thestation (2.6 mw/cm2 resulted from a base station on the roof of a school). the 2schools without base stations in their vicinity had a maximum power density of0.01 w/cm2.the u.k. national radiological protection board measured rf powerdensity levels at 118 sites around 17 base stations in 2000 (nrpb 2000). typicallevels were less than 0.1 w/cm2, while the highest recorded power density atany location was 0.83 w/cm2. the measured upper bound on power density as afunction of distance from the base of a building or tower with an antenna showedan increase (from just below 0.01 w/cm2) for approximately the first 60 meters(to a level approaching 0.1 w/cm2) followed by a more gradual decrease (backto 0.01 w/cm2) up to 200 meters away. the powerdensity auditing program inthe u.k. has continued with data available from recording in 20012004. resultsare summarized in terms of a percentage of the icnirp (international commission for nonionizing radiation protection) powerdensity guidelines for a bandexposure equivalent that factors in the changing safety standard as a function offrequency from 400 mhz to 2 ghz, which for the pave paws emissions wouldrepresent an upper limit of 200 mw/cm2 (at 400 mhz). the highest values reported at any location for each year would represent pave pawslike exposures (i.e., band equivalent exposure extrapolated to 400 mhz) of 0.72 w/cm2,0.27 w/cm2, 0.32 w/cm2, and 0.26 w/cm2 for the years 2001, 2002, 2003,and 2004, respectively.the survey of gsm base stations by the australian radiation protection andnuclear safety agency measured 13 sites that yielded an average power density1from the website http://www.mcw.edu/gcrc/cop/cellphonehealthfaq/toc.html and http://www.ofcom.org.uk/consumerguides/mobphonebasestat. information available 10/25/04.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.exposure levels51of less than 0.1 w/cm2; the highest power density measured was less than 0.2cm2.summary of pave paws exposure datawhile not extensive per se, the powerdensity measurements that do exist forthe pave paws radar on cape cod, which have been recorded by differentgroups on a number of separate occasions over the radarõs operational life, aregenerally consistent with expectations. the most extensive efforts in terms of thenumber and distribution of measurement sites are the recently issued 2004 reports(bsl 2004a, b; copps 2004), which have focused on assessments of exposurelevels within the surrounding communities on cape cod. these studies revealheterogeneity in the measured levels that demonstrate the strong influence of theintervening terrain and local topological environment on the recorded power densities and consequently the public exposure. while there is a general decrease inthe powerdensity levels measured with distance from the radar that is evident inthe various datasets that have been assembled, it is also clear that locations muchfarther (10plus miles) from the radar can be exposed to higher levels of radiationthan sites nearer (within 3 miles) the facility depending on topographical features. certainly, both the bsl and the copps data (bsl 2004a, b; copps 2004)demonstrate this characteristic at selected locations. nonetheless, the averagepower densities have been consistently below 0.1 mw/cm2 and generally in the0.0010.01 mw/cm2 range at locations where the public would be expected to beexposed. the simulation studies that have been reported estimate higher valuesoverall, but for the most part still suggest that the exposure of the public is lessthan 1 w/cm2 in terms of average power density. measured peak levels aregenerally less than 1 w/cm2, although values as high as 15 w/cm2 have beenfound at a few elevated locations near the radar. these levels are well below thewidely accepted thresholds for the power absorption that would be required togenerate harmful thermal effects in tissue. the degree to which they may causeother biological effects in cells and animals is discussed in chapters 6 and 7,respectively, and the implications for human health are developed in chapters 8and 9. the degree to which emissions from pave paws may contain specialcharacteristics pertaining to its timedomain waveform is described in the following chapter (chapter 5).referencesarpansa (australian radiation protection and nuclear safety agency). 2000. line, p., w.a.cornelius, m.j. bangay and m. grollo. levels of radiofrequency radiation from gsm mobiletelephone base stations (tech rep 129). available from http://www.arpansa.gov.au/pubs/emecomitee/rfrep129.pdf as of 10/25/04.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsbsl (broadcast signal lab). 2004a. survey of rf energy field emissions from the pave pawsradar located at cape cod air force station, massachusetts: final test plan, prepared inconsultation with international epidemiology institute, rockville, md, by broadcast signallab, medfield ma.bsl. 2004b. a survey of radio frequency energy field emissions from the cape cod air forcestation pave paws radar facility: final test report, prepared for pave paws publichealth steering group by broadcast signal lab, medfield ma.copps (coalition to operate pave paws safely). 2004. available from http://www.pavepaws.com/measuredsites.pdf; http://www.pavepaws.com/peakmeasurements.pdf; http://www.pavepaws.com/additionalfindings.pdf.eig (engineering installation group). 1986. radio frequency radiation survey for the an/fps115pave paws radar cape cod ma, 1830 sep 86, report #8633, 1839 engineering installation group, keesler air force base, biloxi, ms.epa (environmental protection agency). 1978a. population exposure to vhf and uhf broadcastradiation in the united states, r.a. tell and e.d. mantiply, epa technical report orp/ead785.epa. 1978b. measurements of radiofrequency field intensities in buildings with close proximity tobroadcast stations, r.a. tell and n.n. hankin, epa technical report orp/ead 783, march1978.jensen, m. and y. rahmatsamii. 1995. interaction of handset antennas and a human in personalcommunications. p ieee 83:717.mitre. 2000. rf power density exposure at ground level for the pave paws radar at capecodñquestions and answers. mitre technical report, mitre corporation, bedford, ma.nrc (national research council). 1979a. analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologiceffects of the pave paws radar system. washington, dc: national academy press.nrc. 1979b. radiation intensity of the pave paws radar system, engineering panel on the pavepaws radar system, national research council, final report. washington, dc: nationalacademy press.nrpb (national radiological protection board). june 2000. mann, s.m., t.g. cooper, s.g. allen,r.p. blackwell, and a.j. lowe. exposure to radio waves near mobile phone base stations.chilton, u.k.: national radiological protection board.thansandote, a., g.b. gajda, and d.w. lecuyer. 1999. radiofrequency radiation in five vancouverschools: exposure standards not exceeded. can med assoc j 160:13111312.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.535pave paws exposure conditionsexposure characteristicsthe radar and its signalto briefly review the radar description provided in chapter 4, the pavepaws radar is pulsed; it transmits a pulse sequence, and then is quiescent whilethe radar echoes return. then another pulse sequence is transmitted and the process is repeated. pulse widths vary from 250 microseconds to 16 milliseconds,and the listening period is at least 38 milliseconds. some pulses vary in carrierfrequency during the pulse, using a technique called òchirpingó to improve rangeresolution. the carrier frequency varies from 420 mhz to 450 mhz. signal bandwidths at the input to the final amplifiers range from 8 khz for the narrowestpulse to 125 hz for the widest pulse. the òchirpó bandwidth is 2 mhz.the antenna is comprised of two phased arrays, each located on a planarface, tilted back 20 degrees from vertical. the elements are located on a regularhexagonal lattice, and there are 1792 active elements per face and 885 passiveelements. the elements are deployed in quadrantal symmetry to allow precisemonopulse tracking of targets. the diameter of each array is approximately 72.5ft. each array face will support many more elements, but that expansion has notoccurred, and the committee has been informed that there are no plans to expandthe number of elements on the array. the elements are bent dipoles, each supported by a twopost balun. bending down the arms avoids blind angles producedby dipolebalun mode interference. crossed dipoles are used, thus providing bothvertical and horizontal polarization. both arms are hot; the two conductors supporting the dipole arms constitute a balun, which transforms the balanced dipolearm connection to an unbalanced coax; the latter connects to the module containan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsing the amplifier. this is a well known and widely used technology. each quadrant has 14 subarrays, and each subarray has 32 transmitreceive (tr) modulesand 32 active elements. the array main beam is steered by applying phase shift toeach tr module. all modules are excited simultaneously; beam scan is providedby phase shift. sidelobe levels are held 20 db below the main beam by tapering:the inner subarrays have all active elements, while middle subarrays have somepassive elements, and outer subarrays have more passive elements. thus an amplitude taper is produced over the array (see figure 54). each tr module includes a bandpass filter to minimize interference caused by the radar. filter bandwidth is 115 mhz at 10 db points; the measured filter response is shown infigure 51. note that the filter skirts around 420 and 450 mhz are quite steep.this filter affects the pulse buildup and decay.figure 51measured module filter response. the filter minimizes the interference ofpave paws to services such as cell phones, gps, and other communications systems.filter bandwidth is 115 mhz at 10 db points. this figure shows the pass band (lowattenuation for the radar frequencies [425450 mhz], and high attenuation for harmonics;attenuation of 70 db for second harmonic at 850 mhz; 68 db for third harmonic at 1350mhz; 31 db for 4th harmonic at 1800 mhz; and 59 db for fifth harmonic at 2100 mhz).this filter insures that the pave paws signal has very small harmonic content. figure isreproduced with permission from raytheon company.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions55measurements of the exciter output rf waveform are shown in figures 52a,52b, and 52c. note that these appear inverted, due to the measuring equipmentusing negative detection. in figure 52b the rise time is approximately 1 microsecond, with a gradual rise and gradual leveling off. finally figure 52c showsfall time, which is much slower, roughly 12 microseconds, and therefore no abruptchanges are evident. note that the risetime bandwidth is narrow (roughly 2 mhz).waveform decayeach pave paws dual polarized element is driven by a class c (highlynonlinear) amplifier; a second class c amplifier drives all 64 element amplifiersin a subarray; a third class c amplifier drives all 56 subarrays. all of theseamplifiers are òonó all the time; the radar exciter unit applies the waveform (pulse)to the amplifier driving the subarrays. beam steering is provided by a phaser ateach element module. class c amplifiers tend to sharpen up transients, so theexciter buildup and decay times of roughly 1 and 12 microsec (figures 5.2b and5.2c) become typically 200 and 1000 nsec for the radiated signal.an examination of phase iv buildup and decay pairs shows that these timesare roughly equal, about 200 nsec (see figures 56 and 511, which are expansions of figures 348e and 353e in the afrl (2003) phase iv timedomainwaveform characterization report. in a number of cases, a trailingedge spike islarger than the main waveform. all of these are at wide angles from the mainbeam, where the sidelobe envelope is much lower. these spikes are probably dueto two factors working together. first, the individual class c amplifiers do notturn off alike, due to different resonant circuit q (ratio of stored energy to dissipated energy), different gain, and other factors. second, when all element contributions add in phase, the main beam is produced. sidelobes and nulls are produced when the element contributions partly cancel, producing sidelobe levelsaway from the main beam 3040 db down (in power down to 0.0010.0001 from1). if amplifiers have typical gain variation of 1 db or even more, fieldstrengthlevels well above the steadystate sidelobe level are possible as the elements variously shut down. this is substantiated by calculations made by tomlin for theppphsg.1 it should be noted that the discrete delay is not a possible cause here.signal propagationthe radar signal power decays as 1/r2 in free space, but multipath signals areusually a problem at uhf. multipath is caused by diffraction and reflection. forexample, if a hill or slope blocks the direct radar signal, the signal can be re1jim tomlin, charts and notes prepared for the ppphsg, january 6, 2004. jim tomlin is atechnical advisor to the ppphsg.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfigure 52cexciter output pulse fall time (negative direction) taken from rf monitorexample in t.o. 31p62fps11551, chapter 6.figure 52aentire exciter waveform pulse (negative direction) taken from rf monitorexample in t.o. 31p62fps11551, chapter 6.figure 52bexciter output pulse (negative direction) rise time taken from rf monitorexample in t.o. 31p62fps11551, chapter 6.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions57flected or diffracted by towers, buildings, power lines, or other obstacles and canreach areas that are not lineofsight from the radar. these multipath signals neednot be in the direction of the observer; they may arrive sideways. reflectedmultipath is provided by many types of metallic structures: metal lighting poles;fence poles and wire; rebars in concrete; and telephone cable and power wires, tomention a few. these multipath signals are well known, and can easily disrupt the1/r2 energy falloff. almost certainly the anomalous phase iv measurements aredue to multipath.the question of surface waves has been raised by concerned cape cod citizens. however, it has been accepted for 50 years that the longitudinal field component that may exist at hf, vhf, and uhf is not a surface wave. sommerfeld inhis classic 1909 work (sommerfeld 1914) made a sign error, according to norton(1937) and others in several papers. there is recent evidence by collin (2004)that the original sign was correct, but in either case the earth does not support asurface wave. the waves are now called òground wavesó; the vertical electricfield tilts just enough to satisfy the lossy boundary conditions in the ground. theterm òsurface waveó has for at least 40 years referred to slow waves, waves withvelocity less than that of light, and usually supported by reactive surfaces. at 435mhz, ground waves attenuate rapidly. using sandy soil (epsilon = 10, = .002 s/m), the radiation is attenuated 40 db (0.0001 in power, 0.01 in field) over a distance of 120 m (400 ft) . outside the safety fence, the ground wave should be toosmall to measure. use of the formulas of baœos, as suggested, is not recommended. they are excellent for dipoles in earth, or dipoles very close to earth, butare error prone for separations of a wavelength or more.although it has been implied that the measured radial fields (radial waves)represent a new and unexpected phenomenon, they are just the result of multipathand simple geometry. as sketched in figure 53a, the line of sight during thephase iv measurements was not horizontal, but was inclined down about 2 degrees. since the electric field at the measurement point is perpendicular to the lineof sight, it can be resolved into a large vertical component and a small horizontalor longitudinal component. for many points on cape cod, the line of sight angleis larger, leading to a larger longitudinal component. at uhf frequenciesmultipath is a well known and serious problem. metallic structures includingtowers, power lines, and rebars in concrete, that are inclined or curved, will convert vertically polarized fields into horizontally polarized fields. even curvedearth hills can produce polarization conversion. it is difficult if not impossible tocompute the combined multipath effects in a given environment. the multipathcontributions and the horizontal field due to line of sight tilt combine to producea longitudinal e field. (see figure 53b taken from 392c, and figure 53c takenfrom 396c of the phase iv report.) because this field is parallel to ground, andthe sensor is roughly two wavelengths above it, there are also ground reflectioneffects. the derivative sensors used in the measurements have very broad patan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfigure 53cradial field amplitude (from 396.c of the waveform report).figure 53avector resolution of pp electric field into vertical and longitudinalcomponent. note: this figure has been changed since the original prepublication versionto correct an error.figure 53bvertical field amplitude (from 392.c of the waveform report).verticalcomponentppelectricfieldlongitudinalcomponentarrayan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions59terns, and pickup signals from many directions. it would be better physics to callthe field a òlongitudinal component.ótime delay in large antennasit was suggested by dr. albanese2that phasedarray radars are different fromother radars due to their discrete time delay. this is one of the key issues relatingto pave paws effects and it is examined thoroughly here. in the farfield of alarge phased array or reflector antenna, the contributions from all parts of theantenna arrive at the main beam peak simultaneously (broadside beam for aphased array). at other angles, there is a differential delay as the energy from theclosest part of the array or reflector arrives first, while that from the farthest partarrives last. of course this applies primarily to pulsed signals. for the reflector,the pattern buildup starts at 90 degrees from the axis due to the currents on thereflector edge (see hansen 1987; hansen and kramer 1992) and the pattern buildsup slowly and continuously. with a phased array, the pattern builds up slowly butin a discrete stairstep fashion. due to the large number of elements, the stair hasmany very small steps. as expected, the effect of those small steps does notappear in the waveform measurement (see figure 56).in the nearfield region (distance generally less than 2000 ft), there are delays also in forming the main beam. for the phased array, the nearfield stairstepbuildup of the waveform is expected to be very close to a continuous buildup. fora reflector antenna, the nearfield buildup is more complex.at angles away from the normal to the face of the array, there is a time delaybetween energy arriving from the closest element and that arriving from the farthest element, since all elements are turned on simultaneously. this delay, inamplitude and phase, has been computed for the pave paws radar. the activearray is 72.5 feet wide. a worst case scenario is postulated: the beam is scannedto the farthest left position of 60 degrees azimuth, and to the lowest elevationposition ð17 degrees (3 degrees above the horizon). the observation point is 60degrees right azimuth, and ð20 degrees elevation (on the horizon). a computerprogram was written to calculate the waveform buildup. the xy coordinates ofthe 1792 excited elements were provided on a disk by mitre. figure 54 shows thepositions of the active elements. they are closely spaced around the center butspace tapering is used in the outer portion, to control the sidelobe level.2 dr. albanese presented his theories to the committee in open sessions of committee meetings onseveral occasions and by letter. a number of causal hypotheses were also presented in a letter to theppphsg dated july 30, 2001, and the committee has also evaluated responses to these hypothesesmade by dr. robert adair in a journal commentary (adair, r. k. 2003. environmental objections tothe pave paws radar system: a scientific review. radiat res 159:128134).an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfigure 54positions of the active pave paws elements.using the observation direction, the projected distance from each element tothe first element (center row, right side) is calculated for the 1792 elements. theprojected distances are calculated using direction cosines, where the polar angle is measured from the normal to the array face, and the azimuth angle is measured in a horizontal plane from normal to the surface. since those with the smallest projected separation contribute first, the array of projected separations is ordered in ascending order by a wellknown subroutine called heapsort.because the excitation phases associated with the main beam position affect thephase of the buildup, the x and y coordinates are sorted in consonance with theprojected separations. the delay time across the array is roughly 74 nanoseconds;the delay for the worst case mentioned above is 60 nanoseconds. in order to get afinegrain picture of how the elements contribute, the time line is divided into12,000 steps of roughly 5 picoseconds each. the time stepping starts at 0 at therightmost reference element and proceeds on. when it has encompassed the nextclosest element, the contribution of that element with the appropriate scan phasean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions61and unity amplitude is added in. as the time step proceeds, more and more elements are added until the opposite side of the array is reached. since the phaseand amplitude are both a result of stairstep contributions, no smoothing or interpolation has been used in the plots. figure 55a shows the amplitude buildup forthe extreme case mentioned above.this curve is made of 1790 stair steps, although they are not visible due tothe scale. but a portion of the delay time is expanded in figure 55b, where thesteps are clearly visible.the delays range from 5 psec (or less, as this is the least count) to roughly100 psec. note that the height of the large steps is roughly 4 10ð3 times the finalheight, and that is the level of a farout sidelobe, perhaps 1 10ð4 times the mainbeam power. so a typical step represents a power step of the order of 4 10ð7times the main beam power. figure 55c gives the phase buildup; the first step isan artifact due to the plotting program starting at zero phase. note that the calculations were made along one of the four directions (axes) of symmetry, which is aworst case. if a slightly different azimuth angle had been used, the distance stepswould be less regular, and the buildup would be even smoother. these incremental delays, as radiation from antenna elements appear, are very much smaller bycomparison to the rise times (less than a factor of a thousand) produced by the trmodules, as discussed below.total phase change during buildup is very modest. thus the phasedarraydelay is expected to produce a negligible effect; the waveform rise time is verygradual. buildup is similar to that of a large parabolic dish antenna system.the pave paws phase iv measurement program produced data that arerelevant to the effects of time delay, both in arrays, and in reflectors. all of thegraphs presented below are excerpts of the digital data provided to the committeeby afrl. first, the pp waveform buildup at 60 degrees from the array normal(from figure 348e of the waveform report) (afrl 2003) is shown in figure 56.the pp waveform buildup near normal (from figure 346b in the waveformreport) is shown in figure 57. at center frequency of 435 mhz the maximumdelay in figure 56 is 63.8 nsec, or 28 carrier cycles. the timedelay period extends over roughly onethird of the rise time in figure 56. as expected from thebuildup calculations just discussed, there is no apparent indication in figure 56that the discrete delay has any effect. figure 57, near normal, incurs negligibledelay; the slight irregularities in amplitude occur equally in both. before buildupstarts, the data show noise and interference; this probably accounts for the latersmall irregularities.the committee notes that the air force phase iv report revisions incorrectlyassume timedelay beam steering, instead of phase beam steering.for comparison figure 58 shows buildup for a single pp element. the envelope is smoother, but the prebuildup noise is smaller than in figures 56 and 57.similarly, the phase iv measurements on two pp elements, with an introduced 50nsec delay, are indistinguishable from those of a single element.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfigure 55bpave paws waveform buildup, expanded scale.figure 55a pave paws waveform buildup, az = 60 degrees, el = 0 degrees.figure 55cpave paws waveform buildup. az = 60 degrees, el = 0 degrees.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions63figure 57 array buildup; near normal to array face.figure 56 array buildup; 60 degrees off normal.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfrom these data, several conclusions may be drawn. first, none of the buildupor decay plots show anything that can be related to the time delay. second, thebuildup time is very much longer than the maximum delay time, for both arrayand reflector. third, noise and interference were much worse for the ddot measurements; all measurements discussed here were made with the tem horn.fourth, these results agree with the buildup calculations of figures 57a and 57c,of the air force phase iv waveform report; the discrete nature of the buildup canonly be glimpsed at the very beginning, when the waveform has very small amplitude, and is heavily corrupted by noise and interference.next, delay in reflector antennas will be examined. delay occurs in a reflector as a transmitted pulse appears first at the center of the reflector, then spreadsout. the delay period continues until the farthest edge is excited, and the wavehas reached a given angle offaxis (hansen 1987; hansen 1992) this delay forangle offaxis is:tdffd/cos/sin.28here d is reflector diameter, is wavelength, f is frequency, and f is focal length.for the sri dish, d = 150 ft and f/d = 0.42. at center frequency of 435 mhz, andat an angle offaxis of 46 degrees, the maximum time delay is 70 nsec. thisfigure 58single element buildup.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions65represents roughly 31 carrier cycles. two transmitters were available for the srimeasurements. the wideband source had a rise time of 100 nsec; the narrowband source had a rise time of 500 nsec. figure 59, wideband data, is extractedfrom figure 373c of the waveform report; only a small part of the buildup isshown.note the significant noise and interference before start of buildup, and itseffect after buildup. although the delay is 71 nsec, its effects are not discernable.figure 510, from figure 363e in the waveform report, shows buildup for thenarrowband dish.note that both interference and its effect on the rising waveform are reducedfrom figure 59. it was stated by the measurement team that the interference atthe sri site was appreciable, and these graphs show this. in comparing figure56, pave paws buildup offaxis, with sri buildup offaxis, the clear conclusion is that in neither can the delay effects be observed.turning now to the waveform decay, figure 511 (from figure 356b in theair force phase iv wave form report) shows the array at wide angle.figure 512 (from figure 353e in the air force phase iv wave form report)shows the array near normal, where there are negligible time delays. both showerratic decay; that at normal to the array face is probably less well behaved. inboth cases the effects of interference are visible. nothing in figure 510 can betraced to an array discrete time delay.for the reflector antenna, figure 513 (from figure 376c in the air forcefigure 59dish buildup; 46 degrees off normal wide band.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfigure 511array falloff; 60 degrees off normal.figure 510dish buildup; 46 degrees off normal ñ narrowband.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions67figure 512array falloff; near normal to array face.figure 513 dish falloff; 46 degrees off normal.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsphase iv wave form report) shows the wideband decay. again the effects ofinterference are apparent during the decay, and after. note that for this case, thesource rise time is 100 nsec. again no effects of the reflector delay are visible.the narrowband source decay graph is not shown; it decays much more slowly,due to the 0.5 sec rise time, and the interference is correspondingly reduced.precursorsradar electromagneticsanother key argument by dr. albanese regarding pave paws was thatprecursors might be formed. if so, their deeper penetration into cellular materialmight be a factor to consider in the evaluation of possible health effects. in communications with the committee, dr. albanese recommended that the pavepaws committee take advantage of the extensive technical literature on measurement and calculation of precursors. accordingly, all available measurementsare discussed; several annexes are devoted to calculations.the committee has identified the following questions regarding pavepaws, biological tissues, and precursors. these questions are (1) does the radarradiation produce precursors in biological tissue or equivalent media; (2) doesprecursor formation depend upon signal bandwidth; (3) if precursors are produced, how do they decay with penetration distance? definitive and reasonableanswers to these questions have been developed, and are discussed below.central to all of these questions is bandwidth, which is critical here, as it is inall electronic and computer systems. signal bandwidth is affected by both waveform rise time and pulse width. for pave paws the pulses are long (shortestpulse is 250 sec); the bandwidth is primarily due to rise time. a continuouswave (cw) signal may have a rapid rise time (roughly 1/4 of a cycle), but the cwsignal has zero bandwidth. conversely, phasemodulated signals such as qpskmay have wide bandwidth, but the signal is always on. it is wide bandwidth thatis of concern for precursor formation.central to all of these questions are the electrical properties of the materialthe radar signal is traveling through. precursors occur in anomalous dispersivemedia, that is, where there is a decrease in the permittivity (dielectric constant)with increasing frequency and where one or more absorption bands exist in thefrequency range of the signal. see annex 51 for data on dispersion in biologicaltissues.a precursor is a modification of the incident waveform that arrives at a givendepth in the dispersive medium before or during the incident waveform.sommerfeld precursors arrive before, and tend to contain frequencies higher thanthe signal carrier frequency. brillouin precursors arrive next, and tend to containlower frequencies. in the medium, the incident waveform travels with the groupvelocity. the wave front of the sommerfeld precursor travels with the speed oflight in a vacuum; but this wave front is extremely small. the signal velocity,an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions69based on energy transport, is slower. however this signal velocity is larger thanthe group velocity, which is that of the incident waveform, accounting for theearly apperance. in contrast, the brillouin precursor has a signal velocity belowthe group velocity. phase velocity has no meaning except for a monochromatic(single frequency) signal (oughstun and sherman, 1994).precursors may exist in a dispersive medium (dielectric constant/permittivity) and/or loss varying with frequency. whether they are excited depends alsoupon the bandwidth of the incident signal. wideband signals can produce precursors in highly dispersive media. but the variation in material parameters withfrequency over a narrowband signal does not allow observable precursors toform. this is substantiated by the sandia national laboratory calculations (seeannex 53).the pave paws instantaneous bandwidth is never more than 5 mhz, although the carrier frequency changes as the beam moves between 420 mhz and450 mhz. thus this narrow bandwidth will not produce measurable precursors.when precursors are created, the decay is a function of bandwidth of theapplied waveform. roberts (see annex 53) has shown that a wideband signalwill have significant spectral energy below the frequency of the carrier. each ofthese spectral components decays exponentially in a linear lossy medium; if thewideband applied waveform has sufficient lower frequency energy, the resultingprecursor will decay more slowly than the exponential decay of the carrier. because the spectral components of lower frequencies decay more slowly with penetration distance, the mix (spectrum) changes with distance, resulting in a decayrate for the brillouin precursor of approximately 1/r(papers by oughstun andby roberts; see annex 53). note that all examples computed by oughstun andcolleagues utilize very wideband waveforms, typically bandwidths of 10 to 20ghz or more, at optical (laser) frequencies. for pave paws with its very narrow bandwidth, the carrier frequency predominates, and all decay in a lossy media will be exponential at this frequency.waveform slopesslope is the rate at which electric field is changing. thus it may be measuredin volts/meter per nanosecond. this is not to be confused with rise time, in nanoseconds, which is independent of field strength. at the september 16, 2003, pavepaws committee meeting, dr. albanese presented charts on phase and slopeestimation. the zero crossings of waveforms were examined to determine slopes.the slope between adjacent zero crossings changes at rates greater than 1 volt permeter per nanosecond have been postulated to be biologically significant by someindividuals. however at the zero crossings, the pp signal is approaching zero; jimtomlin has shown in detail3 that noise and interference, although small, can sig3jim tomlin, òinterior delta slopes and noise,ó charts, notes, and attachment prepared for theppphsg.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsnificantly change the slopes because in the vicinity of a zero crossing the ppsignal is smaller than the noise. as a result, the slopes and slope changes (deltaslopes) calculated by dr. albanese are corrupted by interference. the spatialvariation in figure 514 matches almost exactly the leading edge of the relatedphase iv waveform in figure 515; figure 514 should be volts/meter, as in figure 515.figure 514pave paws spatial variation at 500 meters. used with permission fromrichard albanese.figure 515leading edge 540 meters from pave paws.a similar match occurs in figure 516 (vpdd 11173.ed1) and figure 517 (figure 3106h from the waveform report).an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions71figure 517leading edge, 540 meters from pave paws.figure 516 pave paws spatial variation at 500 meters.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsthe òwigglesó in the phase iv waveform envelopes are caused by interference, and these same wiggles are added to the pp carrier slope of 2.7 v/m/nsec(for a 1 v/m signal at 425 mhz). slopes in figure 518 (provided by dr. albaneseas figure parl11090.ed1) are shown over a 400 nsec time, representing about 170carrier cycles. the granularity maximum delay is 60 nsec; the waveform buildupis completely covered by figure 518 but nothing attributable to the discrete delay is visible.jim tomlin, for the pphsg, has smoothed the waveform data, and has calculated and plotted delta slopes (see figure 519). the upper curve, with right scale,shows the smoothed (twopoint running average) of the noise and interferencederivative for a record segment just prior to the arrival of the indicated pavepaws pulse. the lower curve, with left scale, shows the delta slopes that wouldhave been recorded due to this noise and interference had a pure 434.8 mhz nonphased sine wave signal been present. it is clear that the variations in delta slopeare due to interference. all highpower radiating systems (tv, fm, radars) havefigure 518slope differentials at adjacent zero points. used by permission from richard albanese.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions73slopes of several v/m/nsec, plus delta slopes induced by interferers. there is noreason to believe that pave paws effects are different. tomlin has suggestedadditional measurements; the committee concludes the variations are due to interference and that further measurements are not needed.relation of waveform slopes to precursersas part of the committeeõs informationgathering effort, dr. albanese wasasked by the committee what, in his opinion, the relationship was between slope(v/m/nsec) and precursor formation. he responded that the association was indicated in the paper by albanese, penn, and medina (see annex 53). a carefulreading of this paper shows that brillouin precursors occur when the medium issufficiently dispersive, and when the bandwidth is wide. their calculations used aconvenient applied field of 1 v/m, and the precursor levels were related to this.the system is linear; it is clear that a hypothetical applied field of 1 mv/m wouldproduce a precursor with amplitude 1/1000 of the precursor in the paper. thispaper shows indirectly the association between signal rise time (in nsec) andprecursor formation. slope (v/m/nsec) is not associated therein. it is important todistinguish between rise time, in nsec, and slope, in v/m/nsec.discussion of extant measurementsthe committee has located only three measurements that showed precursors.first, circa 1967, as thesis work at nyubronx; second, circa 1986, at physicsinternational; third, calculations and measurements made at the naval surfacewarfare center in the 1990s, but published in 2001. in addition, circa 1990, calfigure 519smoothed waveform data and delta slope magnitudes vs time. used withpermission from jim tomlin.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsculations and measurements were made at the university of michigan but notpublished, and later briefly extracted. further measurements were made by afrlded contractors on water, sand, and concrete. the michigan and afrl measurements did not show precursors.pleshko (see annex 52)graduate student peter pleshko, under the supervision of professor istvanpalocz, designed experiments to produce precursors in the microwave region,and took measurements accordingly, all as a ph.d. project at new york universitybronx. their paper describes and discusses the three experiments they designed to demonstrate precursors.precursors were observed, but in all three experiments the bandwidths werewide: the smallest bandwidth was roughly 500 mhz. thus, there is minimal relevance to pave paws.physics international report òdispersive pulse propagationó(see annex 52)physics international (pi) experiments replicated one of the pleshko experiments, using a coaxial test fixture for additional measurements and also opentank measurements. measuring and test equipment for shortpulse wideband weresomewhat primitive (circa 1987) compared with current capabilities. the sourcesignals were of poor quality: the source pulse had high pre and postpulses. thecoaxial test cell was designed for a 50 ohm match with air; the water, salt, andsugar solutions produced major mismatches resulting in quite apparent ringing.all of the measurements were wideband, and had frequency spectra centeredabove 1000 mhz, where dielectric constant and conductivity changes withfrequency are significant. precursors were observed only in those few widebandexperiments that were designed to create strong dispersion (waveguide andgoubau line). no discernable precursors were observed in test cell and liquidtank experiments, even though bandwidths were wide and frequency spectra werein the region of changing dielectric properties.stoudt, peterkin, and hankla, nswc report òtransient rf and microwavepulse propagation in a debye medium (water)ó (see annex 52)the measurements utilized a coaxial line test cell filled with recirculatingdeionized water. waveforms were wideband; lowfrequency precursors weremeasured. agreement with calculated data was excellent. these measurementsused welldesigned equipment with realistic media, and were of high quality.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions75mourou and williamson (see barrett in annex 52)the paper by barrett reproduces a small set of the measurements made at theuniversity of michigan by mourou and williamson. the mourou and williamsonwork has not been published. measurements were made using microwave striplinewith betaalumina dielectric. a wideband waveform at 8 ghz was used, but theapparatus introduced significant reflections. nonetheless, no signals that could beidentified as precursors were observed.farr and frost, measurement notes 49 and 52, afrlded (see annex 52)the purpose of the measurements was determination of dielectric propertiesof water, sand, and concrete. a coaxial transmission line was used, with an impulse waveform with spectral content from dc to over 20 ghz. significant pulsebroadening and attenuation were observed, but no overt precursors appeared.discussion of calculationsextensive calculations have been published by oughstun and colleagues, in abook and numerous papers (see annexes 53 and 55). all of these use widebandwaveforms, typically at laser (infrared) frequencies. classic precursor waveformsare produced, but the vital contribution of bandwidth is not discussed.sandia report òcalculations of precursor propagation in dispersivedielectriesó (see annex 53)bacon calculated propagation of waveforms into pure water at 435 mhz, fortwo bandwidths: 200 mhz, and 10 mhz. the 200 mhz bandwidth waveformsshowed precursors, while the 10 mhz bandwidth waveforms did not. the narrowband signal also showed a slow buildup (and presumably decay). thewideband waveforms decay at the carrier rate for several meters, then moreslowly. however the bandlimited signal decays at the carrier rate at all penetration distances. pave paws has bandlimiting filters in the exciter units, so these10 mhz results are expected to represent the radar (see annex 3).these calculations were buttressed by roberts, who showed that decayslower than carrier exponential requires significant spectral energy below the carrier frequency, i.e., wideband. as mentioned in radar electromagnetics, thespread of spectral energy allows the precursors to decay as 1/rat distanceswhere the main signal is negligible.moten and others (see annex 53)moten and colleagues calculated that a wideband waveform produces prean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76assessment of potential health effects from pave pawscursors, but stated that narrow band systems would not generate precursors (seeannex 53).in several papers, albanese and colleagues calculated precursors, but all forwideband signals. no attempt was made to correlate precursor generation witheither bandwidth, or dispersive characteristics of the medium with frequency.mokole and samaddar (see annex 53)mokole and samaddar calculated the behavior of a laser pulse (verywideband) propagating into a semiinfinite medium. strong precursors were predicted.dvorak (see annex 53)dvorak, using exotic functions, calculated propagation in a waveguide, thusverifying the prior experimental work of pleshko.discussion of annexesthe annexes contain a citation and review of each journal paper that appearsrelevant. they are grouped into precursor measurements, precursor calculations,related papers on precursors, pulse propagation in lossy media, and publicationsby professors oughstun and others.summarythe pave paws phased array contains a large number of elements per face(1792), all of which are turned on simultaneously. bandwidth is very narrow, 5mhz at most; the signal is heavily filtered to reduce interference. waveformbuildup is slow (about 200 nsec) due to the signal bandwidth and to the amplifiercharacteristics. waveform slopes, in v/m/nsec, are as expected, except in thevicinity of zero crossings; there, noise and interfering signals control slopes, andthe pave paws signals are negligible. radial fields as such are not present; thelongitudinal field components observed were produced by the dipole 20 degreetilt, and multipath fields.at angles away from the array axis, time delay exists between the signalfrom the closest dipole and the farthest dipole. it is a maximum of about 60 nsec.reflector (dish) antennas have a similar delay at wide angles; the samesize arrayand reflector have roughly the same delay. for pave paws the peak delay isroughly 1/3 of the buildup time. due to the large number of active elements perface, and due to the pseudorandom distances from each element to an observer,the signal buildup is smooth as shown by detailed calculations. in none of thephase iv measured data is it possible to discern the delay effects. the committeeõsan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions77conclusion is that narrowband phasedarray radiation is just like narrowbandreflector radiation.at wide angles from the array axis and from the radar beam, the sidelobelevel is extremely low. this low sidelobe level results from the destructive summation of 1792 contributions. turnoff and decay of the class c amplifiers issomewhat irregular, which sometimes results in decay transients above the normal low sidelobe level. amplitude of these spikes is still much below the allowable power density; this, with their short duration, indicates a negligible effect.precursors are transient signals that may appear before, during, and after thesignal, in a dispersive medium such as water or cells. none propagate faster thanlight. those that have been considered as possibly important have significantlowfrequency spectral energy, that is, important frequency components belowthe carrier frequency. there are extensive calculations, and several measurements,that show that wideband signals produce observable precursors. typical precursor wide bandwidth is 10,000 mhz, a factor of 2000 times the pave pawsbandwidth. each frequency component of the wideband waveform decays exponentially in the medium. after the signal has experienced a large attenuation, theprecursor waveform may decay algebraically. precursor formation is related tosignal bandwidth (buildup time) but not to signal level (v/m). the criterion of 1v/m/nsec has no meaning for precursor formation. as discussed under precursors: radar electromagnetics, rise time and bandwidth are independent of fieldstrength in v/m.for the pave paws bandwidth no measurable precursors were found in theseveral experiments. all calculations and measurements conclude that narrowband phasedarray radiation effects are not distinguishable from those of reflectorantennas. this may also be true for wideband phased arrays, but no relevant dataare available.referencesafrl (air force research laboratory). 2003. phase ivñtimedomain waveform characterizationmeasurements of the pave paws radar. kirtland air force base, albuquerque, nm.baœos, a. 1966. dipole radiation in the presence of a conducting halfspace. new york: pergamonpress.brillouin, l. 1962. wave propagation and group velocity. st. louis, mo: academic press.collin, r.e. 2004. hertzian dipole radiating over a lossy or sea: some early and late 20th centurycontroversies. ieee antennas and propagation magazine 46:6479.hansen, r.c. 1987. short pulse excitation of reflector antennas. p ieee 134: 557559.hansen, r.c. and e. kramer. 1992. correction to shortpulse excitation of reflector antennas. p ieee139:119120.norton, k.a. 1937. space and surface waves in radio propagation. phys rev 132133.jordan, e.c. and balmain, k.g. 1968. electromagnetic waves and radiating systems. prentice hall.oughstun, k.e. and g.c. sherman. 1994. electromagnetic pulse propagation in causal dielectrics,springer series on wave phenomena, vol. 16. berlinheidelberg: springerverlag.somerfeld, a. 1914. above the propagation of light in dispersive media. ann physik 44:177202.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsannex 51: dispersion in biological tissuesin biological tissues, three distinct dispersion regimes have been defined.the lowest frequency dispersion, referred to as the dispersion, is very large,and occurs near 10 hz to 100 hz, and is believed to be associated with largebiological structures such as cell bodies. the second dispersion (referred to as the dispersion) occurs over the range of approximately 100 khz to 100 mhz. itreflects the dipolar characteristics of the molecular constituents of the tissue, andterminates at the permittivity of water (approximately 80 farads/meter). the thirddispersion (), is associated with the relaxation time of water and occurs in thelow ghz range. correspondingly, in the frequency range of the pave pawssignal, the dielectric permittivity of biological tissue is very near to that of water,and the dispersion is very low. while the dispersion (/f) depends on both thespecific tissue and frequency range, dispersions in biological tissues near 500mhz are in the range of only 1 to 10 farad/meter per 100 mhz. this is a verysmall dispersion. nonetheless, whenever the frequency spectrum of an appliedwaveform encompasses a region of anomalous dispersion, precursors may beformed. if the bandwidth is narrow, and the material parameters change little if atall over the frequency range of interest, precursors will have negligible amplitude. an examination of the dielectric properties of the white matter of braintissue, for example, shows that the permittivity changes at a relatively constantrate of 0.5 decade of permittivity/decade of frequency, from a value of 10,000 at10 khz, to a value of 30 at 1 ghz. the pave paws instantaneous bandwidth isnever more than 5 mhz, although the carrier frequency changes as the beammoves between 420 mhz and 450 mhz. thus this narrow bandwidth signal is notexpected to produce measurable precursors.annex 52: papers on precursor measurements1.p. pleshko and i. palocz, òexperimental observations of sommerfeldand brillouin precursors in the microwave domain,ó phys. rev. letters, vol.22, 2 june 1967, 12011204graduate student peter pleshko, under the supervision of professor istvanpalocz, designed experiments to produce precursors in the microwave region,and took measurements accordingly, all as a ph.d. project at new york universitybronx. this paper describes and discusses the experiments they designed todemonstrate precursors.the first experiment utilized a coaxial transmission line filled with ferritematerial, which was magnetized by an applied external magnetic field. this simulated the first branch of the dispersion curve. a pulse of sine waves at a carrierfrequency of 625 mhz was applied at one end of a long coax, and the waveformwas observed at the other end. with an applied magnetic field of 100 gauss (earthfield 0.3 to 0.6 gauss), the brillouin precursor was visible but the main signal wasan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions79not. with a 200 gauss field the brillouin precursor, which looks like one cyclewith a slightly lower frequency than the carrier, was followed by the pulse train.the precursor amplitude was nearly twice that of the pulse train.the second experiment was aimed at simulating the second branch of thedispersion curve. a waveguide with a cutoff frequency of 4290 mhz was used;the guide length was 6 ft. a pulser source producing a 100 picosecond singlepulse with fast rise time was used. a sommerfeld precursor with a frequency ofroughly 15,000 mhz was observed, but the amplitude was small compared to themain signal; these precursors are of higher frequency.the third experiment was also second branch, and used a goubau surfacewave transmission line consisting of rg8 coaxial cable with the outer braidremoved. it was then a wire with a dielectric sheath. horn feeds were used. againthe 100 picosecond pulser with 30 picosecond rise time was the source. thebrillouin (low frequency) precursor was observed; the pulse was not shown.in all three experiments described above the bandwidths were large: in experiment one, 350 mhz or 315%; experiments two and three, 350 mhz. theselarge bandwidth[s] are critical, as signals occupying large bandwidth can experience significant dispersion (dispersion is a change of parameters with frequency),and have major energy at low frequencies. in spite of the deliberately introducedlarge dispersion, the high frequency (sommerfeld) precursor was very small. theamplitude of the low frequency (brillouin) precursor was not compared to thepulse amplitude. the large precursors calculated for the optical region byoughstun did not develop, but the optical bandwidth and dispersion are muchlarger, and the wavelength is very much shorter than at microwave frequencies.2.r.r. smith, dispersive pulse propagation, report pitr 3341, physicsinternational co., prepared for usafsam/rzm, dec. 1988the principal investigator performed three experiments to determine if precursors could be generated by microwave frequencies.the first pi experiment replicated the goubau surfacewave transmissionline experiment of pleshko and palocz. a stepinput function was used, with arise time of roughly 300 picoseconds. the brillouin precursor was observed as anovershoot of roughly 100% with rapid decay. signal bandwidth was approximately 6700 mhz.the next experiment simulated muscle tissue in a coaxial test fixture filledwith distilled water. a singlestep function with a rise time of roughly 500 picoseconds was the applied signal. for the frequency spectrum of the waveform,roughly 4000 mhz wide, distilled water, if sufficiently pure, has dielectric constant and conductivity similar to those of muscle tissue. the results showed severe waveform distortion and ringing (steps) as illustrated in trace 906d of figure 8 of the report. unfortunately the coaxial line was designed for 50 ohmsimpedance (industry standard for test equipment) when air filled. when water oran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsionic solution fills the test cell, the impedance is badly mismatched, resulting inthe serious ringing observed.another experiment used a pulse generator that supplied a bipolar pulse (apositive pulse followed by a negative pulse), again into distilled water. this pulsewas of poor quality, having itself a small precursor and a small postcursor, alongwith a negative pulse much lower in amplitude and wider in time, than the positive pulse. results from the test cell showed considerable ringing, no doubt due tothe impedance mismatch, but no evidence of sommerfeld or brillouin precursors.measurements next used water with 1.4% salt, with the stepfunction signalsource. results showed severe waveform distortion but no evidence of precursors. with the bipolarpulse signal, again results were distorted but no precursorswere present. use of a sugar/salt mixture with water produced essentially thesame results: distortion but no precursors. coaxial test fixture measurements werecontaminated by ringing due to impedance mismatch, and by poor quality sourcesignals. no sommerfeld or brillouin precursors were observed.opentank measurements used a waveguide as an illuminator, with set onewith cutoff at 910 mhz and set two with cutoff at 1320 mhz. the signal wastripolar (ð,+,ð) but was of poor quality with ringing. results did not show anyprecursors for several salt and sugar solutions. finally, as the signal propagatesinto the lossy solution, the higher frequency components are attenuated more, asexpected. the source signal was of very poor quality, and there were internal andexternal reflections, resulting in extraneous signals (ringing). no precursors wereobserved.shortpulse, wideband measuring and test equipment was somewhat primitive (circa 1987) compared with current capabilities. the source signals were ofpoor quality. the coaxial test cell was designed for a 50 ohm match with air; thewater, salt, and sugar solutions produced major mismatches with resulting quiteapparent ringing. these reflections tended to mask the changes in waveform produced by the medium. all of the measurements were wideband and had frequencyspectra centered above 1000 mhz, where dielectric constant and conductivity ?changes with frequency are significant. precursors were observed only in thosefew experiments that used wide bandwidth and deliberately created strong dispersion (waveguide and goubau line). no discernible precursors were observedin testcell and liquidtank experiments, even though bandwidths were wide andfrequency spectra were in the area of changing dielectric properties.3.t.w. barrett, òenergy transfer and propagation and the dielectrics ofmaterials: transient versus steady state effects,ó proc. ultrawideband radar symp., los alamos, crc press, 1990, 120in this paper, the author gives a brief review of the saddlepoint approximations used in calculating transient response of dispersive materials. a much morethorough account is given by oughstun and sherman. the paper reproduces somean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions81of the unpublished measurements made circa 1990 at the ultrafast science laboratory of the university of michigan by professor mourou and dr. williamson. amore extensive set of the raw measured data has been made available by dr.whittaker of the university of michigan. the relevant measurements utilizedstrip line with either air or betaalumina as the dielectric. the frequency was 8ghz, and waveforms of one to eight cycles were used. unfortunately, the waveform generator and the detector/receiver together produced several significantreflections (echoes) in the reference air line results. reflected waveforms appeared at roughly four and eight cycles. using a length of dielectric of 1 inch,both singlecycle and eightcycle incident waveforms showed a distorted waveform due to the echoes, but no precursors. with a dielectric length of 4 inches, thecarrier waveform was absent due to attenuation, but the transmitted waveformdid not look like any calculated precursors. in all of these experiments, the bandwidths were large, and extended to frequencies well below the carrier frequency.4.d.c. stoudt, f.e. peterkin, and b.j. hankla, òtransient rf and microwave pulse propagation in a debye medium (water),ó nswc reportjpostccrf00503, dahlgreen, va, sept. 2001the test cell was a 1.4 mlong coaxial transmission line with recirculateddeionized water. a tapered dielectric plug matched the 33 ohm line (when filled)to the 50 ohm test equipment. a short was placed at the far end of the line, so thatthe signal would be reflected. at the feed end, a tee junction separated out thereturn signal. round trip delay was 82 nanoseconds. equipment included agigatronics 7100 signal generator and an hp 54720a digitizing oscilloscope.a 10cycle pulse at 1 ghz was the test signal. this signal showed two smallamplitude residual cycles at the end of the signal, but the input signal quality wasgood. the output signal, after 2.76 m of water travel, showed only two precursors, no main signal. the fore and aft precursors were of opposite polarity, andclosely matched the calculated values. a 10.5cycle 1 ghz waveform showedsimilar results, and again agreed with calculations. in this case, because of thehalf cycle, both precursors are of the same polarity.two 6cycle 400 mhz waveforms were used as exciters. the squarewavemodulated pulse, after 2.76 m of water, showed precursor amplitude roughlytwice the main signal amplitude. again, calculations and measurements agreevery closely. it is worth noting that the calculations for this waveform after 1.5 mof water showed only very slight precursor effects. trapezoidal modulations ofthe 10 cycles of carrier were also tested. only small precursor effects appearedafter 2.76 m of water.these measurements were carefully designed and conducted, with attentionpaid to impedance matching, use of time delays to separate input and output signals, and data recording. thus these are the definitive measurements utilizingrepresentative media.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82assessment of potential health effects from pave paws5. e.g. farr and c.a. frost, òtime domain measurement of the dielectricproperties of water in a coaxial test fixture,ó measurement notes 49, dec.1996; òimpulse propagation measurements of the dielectric properties ofwater, dry sand, moist sand and concrete, òmeasurement notes 52, afrldirected energy directorate, albuquerque, nm.an oversized coaxial transmission line, with the sample occupying part ofthe line length, was used. the signal was a wideband impulse (short pulse), withmajor spectral energy from dc to over 10 ghz. the line was used in both thetransmission and the reflection modes. unfortunately, the line was matched withair for 50 ohms, which produced significant mismatch at the sample interfaces.thus, the results were contaminated with significant ringing. in passing throughthe distilled water sample, the impulse waveform was significantly attenuatedand broadened. the resulting waveforms did not show any of the typical oscillations commonly seen in precursor waveforms. although the time domain instrumentation was up to date and of high quality, the results were degraded by thedesign of the coaxial test chamber.annex 53: papers on precursor calculations1.l. brillouin, wave propagation and group velocity, academic press, 1960this most interesting, but hard to find, book is a retrospective of the work bysommerfeld and brillouin on wave velocities and precursors. a translation (fromgerman) of the classic 1914 paper by sommerfeld is included, along with a translation (from french) of the classic 1914 paper by brillouin; both concern propagation in dispersive media and saddlepoint asymptotics. in the other chapters,brillouin discusses several waveform velocities: group velocity, signal velocity,and energytransfer velocity. his calculations of precursors are less useful, due toerrors, as observed by oughstun and others. both sommerfeld and brillouin usedthe term òforerunnersó rather than precursors; use of òprecursorsó apparentlyfound favor relatively recently.2.k.e. oughstun and g.c. sherman, electromagnetic pulse propagationin causal dielectric, springer, 1997this treatise shows in detail the difficulties in obtaining approximate solutions to wave propagation in dispersive media. crudely, the signal is representedin the complex phase plane by a pole, and the precursors by branch points. elaborate asymptotics are used to obtain the propagated waveforms. unfortunately (forpave paws relevancy), all calculations are at infrared wavelengths, where thefrequency is roughly 10,000,000 times higher than that of pave paws. allwaveforms are either single cycle or a few cycles. for these very wideband signals, precursor formation is calculated. further, the work is mathematically oriented, and has little physics interpretation. in particular, there is no discussion ofthe crucial effect of bandwidth.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions83oughstun and colleagues have published many informative papers; almostall concern laser (ir) waveforms. even their papers in radio science are on optical (ir) waveforms.3.t.m. roberts, òradiated pulses decay exponentially in materials in thefar fields of antennas,ó electronics ltrs., vol. 38, 4 july 2002, 679680this salient paper shows that lowfrequency spectral components of a waveform can produce a decay rate in dispersive material that is lower than that of thecarrier frequency. in a linear medium, and at low power levels, tissue is linear andall spectral components decay exponentially. see also:4.t.m. roberts and p.g. petropoulos, òasymptotics and energy estimatesfor electromagnetic pulses in dispersive media,ó j. opt. soc. amer. a, vol.13, june 1996, 12041217 and òaddendum,ó j. opt. soc. amer. a, vol. 16,1999, 279928005.t.m. roberts, òmeasured and predicted behavior of pulses in debyeand lorenztype materials.ó trans. ieee ap52 jan. 2004. 310314.asymptotic calculations are shown to validate precursor measurements madeusing liquidfilled coax cables by afrl contractors (see annex 2). results showalgebraic decay after significant attenuation has occurred. signal bandwidth wasapproximately 10 ghz; the widest pave paws bandwidth is 5 mhz, or 2000times smaller. pave paws precursors will be too small to be measurable.6.l.d. bacon, òcalculations of precursor propagation in dispersivedielectries,ó sand 20033040, aug. 2003, sandia national laboratoriesdr. larry bacon of sandia national laboratories has calculated waveformpropagation in lossy dispersive media. these cases utilized a carrier frequency of435 mhz, which is in the middle of the pave paws band. pure water was themedium. he used a narrowband (1 microsecond) pulse train, and a wideband (10nanosecond) pulse train. note that the narrowband pulse has about the samebandwidth as the widest pave paws waveform. each pulse train was utilizedwithout, and with, a filter. the 1 microsecond waveform used a 10 mhz widefilter, while the 10 nanosecond waveform used a 200 mhz wide filter. the twofilter bandwidths are shown in figure 5a3.1.the wideband unfiltered waveform displayed at 1meter depth in the mediuma precursor, small compared to the main signal; at 5meter depth, the precursorwas larger than the signal but very small compared to the signal at 1 meter. whenthe wideband filter was applied, no precursors were visible.the narrowband unfiltered waveform displayed at 1meter depth in the medium a very small precursor; at 5meter depth the precursor was again larger thanthe signal but very small compared to that at 1 meter. with the filter applied,an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfigure 5a3.110 mhz (dotted) and 200 mhz (solid) bandpass filter frequency responses.which represents the pave paws radar, a slow buildup was observed at alldepths, as seen in figure 5a3.2. no precursors were evident. however, at greatdepth in the medium, a precursor is visible but its amplitude is below the incidentamplitude by a factor of roughly 100 million. such small values are way belowthe natural noise level, hence are not measurable. because of the narrow bandwidth of the 1 microsecond waveform, all spectral (fourier) components decayessentially exponentially, producing the classic òskin depth.ófigure 5a3.3 shows waveform decay over a 20meter depth; this waveformdecays exponentially just like all narrowband waveforms. exponential decay islinear on a logarithmic scale (decibels).in summary, wideband waveforms do produce observable precursors.narrowband waveforms, such as those of pave paws, do not produce measurable precursors.7.d.c. stoudt, f.e. peterkin, and b.j. hankla, òtransient rf and microwave pulse propagation in a debye medium (water),ó nswc report jpstccrf00503, dahlgren, va, sept. 2001this work concerns frequencies below 2 ghz, where water shows a nearlyconstant permittivity but a varying conductivity with frequency. accordingly,group and signal velocity dispersion can be neglected, and the debye dispersionmodel is adequate. the propagation of waveform is analyzed using fourier transan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions85figure 5a3.2leading edge of 1 sec signal at various depths; baselines are offset forclarity.figure 5a3.3 energy decay of 1 sec signal, with 10 mhz filtering.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsforms; the resulting frequency spectra are propagated through the lossy media,then inverse transformed into a waveform. waveforms used include an ideal 10cycle, 1 ghz pulse, a 6cycle, 400 mhz pulse, and these two with a more practical trapezoidal envelope on the 1 ghz waveform. these calculations agree withthose of albanese (see reference 13, this section).for the squarewave modulated 1 ghz signal, at a depth of 75 cm (2.5 ft.),the fore and aft precursors are much larger than the main 10cycle waveform. atthe much shorter depths representative of humans, the waveform would be muchlarger than the precursor. when the modulation is trapezoidal, the precursors areonly slightly larger than the main signal, at the same 75 cm depth. bandwidth ofboth signals is roughly 200 mhz. for depths so large that the main signal hasdisappeared due to strong attenuation, the precursor decays approximately as1/r, thus validating the oneterm series approximation of oughstun.the 6cycle, 400 mhz signal, with ideal squarewave modulation (instantturn on), shows only a precursor slightly larger than the main signal, at a depth of1.5 m (4.9 ft). bandwidth is roughly 130 mhz.these calculations show that for 400 mhz, even with the large bandwidthassociated with the 6cycle waveform, precursors are negligible at the limitedtissue depth available in humans.8.k. moten, c.h. durney, and t.g. stockham, òelectromagnetic pulsepropagation in dispersive planar dielectrics,ó bioelectromagnetics, vol. 10,1989, 3549this paper investigates a planewave pulsetrain incident on a lossy dispersive slab, using fast fourier transform techniques. calculations show thatwideband pulses can produce significant precursors. however, òthe narrower thebandwidth of the pulse train, the less the difference between the pulse responseand cw response.ó and, òonly very broadband pulsed systems could be expectedto produce results that differ significantly from those of cw systems.ó pulsepenetration depends on the dispersive nature of the dielectric medium and thefourier coefficients (bandwidth) of the waveform.9.r. albanese, j. penn, and r. medina, òultrashort pulse response innonlinear dispersive media,ó in ultrawideband, shortpulseelectromagnetics, h.l. bertoni, l. carin, and l.b. felsen, eds., plenum,1993, 259265see also:10.r. albanese, j. penn, and r. medina, òshortrisetime microwavepulse propagation through dispersive biological media,ó j. opt. soc. amer.a, vol. 6, sept. 1989, 14411446these papers use fourier series (of the waveform) as an analysis tool. theiran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions87calculations used a waveform with 10 carrier cycles with a carrier frequency of 1ghz. the waveform buildup was instantaneous; the envelope was a square wave.at 1.5 m distance the rise time affected the precursor amplitude, with longer risetime reducing the amplitude. however, at this distance the main signal is verysmall and the precursors are also small.11.r. albanese, j. blaschak, r. medina, and j. penn, òultrashort electromagnetic signals: biophysical questions, safety issues, and medical opportunities,ó aviation, space, and environmental medicine, may 1994, a116a120this paper shows a 1 nanosecond wideband pulse of 10 carrier cycles, carrierfrequency 10 ghz. both sommerfeld and brillouincalculated precursors appear after propagating 1 cm in pure water. also shows precursors produced bylaser (ir) radiation. possible cellular effects of very high electric fields (hundredsor thousands of kw/m) are discussed.12.r.a. albanese, òan electromagnetic inverse problem in medical science,ó chapter 2 of invariant imbedding and inverse problems, siam, 1992.3041using a squarewave modulation containing 5 carrier cycles, with a 3 ghzcarrier frequency, a waveform with brillouin precursors was calculated at 10 cm.depth. with no noise, partial results were obtained, but with very weak addednoise there were no results.13.r.a. albanese, r.l. medina, and j.w. penn, òmathematics, medicine,and microwaves,ó inverse problems, vol. 10, 1994, 9951007this paper shows a 1 nanosecond wideband pulse of 10 carrier cycles, carrierfrequency 10 ghz. both sommerfeldand brillouincalculated precursors appearafter propagating 1 cm in pure water. most of the paper concerns the inverseproblem: given the response, find the dielectric and loss properties of the material.14.e.l. mokole and s.n. samaddar, òtransmission and reflection of normally incident, pulsed electromagnetic plane waves upon a lorentz halfspace,ó j. opt. soc. amer. b, vol. 16, may 1999, 812831both reflected and transmitted fields are calculated for a semiinfinite medium; the incident waveform is a single laser pulse at ir (frequency ~2 thz). asexpected, this extremely wideband waveform produces strong sommerfeld precursors.15.s.l. dvorak, òexact, closedform expressions for transient fields inhomogeneously filled waveguides,ó trans. ieee, vol. mtt42, nov. 1984.21642170an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88assessment of potential health effects from pave pawssee also:16. s.l. dvorak and d.g. dudley, òpropagation of ultrawideband electromagnetic pulses through dispersive media,ó trans. ieee, vol. emc37,may 1995, 192200using the incomplete lipschitzhankel integrals (ilhi), waveform propagation in a waveguide is studied. waveguides provide dispersion. the waveformused is a single cycle of a sine wave. calculations show significant precursors;the waveform bandwidth is very wide. prior experimental work of pleshko is notmentioned, but the precursor increases in frequency as it propagates, just as measured by pleshko.annex 54: related papers on precursors1.albanese, r.a. and e.l. bell, radiofrequency radiation and living tissue: theoretical studies, report samtr7941, dec. 1979this interim report models possible interactions of rf energy and cells. nodistinction is made between thermal effects and pulsed effects.2.albanese, r.a. and e.l. bell, òradiofrequency radiation and chemicalreaction dynamics,ó in nonlinear electrodynamics in biological systems,w. r. adey and a. f. lawrence, eds., plenum, 1984, 277285treated in this paper are high field strengths (100 to 2000 v/m) where themedia are nonlinear. there is no relevance to pave paws, where the fieldstrengths are low, and the media are linear.3.albanese, r.a., r. medina, and j. penn, òmathematics and electromagnetic theory,ó unpublished and undated paper, circa 2001the statement òfrequency dependence in the frequency domain implies localtissue memory in the time domainó is too general to have meaning. certainly,frequency spectrum and time waveform are related. but this does not necessarilyimply tissue memory. the entire paper is not concerned with pulses.4.papazoglou, t.m., òtransmission of a transient electromagnetic planewave into a lossy halfspace,ó j. appl. phys., vol. 46, aug. 1975, 33333341see also:5.dudley, d.g., t.m. papazoglou, and r.c. white, òon the interaction ofa transient electromagnetic plane wave and a lossy halfspace,ó j. appl.phys., vol. 45, march 1974, 11711175propagation of a single gaussian type pulse (slow rise time and fall time)into a lossy medium is considered. one case of interest uses a lossy and disperan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions89sive medium (earth). waveforms with and without dispersion are very much thesame, probably due to the narrow bandwidth of the incident pulse. no precursorswere evident.6.devaney, a.j., òlinearized inverse scattering in attenuating media,óinverse problems, vol. 3, 1987. 389397dr. devaney has extended this work to dispersive media, but it has not beenpublished. the aim was to see if precursors could help in the inverse problem.note, the inverse problem is: given the response, find the details of the scattereror the details of the medium.pulse propagation in lossy mediaresearchers from harvard have published papers on pulse propagation in seawater, a highly lossy medium. single pulses and a pulse of carrier oscillationshave been considered. these papers utilize a dipole as source, unlike the planewave source of oughstun and colleagues. the dipole nearfield greatly complicates the analysis. the papers show that the rise and fall times each produce atransient, with the carrier oscillations in between. when the rise and fall times areslow, two things occur. first, the lower frequencies in the transient allow them todecay more slowly than does the carrier. so after some distance, the carrier maybe smaller than the transient waveform. these are probably not precursors in thebrillouin sense. second, the amplitude of the transient is reduced by f2rs/(f2 + f2rs),where f is the carrier frequency and frs is the principal frequency of the rise time.thus, if the rise time equals 20 carrier cycles, the risetime transient amplitude isreduced by 0.0025, or 52 db.1.king, r.w.p. and t.t. wu, òthe propagation of a radar pulse in seawater,ó j. appl. phys., vol. 73, 15 feb. 1993, 15811590see also:2.king, r.w.p. and t.t. wu, erratum: òthe propagation of a radarpulse in sea water,ó j. appl. phys., vol. 77, 1 april 1995, 358636873.king, r.w.p., òthe propagation of a gaussian pulse in sea water andits application to remote sensing,ó trans. ieee, vol. grs31, may 1993,5956054.king, r.w.p., òpropagation of a lowfrequency rectangular pulse inseawater,ó radio science, vol. 28, mayjune 1993, 2993075.margetis, d., òpulse propagation in sea water,ó j. appl. phys., vol. 77,1 april 1995, 28842888an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90assessment of potential health effects from pave paws6.margetis, d., òpulse propagation in sea water: the modulated pulse,óprogress in electromagnetics research, vol. 26, 2000, 89110the prediction by song and chen that early arrival and late arrival parts of awaveform in lossy media decay algebraically (as 1/r3 or 1/r5) has been shown tobe incorrect by margetis and king:7.song, j. and km chen, òpropagation of em pulses excited by an electric dipole in a conducting medium,ó trans. ieee, vol. ap41, 1993, 141414218.margetis, d. and r.w.p. king, òcomments on ôpropagation of empulses excited by an electric dipole in a conducting medium,õó trans.ieee, vol. ap43, jan 1995, 1191209.wait, j.r., òelectromagnetic fields of sources in lossy media,ó chapter 24 in antenna theory, part ii, r.e. collin and f.j. zucker, eds., mcgrawhill, 1969this paper treats singlepulse propagation in lossy (nondispersive) media.extensive references are provided.annex 55:papers by professor oughstun and colleaguesthese papers are concerned with wideband optical (laser) short pulses inmedia that are lossy and dispersive. no discussions of the effects of waveformbandwidth are given. these papers are listed because they are often cited forpave paws. however the very narrowband nature of the pave paws signalmakes all of these papers irrelevant to the pave paws problem. and the laserfrequency is roughly 10,000,000 times higher than that of pave paws.1.oughstun, k.e. and g.c. sherman, òpropagation of electromagneticpulses in a linear dispersive medium with absorption (the lorentz medium),ó j. opt. soc. of am. b, vol. 5, april 1988, 8178492.oughstun, k.e. and s. shen, òvelocity of energy transport for a timeharmonic field in a multipleresonance lorentz medium,ó j. opt. soc. ofam. b, vol. 5, nov. 1988, 239523983.shen, s. and k.e. oughstun, òdispersive pulse propagation in a doubleresonance lorentz medium,ó j. opt. soc. of am. b, vol. 6, may 1989, 948963an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions914.wyns, p., d.p. foty, and k.e. oughstun, ònumerical analysis of theprecursor fields in linear dispersive pulse propagation,ó j. opt. soc. ofam. a, vol. 6, sept. 1989, 142114295.oughstun, k.e. and j.e.k. laurens, òasymptotic description of ultrashort electromagnetic pulse propagation in a linear, causally dispersive medium,ó radio science, vol. 26, jan.feb. 1991, 2452586.oughstun, k.e., òpulse propagation in a linear, causally dispersivemedium,ó proc. ieee, vol. 79, oct. 1991, 137913907.oughstun, k.e. and j.e.k. laurens, òasymptotic description of electromagnetic pulse propagation in a linear dispersive medium,ó in ultrawideband, shortpulse electromagnetics, h. bertoni et al,. eds., plenumpress, 1993, 2232408.balictsis, c.m. and k.e. oughstun, òuniform asymptotic description ofultrashort gaussian pulse propagation in a causal, dispersive dielectric,óphys. rev. e, vol. 47, 1993, 364536699.balictsis, c.m. and k.e. oughstun, òuniform asymptotic description ofgaussian pulse propagation of arbitrary initial pulse width in a linear,causally dispersive medium,ó in ultrawideband, shortpulseelectromagnetics 2, l. carin and l.b. felsen, eds., plenum press, 1994, 27328310.smith, p.d. and k.e. oughstun, òelectromagnetic energy dissipationof ultrawideband plane wave pulses, in a causal, dispersive dielectric,ó inultrawideband, shortpulse electromagnetics 2, l. carin and l.b. felsen,eds., plenum press, 1994, 28529511.oughstun, k.e., òtransient in chiral media with single resonance dispersion: comments, jour. opt. soc. of am. a, vol. 12, 1995, 62662812.sherman, g.c. and k.e. oughstun, òenergyvelocity description ofpulse propagation in absorbing, dispersive dielectrics,ó j. opt. soc. of am.b, vol. 12 feb. 1995, 22924713.oughstun, k.e., òdynamical structure of the precursor fields in lineardispersive pulse propagation in lossy dielectrics,ó in ultrawideband, shortpulse electromagnetics 2, l. carin and l.b. felsen, eds., plenum press, 1995,257272an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92assessment of potential health effects from pave paws14.oughstun, k.e., ònoninstantaneous, finite risetime effects on the precursor field formation in linear dispersive pulse propagation,ó j. opt. soc.of am. a, vol. 12, aug. 1995, 1715172915.marozas, j.a. and k.e. oughstun, òelectromagnetic pulse propagationacross a planar interface separating two lossy, dispersive dielectrics,ó inultrawideband, shortpulse electromagnetics 3, c. baum, l. carin, and a.p. stone, eds., plenum press, 1996, 21723016.oughstun, k.e. and c.m. balictsis, ògaussian pulse propagation in adispersive, absorbing dielectric, òphys. rev ltrs., vol. 77, 9 sept. 1996, 2210221317.oughstun, k.e. and hong xiao, òfailure of the quasimonochromaticapproximation for ultrashort pulse propagation in a dispersive, attenuativemedium,ó phys. rev. ltrs., vol. 78, 27 jan. 1997, 64264518.balictsis, c.m. and k.e. oughstun, ògeneralized asymptotic description of the propagated field dynamics in gaussian pulse propagation in alinear, causally dispersive medium,ó phys. rev. ltrs. e, vol. 55, feb 1997,1910192119.xiao, h. and k.e. oughstun, òhybrid numericalasymptotic code fordispersive pulse propagation calculations, jour. optical society of americaa, vol. 15, 1998, 1256126720.solhaug, j.a., k.e. oughstun, j.j. stamnes, and p.d. smith, òuniformasymptotic description of the brillouin precursor in a lorentz model dielectric,ó jour. european opt. soc. a., pure and applied optics, vol. 7, 1998,57560221.oughstun, k.e., òthe angular spectrum representation and thesherman expansion of pulsed electromagnetic beam fields in dispersive,attenuative media,ó jour. european opt. soc. a., pure and applied optics,vol. 7, 1998, 1059107822.solhau, j.a., j.j. stamnes, and k.e. oughstun, òdiffraction of electromagnetic pulses in a singleresonance lorentz model dielectric,ó jour. european optical soc. a., pure and applied optics, vol. 7, 1998, 1079110123.smith, p.d. and k.e. oughstun, òelectromagnetic energy dissipationand propagation of an ultrawideband plane wave pulse in a causally dispersive dielectric,ó radio science, vol. 33, 1998, 14891504an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pave paws exposure conditions9324.xiao, h. and k.e. oughstun, òfailure of the groupvelocity description for ultrawideband pulse propagation in a causally dispersive, absorptive dielectric,ó j. opt. soc. am. b, vol. 16, oct. 1999, 1773178525.laurens, j.e.k. and k.e. oughstun, òelectromagnetic impulseresponse of triplydistilled water,ó ultrawideband, shortpulseelectromagnetics 4,ó heyman et al,. eds., kluwer academic/plenum publ.,1999, 24326426.smith, p.d. and k.e. oughstun, òultrawideband electromagnetic pulsepropagation in triply distilled water,ó ultrawideband, shortpulseelectromagnetics 4,ó heyman et al, eds., kluwer academic/plenum publ.,1999, 26527627.oughstun, k.e. and h. xiao, òinfluence of precursor fields on ultrashort pulse autocorrelation measurements and pulse width evolution,óoptics express, vol. 8, 9 april 2001, 48149128.oughstun, k.e. and h. xiao, òinfluence of the precursor fields onultrashort pulse measurements,ó in ultrawideband, shortpulseelectromagnetics 5, p.d. smith and s.r. cloude, eds., kluwer academic/plenum publ., 2002, 56957629.oughstun, k.e. òasymptotic description of ultrawideband, ultrashortpulsed electromagnetic beam field propagation in a dispersive, attenuativemedium,ó in ultrawideband, shortpulse electromagnetics 5, p.d. smith ands.r. cloude, kluwer academic/plenum publi, 2002, 687696an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.946evidence of biological effects ofrf exposure relevant topave paws radar systemintroductionbiological studies to determine the plausibility of an environmental exposurehaving either detrimental or beneficial consequences take many forms. however,the primary goal in most of these studies is to establish a reproducible biologicaleffect from the exposure under wellcontrolled conditions. such studies utilizeanimal cell cultures and embryo cultures, as well as plantgrowth cultures andfield studies. exposure conditions for these studies may represent those that human populations might be exposed to, or alternatively those that are expected toproduce an observable biological effect in a reasonable period of time. for example, it is common research practice to use exposure levels that are much higherthan those encountered in the environment to obtain a rapid and robust experimental effect. such studies may lead to subsequent investigations of possiblehuman health effects in animal systems or epidemiological studies. cellcultureexperiments are easy to reproduce, but the behavior of cells in culture is neverexactly the same as within an organism due to the fact that cells have been isolated from their usual environment, which includes contact with a variety of othercell types, exposure to intercellular factors, and a tissue architecture. in vitroexperiments, therefore, can be, in comparison to whole organism in vivo experiments, sometimes more and sometimes less likely to demonstrate a response to anenvironmental exposure. cellculture experiments are also of limited value if onewants to undertake very longterm exposure experiments (months to years). embryonic development studies can provide greater insight into potential health effects; however, there are a limited number of established embryo models thatprovide wellaccepted, quantifiable endpoints for study. plant growth studies peran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws95mit very longterm exposures to be studied under wellcontrolled conditions, butare only remotely connected to potential human health issues.tremendous advances in our understanding of biological systems have occurred over the 25 years since the previous review of in vitro studies of rf exposure effects, which was a part of the 1979 nrc review of the pave pawsinstallation (nrc 1979). those advances have had profound effects on our understanding of biology, greatly enabling the scientific community in its efforts todetermine if and how the rf radiation generated by the pave paws systemcould influence biological systems. our ability to design experiments and collectdata from culture studies has been enhanced as a result of numerous technicaladvances, as well as significant advances in modeling the inherent complexity ofbiological systems, which provides a theoretical foundation for interpreting datafrom such experiments.at the time of the initial nrc pave paws report (1979), cell/tissueculture techniques were welldeveloped approaches but their analysis involved predominantly simple biochemical assays and singlemolecule detection approaches.protein biochemistry was also a developed field, but few specific signaltransduction pathways had been identified in cells. the techniques of molecular biology were only in the early stages of development. today, threedimensional tissueculture systems are being developed to permit the study of differentiating cellsystems in a native tissue architecture, and polymerase chain reaction technologypermits dna amplification from samples as small as a single cell. differentialdisplay techniques and cdna microarray approaches permit studies of gene expression of large numbers of genes at one time, and high performance liquidchromatography (hplc), mass spectroscopy of òprotein chips,ó and yeast twohybrid systems permit studies of protein distributions, protein dynamics, and proteinprotein interactions. similarly, developments in microscopic techniques(such as atomic force, confocal fluorescent, realtime fluorescent, and micromanipulation techniques [laser capture microscopy] have significantly advanced ourabilities to undertake studies of processes such as cell dynamics and intra andintercellular interactions.of equal importance has been the development of computational approachesfor modeling biological systems and responses based on concepts from complexity theory. fuzzy logic, neuralnetwork analysis, genetic algorithms, and clustering techniques are modern bioinformatic tools that permit the large datasets obtained by molecular biological techniques to be analyzed. these new approachesare tools that allow scientists to understand how complex systems (i.e. systemswith many highly interactive components) are influenced by alterations to theirenvironment. the computational modeling of biological processes, therefore, mayhelp us to predict under which situations perturbations in the environment mayinfluence biological systems. whereas all complex systems are robustly stable toacute environmental insult, even slight perturbations in the environment can influence the selforganization of such systems if imposed for a sufficient period ofan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96assessment of potential health effects from pave pawstime. all cells and organisms are potentially sensitive to fluctuations in the environment; however, the influence of a specific environmental perturbation on cellsand organisms may not necessarily be observed in studies of a single model, butcould require that a class of models be used to capture the potential set of outcomes of a given environmental perturbation. application of these concepts tothe review of biological studies of rf exposure suggests that studies that focus onthe selforganization in a system (e.g., differentiation and development) and involve longterm exposures may eventually be best positioned to identify the influence of an environmental perturbation.in order to provide a maximal representation of different cells, tissues, andògeneraló experimental conditions, and still remain in the realm of experimentalconditions relevant to the pave paws system, this review emphasizes experimental designs from the following types of systems:¥a large ensemble of cells,¥an rf exposure similar to that generated by the pave paws system,and¥a longterm exposure to the radiation (similar to the circumstances associated with the pave paws installation).we have also reviewed responses in cells based on stress responses that havebeen identified in the literature as being important for cellular recovery to acutetoxicity and injury. life on earth has evolved in an environment associated with avariety of stressors including radiation, heat, chemicals, and other toxic insults.as a consequence, cells and animals have evolved defense mechanisms to copewith these acute stresses including antioxidants, apoptosis (cell death to avoidreplication of damaged cells), dna repair, refolding of damaged proteins, andother mechanisms. these defense pathways work to prevent the continued expansion and use of damaged biomolecules in the cell. much acute cellular damagecan be compensated by these different damageresponse pathways and so, correspondingly, these pathways represent important targets to consider in the contextof detrimental biological responses to an environmental exposure. the presenceof these pathways may also explain how biological responses may occur but notresult in adverse health effects.the effects of exposure to external stimuli can be categorized into:1.direct molecular effects¥dna damage¥membrane perturbations¥protein function alterations2.indirect molecular effects¥cell signal transductionan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws97¥gene expression3.phenotypic effects¥cell apoptosis¥cell cycle perturbation¥dna repair¥differentiation and development¥carcinogenesis¥growthliterature reviewdirect molecular effectsdna damagedna damage is induced by a wide variety of different stimuli includingradiation, chemicals (such as chemotherapeutic drugs), and oxidative damage (including the damage that results as a normal consequence of cellular respiration).elaborate pathways exist within cells that serve to repair damage to dna, therebymaintaining genetic integrity and normal cellular function. incomplete or faultyrepair can lead to the production of abnormal proteins or the dysregulation ofspecific protein syntheses. while the overall resiliency of the cell may compensate for this dysregulation, a disruption of certain specific dna repair processescan result in diseases such as cancer, immunodeficiency, and others. dna damage is a normal consequence of cellular function, and it is estimated that mammalian cells encounter 104 dna strand breaks/cell/day, which are usually repairedwithout adverse effects.several studies have examined possible effects of exposures to radar andcellphone rf energies on dna damage in mammalian cells following acuteexposures (hours). the results have been contradictory and controversial (lai andsingh 1995; mcnamee and others 2002; tice and others 2002; bisht and others2002; malyapa and others 1997; lai and singh 1996). while lai and singh havedetected strand breaks after rf exposures, several groups which have also usedvery sensitive alkaline comet assays detect no dna break increase at pulsed rffrequencies of 1.9 ghz, 835.62 mhz, or 847.74 mhz (cellphone frequencies) at0.6 w/kg sar (mcnamee and others 2002; malyapa and others 1997). additional recent studies from rotirotiõs laboratory have demonstrated an absenceof dna damage in brain cells, fibroblasts, and lymphoid cells following exposure to pulsedwave microwaves and radiofrequency (lagroye and others 2004a;lagroye and others 2004b; hook and others 2004). the validity of such studiesdepends on the sensitivity of the assay system in any particular laboratory, thetypes and times of exposures, and the possible sources of error. recent studies bydimitroglou and others (2003) have shown using singlecell gel electrophoresisan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98assessment of potential health effects from pave pawshigher levels of dna strandbreaks in people who have been psychologicallystressed, suggesting a role for hormonal and biochemical factors in the response,a consideration that was not previously addressed in the above reports and may beone source of error. for a review of controversial cytogenetic observations inmammalian somatic cells see vijayalaxmi and obe (2004).it should be noted that the ability of an agent to cause single or doublestrand breaks (ssb or dsb) in dna does not necessarily mean that the agent isdangerous or even capable of inducing mutations. chemicals such as hydrogenperoxide are known to cause breaks in dna but cause few adverse health effects.likewise, low doses of ionizing radiation or uv light well within the limits of thepermissible exposure also cause dna strand breaks. exposure to very low dosesof ionizing radiation (1 cgy) can be detected to cause dna strand breaks (forexample, buatti and others, 1992 find that the rate of strand breaks per cell is1815/gy). uvradiation exposure, analogous to the exposure from sunlight,causes 0.07 ssb/1010 da/kj/m2 for uva; and 1.9 ssb/1010 da/kj/m2 for uvb(wenczl and others 1997). membrane perturbationsdirect damage to cellular membranes has been associated with exposure to avariety of chemicals and to ionizing radiation. these stresses often lead to differences in lipid and protein composition of cellular membranes, altering the membrane fluidity, ion transport, and surface properties of the membrane.as in the studies with dna damage, changes in membrane fluidity or iontransport are associated with a large variety of normal states, and these changes inand of themselves are not necessarily associated with pathogenic states or with aprogression toward pathogenesis. for example, chemicals known as ionophorescause a change in membrane permeability and permit ions that are usually outsidethe cell to rapidly influx. nevertheless, there are very few dangerous consequences associated with exposure to ionophores, and in general they are used tomimic natural ionophoric processes that occur in mammalian cells.some isolated reports ofchanges in membranes and ion transport have beenreported to be associated with exposure of cells tomodulatedcellphone andradarradiation. thereportedeffects in the literaturecome largely from one laboratory, andinclude both changes in ca++ ion fluxin cells in monolayer cultureand efflux from ex vivo tissue slices (dutta and others, 1989; dutta and others,1984; blackman and others 1985; joines and blackman, 1980). subsequentstudies(cranfield and others 2001; wolke and others 1996) have documented no or marginal effectsof rf exposure on ca++ flux in cellculture systems. taken together, these experimentsprovidesome support forthesuggestion thatmodulated rf exposures maybe more capable of causingbiological effects than unmodulated rf fields.clustering of membrane proteins (called membrane capping) occurs on aan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws99variety of cell types including lymphocytes and is usually a measure of membrane perturbations and membrane responses in mammalian cells. sultan andothers (1983) performed studies to determine whether or not modulated rf exposure caused changes in the ability of blymphocytes to cap following exposure toantigen; these studies showed no difference in the capping responses of unexposed and exposed cells in culture.protein function (folding, proteinprotein interactions, translations)proteins are responsible for carrying out most of the cellular maintenancefunctions within mammalian cells. changes in dna are considered dangerousprimarily because they lead to changes in the expression of proteins. however,cellular stressinducing agents have been shown to affect proteins in several different ways. changes in the ways in which proteins fold have been found predominantly following exposure to heatshock, while changes in proteinproteininteractions and in protein translation have been associated with almost all typesof cellular stress. because of the resiliency of biological systems, such damage toproteins is not usually sufficient to harm a cell unless it has occurred with a largenumber of proteins resulting in protein aggregation and largescale dysfunctionin a cell. in addition, cells have evolved complex systems for managing this typeof damage. chaperone systems and proteosomes are proteins that function torefold damaged proteins, clear unrepairable proteins from the cell, and disassociate aggregates created following exposure to heatshock stress. this damageresponse pathway permits heatdamaged cells to repair their proteins and resumenormal function in the body. this pathway is generally induced whenever thebody is experiencing fever or thermal dysregulation, although there have been afew reports in the literature of heatlike responses following exposure to ionizingradiation, uv, or other forms of stress. numerous studies have examined thethermal effects of radar, and these effects have been wellcharacterized in theliterature. however, such thermal effects cannot occur at the radar power densities experienced by the cape cod population and are not considered here.several recent reports have documented induction of chaperonelike heatshock protein responses in mammalian cells following exposure to cellphonefrequencies below the thermal range. in particular, dicarlo and others (2002),and studies by kwee and others (1998, 2001), have documented induction ofseveral heatshock proteins (hsp70) in mammalian cells, as well as increased binding of heatshock elements to their dnabinding sequence. replication of thosefindings have not been reported in the literature but are suggested by other studiesshowing increases in hsp70 following rf exposure (cellphone frequencies) offruit flys (weisbrot and others 2003). related studies by depomerai and others(2000a, 2000b, 2002) have demonstrated that nonthermal microwaves can induce hsp70 in the nematode caenorhabditis elegans. similar induction of hsp70has been observed following exposure to very low doses of ionizing radiationan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100assessment of potential health effects from pave paws(calini and others 2003). the implications of this nonthermal induction of heatshock proteins are not clear however they do suggest the induction of a cellularmechanism to protect proteins from degradation/denaturation. whether this is adirect consequence of radar exposure is also not clear, but levels of induction arevery low, far below the threshold of a small fever response. on the other hand,other studies have suggested that stress proteins are not induced following exposure to radiofrequency or microwave radiation (cleary and others 1997).indirect molecular effectscell signal transductionextracellular signals (for growth, differentiation, apoptosis) are transmittedto the cell via a cell signaltransduction cascade that usually involves stimulationof a surface receptor, alterations in intracellular ionic concentrations, a variety ofphosphorylation events, amplification of the signal, transmission of the signalinto the nucleus, and alterations in gene expression. transient changes in cellsignaltransduction cascades have been associated with most cellular stressinducing agents; these changes can lead to more permanent expressions of cellularchanges such as those reflected in terminally differentiated cells.studies of changes in cell signal transduction following radiofrequency exposure have been limited to an examination of production of extracellular factorsfollowing exposure to rf. the most significant changes that have been reportedin the literature are in the transient release of cellular growth factors and other cellsignalinducing agents that might alter cellular functions temporarily (maussetand others 2001; george and others 2002). other studies, however, have reportedno changes in levels of such extracellular modulators as melatonin or cortisol(radon and others 2001; stark and others 1997). while there are numerous studies in the literature of the effects of other cell stressing agents on kinase activationor intracellular phosphorylation events, pacini and others (2002) is the only report of changes in mitogenactivated protein kinase (mapk) phosphorylationpathways affected by exposure to rf. leszczynski and others (2002) reportedactivation of mapk stress pathway in human endothelial cells using mobilephone exposures.timeseries data provide an exceptional means for characterizing cell systemdynamics, and fluorescent microscopy provides a wellestablished technique formonitoring the activity of cell ensembles. specifically, calcium signaling hasplayed a major role in discussions of the influence of rf exposure on biologicalsystems, dating to the early calciumefflux studies of adey and others as reportedin the 1979 nrc report. modern techniques permit the realtime monitoring ofcalcium activity in cell ensembles. cranfield and others (2001) monitored calcium activity (using fluo3 dye) in monolayers of jurkat e61 cells exposed to a915 mhz rf waveform pulsed at 217 hz and designed to simulate a gsm telean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws101phone signal. sar varied from 1 to 2.1 w/kg with a weighted average of 1.5 w/kg. mean calcium levels and calcium spike height were not affected by the rfexposure; however, a significant shift in calcium spike frequency was observed,consistent with an affect on cell ensemble activity.gene expressionchanges in gene expression encompass events from activation of genes (promoter activation), through the changes in mrna availability, to changes in protein stability/quantity, all of them finally leading to the changes in quantity of theprotein product of the gene in question. moderate changes in gene expressionhave been associated with mild or moderate exposures to cellular stressing agentsincluding mild heatshock or very low doses of ionizing radiation.several groups have examined changes in gene expression following exposure to rf. for the majority of genes examined for changes in expression to date,cfos is the only transcription factor that has been shown, in multiple studies, tobe modulated in response to rf exposure (goswami and others 1999). pacini andothers (2002) reported induction of betatransforming growthfactor andapoptosisfactor (bax) gene expression following rf exposure. several studies ofgene expression using comprehensive genechip arrays that can monitor the entire genome of expressed genes in a single experiment are underway and holdpromise for resolving questions of gene expression changes associated with rfexposure.phenotypic responsescell apoptosisapoptosis is the process of programmed cell death induced either in naturalcircumstances of embryogenesis and differentiation or in states of stress following exposure to cellular damaging agents such as heat or radiation. in cellstressresponses, apoptosis can be protective because it prevents the induction of cancercells by causing the death of cells with damaged dna that might otherwise allowfor cells bearing deleterious dna mutations to survive.few studies have examined induction of apoptosis following rf exposure.as noted above, pacini and others (2002) reported the induction of the proapoptotic gene bax following rf exposure.cellcycle perturbationsthe cell cycle not only marks the progression of a cell from single cellthrough its dna replication and division into two daughter cells, but also caninclude stages of cellular preparation for proliferation, differentiation, or cellan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102assessment of potential health effects from pave pawscycle arrest. cellcycle perturbations are commonly observed following exposureto cellular stressing agents. ionizing and uv radiations are both known to causedelays in cellcycle progression associated with an increase in dna repair andactivation of other cellsurvival functions. in addition, changes in cellcycle timeare reflective of each particular cell type and its degree of differentiation.in studies on the effects of rf exposure, george and others (2002) demonstrated an increase in proliferative potential in exposed fibroblasts and epithelialcells. similarly, velizarov and others (1999) demonstrated a change in cellproliferative capacity following rf exposure that was not related to thermal effects.pacini and others (2002) also documented an increased proliferation of normalhuman skin fibroblasts in culture following exposure to rf. on the other hand,higashikubo and others (2001) observed no changes in cellcycle progression intwo different cell lines exposed to rf (higashikubo and others, 2001). similarly,stagg and others, (1997) reported no effects of a modulated rf field on cellproliferation in a glioma cell line or in primary glial cells.these differences in observations may be due to different cell systems used,different sensitivities of assays, and different experimental conditions.differentiation and development cellular differentiation is a critical aspect of tissue and organismal development. the process of differentiation is complex and poorly understood, yet it isknown to involve changes in gene expression, protein production, cell surfacemarker expression, and cell signaltransduction pathways. an undermining ofthis process is associated with some types of tumor progression in which normaldifferentiated cells are replaced by dedifferentiated continuously dividing tumorcells. this process is perhaps best understood in vitro when differentiating agentsare added to cells in culture to induce particular phenotypic changes associatedwith endstage cells. a few studies have examined the effects of rf exposure oncellular differentiation.koldayev and shchepin (1997) reported a study of rf effects on early embryogenesis of sea urchins. in two studies involving 450 mhz radiation for aperiod of 520 minutes, the protocol investigated fertility associated with combinations of exposed sperm and unexposed eggs, and unexposed sperm with exposed eggs. exposure of sea urchin eggs to 100 mw/cm2 caused a 1.2 to 1.9folddecrease in cell fertilization. irradiation of eggs at 200 mw/cm2 caused a 1.8 to2.6fold decrease in fertilization rate, with 711 times the control number of abnormal zygotes. sperm irradiation had no effect on fertilization rates. however,saito and others (1991), in a study involving 20day exposures of chick embryosto a 428 mhz, 5.5 mw/cm2 incident field, showed severely delayed developmentaccording to the hamburgerhamilton staging. ten replications using 10 eggswere completed, with developmental anomalies observed at sars in the range of8.6 mw/kg to 47.1 mw/kg.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws103numerous studies have been undertaken to address the potential influence ofrf exposure on teratogenesis (the production of nonheritable birth defects). in1987, lary and conover (1987) completed a literature review of all teratogenesisstudies extant to that date, including all studies with exposures from 300 to 3000mhz, and below the ansi exposure limit of 0.4 w/kg. they found no reports ofteratogenic effects in the absence of organismal heating.more recently, heynick and merritt (2003) reviewed work (and subsequenterrata, including saito and others 1991) on teratologic effects and developmentalabnormalities from exposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic fields (rfemf)in the range 3 khz300 ghz. a series of studies was conducted on beetles, birds,rodents, and nonhuman primates indicating that teratologic effects occur onlyfrom exposure levels that cause biologically detrimental increases in body temperature.effects of rf exposures on development in wholeanimal mammalian systems are discussed in detail in chapter 7.dna repairnormal cells have the capacity to repair damage to their genetic material as apart of their evolutionary heritage. dnarepair pathways in mammalian cells arecomplex, with multiple proteins regulating the reactions. different types of repairare associated with repair of different types of dna damage. faulty repair ofdna damage is associated with some human hereditary diseases such as ataxiatelangiectasia or xeroderma pigmentosum. in addition, abnormalities of specificdnarepair proteins are associated with a higher incidence of particular cancers.for example, abnormalities of the brca1 gene, part of a dnarepair complex, areassociated with a higher incidence of breast cancer among women. abnormalitiesof dna repair would be evident in several different ways including increasedaccumulation of dna damage, changes in the accumulation of particular dnarepair proteins, and alterations in other pathways controlled by dnarepair proteins (such as cellcycle progression and cellular transformation). to date, therehave been no direct measures of dnarepair capacity in cells exposed to rffields. nevertheless, the moderate to undetectable changes observed in dna damage, cellcycle progression, and carcinogenesis that occur following rf exposuresuggest that direct effects on dnarepair pathways are unlikely.carcinogenesis is a process whereby changes in the genome of a cell lead tothe progression of a normal cell into a cancerous cell. this process leads to theclonal expansion of a single cell that has uncontrolled growth and progresses to afull malignancy. genes that have been found to be mutated in cancer cells includemany of those discussed aboveñgenes that regulate gene expression, cellsignaltransduction, apoptosis, dna repair, cellular differentiation and development,and cellcycle progression. neoplastic transformation is tightly associated withdna damage and mutagenesis except in a very few cases. reports discussedan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsabove regarding effects of rf on dna damage relate to this issue since mostdnadamaging agents are mutagenic and also carcinogenic.one of the most important endpoints that has been examined after rf exposures is that related to cellular transformation in vitro and induction of cancer inanimals following exposure. several types of in vitro and in vivo assays havebeen applied to the problem in an effort to discern whether or not rf exposureleads to an increased risk of carcinogenic transformation. studying cells in culture, roti roti and others (2001) demonstrated that cdma1 radiations cause noeffect on neoplastic transformation following a sevenday exposure. in relatedwork, cain and others (1997) reported, in a chemical tumorpromoter study usingthe same cell system, that modulated rf field exposure for 28 days does not leadto increased tumor promotion or progression over that of the chemical promoteralone. detailed discussion on the effects of rf field exposure in mammals ispresented in chapter 7.growth in plant systemsa remarkable consistency has developed in a small number of studies addressing the influence of rf radiation on tree growth and fecundity, most notablyin three plant studies out of the former soviet union in the republic of latvia (allconducted in the vicinity of skrunda radio location station).in the initial study, balodis, and others (1996) reported on the growth of treesin an exposed region for the 11 years before 1971, when the radar became active,and for the 16 years following the continuous radiation exposure. trunk sampleswere obtained from 5090yearold pinus sylvestris l. trees (balodis and others1996) growing in 29 sampling plots and the tree heights and diameters were alsomeasured. radial annual increments in growth were measured to a precision of0.01 mm. exposure was at 156162 mhz, with a pulse duration of 0.8 msec,interpulse interval of 41 msec, and pulse power densities as high as 375 w/cm2.growth was significantly (p = 0.001) inhibited by exposure, with a direct linearcorrelation with distance from the station. electricfield exposure levels appear tohave ranged from 0.4 mv/m to 250 mv/m. several possible sources of pollutionthat might have affected the ring widths were shown not to have caused the decrease in ring widths that coincided with the startup of the skrunda radiolocationsystem.in a companion paper, selga and selga (1996) reported on skrunda radiolocation station emfinduced modification of golgi apparatus in pine needlesand a switch from synthesis of predecessors of cell walls (lignins) to formationand export of resin predecessors.1cpma= code division multiple access (cellular telephone technology originally know as is95).an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws105in the paper by magone (1996), effects of skrunda radio location stationemf on the duckweed spirodela polyrhiza was observed. after 55day exposure,various morphological and developmental abnormalities were observed in 610daughter plants from 10 exposed mother plants, while only 0.1 plant with abnormalities per 10 mother plants were observed in the control condition. the samedaughter fronds had a shorter lifespan (67 days compared to 87 days in the control) and fewer subsequent daughters (total eight compared to 10 in the controlgroup).in a more recent, shamcontrolled study of the effect of rf exposure on treegrowth, lerchl and others (2000) obtained a similar observation. in this study,seedlings of three conifer species (abies alba, abies grandis, pinus pumila) wereexposed in a radial waveguide, in a blinded fashion, and seedling height wasmeasured each week for a sixmonth period. exposure was at 383 mhz, with a20% duty cycle hz, at a field intensity of 131 v/m. a significant inhibition ofgrowth was observed.it should be noted, however, that longterm exposures in plants can be influenced by a variety of different factors including microenvironmental changes.summary and conclusionsthe biological studies that most closely reflect a pave paws type of radiation exposure are the treegrowth studies. in those studies, a significant dosedependent response was observed. in addition, some embryo development studies and a few in vitro studies have also suggested the possibility of elfmodulatedmicrowavefrequency rf exposures producing significant biological effects.the consideration that the modulation frequency of the pave paws mayplay a significant role in understanding the potential for this radar to influencebiological systems was also raised by the first nas review committee in 1979.pave paws has an elfmodulation envelope thatgives rise to spectral characteristics in the 10100 hz frequency range. this is due to diagnostic and calibration sequences, where a pulse is removed, but many other radar systems use thesesequences. substantial research has been undertaken in this area over the lastdecade, with the specific intent of establishing fieldintensity thresholds underwellcontrolled conditions. as a result of those efforts, reproducible biologicaleffects of electricfield exposures in the elffrequency range have been demonstrated for induced electricfield intensities of less than 1 /centimeter (e.g., seethe work of rosenspire and others 2001; mcleod and collazo 2000). indeed, theniehs has concluded in a recent report that elf electric fields below 10 /cmcan produce reproducible biological effects (niehs 1998).responses at the cell level that are traditionally associated with carcinogenesis, such as dna damage and mutation induction, have been observed in onlyone study, while several studies have documented no dna damage associatedwith rf exposure. while further studies are required to clarify this issue, thean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsevidence supporting dna damaging events following rf exposures is weak.other biological events that would contribute to nondna damage responses,and wholeorganism responses, are better reported in the literature.to clarify these conclusions, additional studies would be required. specifically, longterm studies of complex biological responses following exposure topave paws type radiation, as described in the u.s. air force phase iv timedomain studies, would be capable of directly confirming previous reports of celllevel effects, particularly those that utilize modern largescale data generationand analysis techniques (i.e., protein and genomicarraybased studies). in addition, studies addressing the rectification properties of living tissue in the microwave region, most importantly, living skin, which is the predominant human organ exposed to the pulsed radiation associated with pave paws, would providea firm foundation on which to calculate the magnitude of any inducedelf fieldin the body due to exposure to elfmodulated microwave radiation. if significant demodulation in living tissue were to be demonstrated, much of the literatureregarding elffield interactions with tissue would be relevant to understandingthe potential of pave paws exposure to influence biological systems. similarly, due to the fact that longterm studies have demonstrated effects on plantgrowth from radar exposure, consideration should be given to examining plantgrowth around the pave paws facility.referencesbalodis, v., g. brumelis, k. kalviskis, o. nikodemus, d. tjarve, and v. znotina. 1996. does theskrunda radio location station diminish the radial growth of pine trees? sci total environ180:5764.bisht, k.s., e.g. moros, w.l. straube, j.d. baty, and j.l. roti roti. 2002. the effect of 835.62 mhzfdma or 847.74 mhz cdma modulated radiofrequency radiation on the induction of micronuclei in c3h 10t(1/2) cells. radiat res 157:506515.blackman, c.f., s.g. benane, d.e. house, and w.t. joines. 1985. effects of elf (1120 hz) andmodulated (50 hz) rf fields on the efflux of calcium ions from brain tissue in vitro.bioelectromagnetics 6:111.buatti, j.m., l.r. rivero, and t.j. jorgensen. 1992. radiationinduced dna singlestrand breaks infreshly isolated human leukocytes. radiat res 132:200206.cain, c.d., d.l. thomas, and w.r. adey. 1997. focus formation of c3h/10t1/2 cells and exposureto a 836.55 mhz modulated radiofrequency field. bioelectromagnetics 18:237243.calini, v., c. urani, and m. camatini. 2003. overexpression of hsp70 is induced by ionizing radiation in c3h 10t1/2 cells and protects from dna damage. toxicol in vitro 17:561566.cleary, s.f., g. cao, l.m. liu, p.m. egle, and k.r. shelton. 1997. stress proteins are not induced inmammalian cells exposed to radiofrequency or microwave radiation. bioelectromagnetics18:499505.cranfield, c.g., a.w. wood, v. anderson, and k.g. menezes. 2001. effects of mobile phone typesignals on calcium levels within human leukaemic tcells (jurkat cells). int j radiat biol77:12071217.de pomerai, d., c. daniells, h. david, j. allan, i. duce, m. mutwakil, d. thomas, p. sewell, j.tattersall, d. jones, and p. candido. 2000a. nonthermal heatshock response to microwaves.nature 405:417418.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws107de pomerai, d., c. daniells, h. david, j. allan, i. duce, m. mutwakil, d. thomas, p. sewell, j.tattersall, d. jones, and p. candido. 2000b. microwave radiation induces a heatshock responseand enhances growth in the nematode caenorhabditis elegans. ieee t microw theory 48:20762081.de pomerai, d.i., a. dawe, l. djerdid, j. allan, g. brunt and c. daniells. 2002. growth and maturation of the nematode caenorhabditis elegans following exposure to weak microwave fields.enzyme microb tech 30:7379.di carlo, a., n. white, f. guo, p. garrett, and t. litovitz. 2002. chronic electromagnetic fieldexposure decreases hsp70 levels and lowers cytoprotection. j cell biochem 84:447454.dimitroglou, e., m. zafiropoulou, n. messininikolaki, s. doudounakis, s. tsilimigaki, and s.m.piperakis. 2003. dna damage in a human population affected by chronic psychogenic stress.int j hyg envir health 206:3944.dutta, s.k., a. subramoniam, b. ghosh, and r. parshad. 1984. microwave radiationinduced calcium ion efflux from human neuroblastoma cells in culture. bioelectromagnetics 5:7178.dutta, s.k., b. ghosh, and c.f. blackman. 1989. radiofrequency radiationinduced calcium ionefflux enhancement from human and other neuroblastoma cells in culture. bioelectromagnetics10:197202.george, f.r., r.j. lukas, j. moffett, and m.c. ritz. 2002. invitro mechanisms of cell proliferationinduction: a novel bioactive treatment for accelerating wound healing wounds 14:107115.goswami, p.c., l.d. albee, a.j. parsian, j.d. baty, e.g. moros, w.f. pickard, j.l. roti roti, andc.r. hunt. 1999. protooncogene mrna levels and activities of multiple transcription factorsin c3h 10t 1/2 murine embryonic fibroblasts exposed to 835.62 and 847.74 mhz cellularphone communication frequency radiation. radiat res 151:300309.heynick, l.n. and j.h. merritt. 2003. radiofrequency fields and teratogenesis. bioelectromagneticssuppl 6:s174s186.higashikubo, r., m. ragouzis, e.g. moros, w.l. straube, and j.l. roti roti. 2001. radiofrequencyelectromagnetic fields do not alter the cell cycle progression of c3h 10t and u87mg cells.radiat res 156:786795.hook, g.j., p. zhang, i. lagroye, l. li, r. higashikubo, e.g. moros, w.l. straube, w.f. pickard,j.d. baty, and j.l. roti roti. 2004. measurement of dna damage and apoptosis in molt4 cellsafter in vitro exposure to radiofrequency radiation. radiat res 161:193200.joines, w.t. and c.f. blackman. 1980. power density, field intensity, and carrier frequency determinants of rfenergyinduced calciumion efflux from brain tissue. bioelectromagnetics 1:271275.koldayev, v.m. and y.v. shchepin. 1997. effects of electromagnetic radiation on embryos of seaurchins. bioelectrochem bioenerg 43:161164.kwee, s. and p. raskmark. 1998. changes in cell proliferation due to environmental nonionizingradiation. 2. microwave radiation. bioelectrochem bioenerg 44:251255.kwee, s., p. raskmark and s. velizarov. 2001. changes in cellular proteins due to environmentalnonionizing radiation. 1. heat shock proteins. electro magnetobiol 20:165176.lagroye, i., r. anane, b.a. wettring, e.g. moros, w.l. straube, m. laregina, m. niehoff, w.f.pickard, j. baty, and j.l. roti roti. 2004a. measurement of dna damage after acute exposureto pulsedwave 2450 mhz microwaves in rat brain cells by two alkaline comet assay methods.int j radiat biol 80:1120.lagroye, i., g.j. hook, b.a. wettring, j.d. baty, e.g. moros, w.l. straube, and j.l. roti roti.2004b. measurements of alkalilabile dna damage and proteindna crosslinks after 2450mhz microwave and lowdose gamma irradiation in vitro. radiat res 161:201214.lai, h. and n.p. singh. 1995. acute lowintensity microwave exposure increases dna singlestrandbreaks in rat brain cells. bioelectromagnetics 16:207210.lai, h. and n.p. singh. 1996. single and doublestrand dna breaks in rat brain cells after acuteexposure to radiofrequency electromagnetic radiation. int j radiat biol 69:513521.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108assessment of potential health effects from pave pawslary, j.m. and d.l. conover. 1987. teratogenic effects of radiofrequency radiation. ieee eng medbiol mag. march 1987, 42.lerchl, d., a. lerchl, p. hantsch, a. bitz, j. streckert, v. hansen. 2000. studies on the effects ofradiofrequency fields on conifers. trans bioelectromagnetics soc 22:160.leszczynski, d., s. joenvaara, j. reivinen, and r. kuokka. 2002. nonthermal activation of thehsp27/p38mapk stress pathway by mobile phone radiation in human endothelial cells: molecular mechanism for cancer and bloodbrain barrierrelated effects. differentiation 70:120129.magone, i. 1996. the effect of electromagnetic radiation from the skrunda radio location station onspirodela polyrhiza (l) schleiden cultures. sci total environ 180:7580.malyapa, r.s., e.w. ahern, w.l. straube, e.g. moros, w.f. pickard, and j.l. roti roti. 1997.measurement of dna damage after exposure to 2450 mhz electromagnetic radiation. radiatres 148:608617.mausset, a.l., r. de seze, f. montpeyroux, and a. privat. 2001. effects of radiofrequency exposureon the gabaergic system in the rat cerebellum: clues from semiquantitative immunohistochemistry. brain res 912:3346.mcleod, k.j. and l. collazo. 2000. suppression of a differentiation response in mc3t3e1 osteoblastlike cells by sustained, lowlevel, 30 hz magnetic field exposure. radiat res 153:706714.mcnamee, j.p., p.v. bellier, g.b. gajda, b.f. lavallee, e.p. lemay, l. marro, and a. thansandote.2002. dna damage in human leukocytes after acute in vitro exposure to a 1.9 ghz pulsemodulated radiofrequency field. radiat res 158:534537.niehs (national institute of environmental health sciences). 1998. portier, c.j. and m.s. wolfe(eds). assessment of health effects from exposure to powerline frequency electric and magnetic fields. working group report. nih publication 983981.nrc (national research council). 1979. analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologiceffects of the pave paws radar system. washington, dc: national academy press.pacini, s., m. ruggiero, i. sardi, s. aterini, f. gulisano, and m. gulisano. 2002. exposure to globalsystem for mobile communication (gsm) cellular phone radiofrequency alters gene expression,proliferation, and morphology of human skin fibroblasts. oncol res 13:1924.radon, k., d. parera, d.m. rose, d. jung, and l. vollrath. 2001. no effects of pulsed radio frequencyelectromagnetic fields on melatonin, cortisol, and selected markers of the immune system inman. bioelectromagnetics 22:280287.rosenspire, a.j., a.l. kindzelskii, and h.r. petty. 2001. pulsed dc electric fields couple to naturalnad(p)h oscillations in ht1080 fibrosarcoma cells. j cell sci 114:15151520.roti roti, j.l., r.s. malyapa, k.s. bisht, e.w. ahern, e.g. moros, w.f. pickard, and w.l. straube.2001. neoplastic transformation in c3h 10t(1/2) cells after exposure to 835.62 mhz fdmaand 847.74 mhz cdma radiations. radiat res 155:239247.saito, k., k. suzuki, and s. motoyoshi. 1991. lethal and teratogenic effects of longterm lowintensity radio frequency radiation at 428 mhz on developing chick embryo. teratology 43:609614.salford, l.g., a.e. brun, j.l. eberhardt, l. malmgren, and b.r. persson. 2003. nerve cell damage inmammalian brain after exposure to microwaves from gsm mobile phones. environ healthpersp 111:881883; discussion a408.selga, t. and m. selga. 1996. response of pinus sylvestris l needles to electromagnetic fields. cytological and ultrastructual aspects. sci total environ 180:6573.stagg, r.b., w.j. thomas, r.a. jones, and w.r. adey. 1997. dna synthesis and cell proliferation inc6 glioma and primary glial cells exposed to a 836.55 mhz modulated radiofrequency field.bioelectromagnetics 18:230236.stark, k.d., t. krebs, e. altpeter, b. manz, c. griot, and t. abelin. 1997. absence of chronic effectof exposure to shortwave radio broadcast signal on salivary melatonin concentrations in dairycattle. j pineal res 22:171176.sultan, m.f., c.a. cain, and w.a. tompkins. 1983. immunological effects of amplitudemodulatedradio frequency radiation: b lymphocyte capping. bioelectromagnetics 4:157165.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biological effects of rf exposure relevant to pave paws109tice, r.r., g.g. hook, m. donner, d.i. mcree, and a.w. guy. 2002. genotoxicity of radiofrequencysignals. i. investigation of dna damage and micronuclei induction in cultured human bloodcells. bioelectromagnetics 23:113126.velizarov, s., p. raskmark, and s. kwee. 1999. the effects of radiofrequency fields on cell proliferation are nonthermal. bioelectrochem bioenerg 48:177180.vijayalaxmi, obe. g. 2004. controversial cytogenetic observations in mammalian somatic cells exposed to radiofrequency radiation. radiat res 162:481496.weisbrot, d., h. lin, l. ye, m. blank, and r. goodman. 2003. effects of mobile phone radiation onreproduction and development in drosophila melanogaster. j cell biochem 89:4855.wenczl, e., s. pool, a.j. timmerman, g.p. van der schans, l. roza, and a.a. schothorst. 1997.physiological doses of ultraviolet irradiation induce dna strand breaks in cultured human melanocytes, as detected by means of an immunochemical assay. photochem photobiol 66:826830.wolke, s., u. neibig, r. elsner, f. gollnick, and r. meyer. 1996. calcium homeostasis of isolatedheart muscle cells exposed to pulsed highfrequency electromagnetic fields. bioelectromagnetics17:144153.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1107animal and human studiesaddressing health effectsintroductionstudies to evaluate the potential of rf fields to impact biological systemshave been conducted in both humans and animals. although the interaction of rffields with humans is of prime importance and concern, the number of humanlaboratory studies is quite small compared to the literature available on animalstudies. moreover, many areas of biologic investigation are more efficiently andappropriately conducted using various animal species. animal studies provide anintegrated system that can be used in studies where experimental variables can becontrolled, specific hypotheses can be explored, and exposure can be preciselyassessed. given the uncertainty and the relatively low power of rf epidemiologic studies to ascertain the relationship between rf exposure and possible adverse health effects, and the small number of human laboratory studies, investigations in animals are especially important in the evaluation of rf for potentialadverse effects.there are, however, limitations to animal studies for riskassessment purposes that one must bear in mind. extrapolation of experimental results fromlaboratory animals to humans remains somewhat tentative, both because of important biologic differences between humans and animals and because the mechanisms (and hence the biologically relevant exposure parameters) by which theeffects may arise are often unknown. furthermore, studies using laboratory animals are typically carried out at exposure levels much higher than found in theenvironment. there are questions as to the applicability of these laboratory studyconditions to the low rf levels experienced by humans exposed to the pavepaws signal.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects111it should be noted that there is a considerable literature investigating thethermal effects of rf exposure in animals. much of this literature is focused on2450 mhz experimentation (outside the frequency range of interest for the pavepaws radar) although other frequencies are also occasionally investigated. because thermal responses are clearly outside the range of expected biologic responses to the pave paws exposures, this report does not consider in detailwork performed at exposure levels that are designed to produce elevated temperatures in exposed animals. reference to exposures at 2450 mhz is made occasionally where studies at the more relevant frequencies are lacking; however, the2450 mhz work is not reviewed comprehensively.cancerñhuman studiesthere are no laboratory studies in humans with exposures to rf energy andcancer as the direct endpoint of investigation. such studies would clearly crossethical boundaries and would not be acceptible. futhermore, rf fields lack sufficient energy to disrupt chemical bonds so there is little theoretical basis for suspecting that such fields would cause mutations or other genotoxic effects. thereare a few human studies investigating possible indirect and nongenotoxic effectsrelevant to cancer that will be discussed in the section on immunological andendocrine function studies.cancerñstudies in animal modelsseveral different approaches and animal models have been used in laboratory animal cancer studies. the selection of a specific model depends largelyupon the hypothesis chosen to evaluate a particular underlying mechanism. forexample, if one desires to test rf for its potential to be a complete carcinogen (anagent that by its application alone can cause cancer), animals are exposed to rfover a long period of time, usually 1 1/2 to 2 years. the extended period ofexposure is necessary to ensure adequate time for slowly developing cancers tobe manifest. during the exposure period, whatever the length, it is important tokeep exposures to other possibly confounding agents to a minimum. in this regimen, the animals are usually observed during the major portion of their lifetimeand the occurrence of tumors, in number, type, and time of development, are thecritical endpoints. this type of study should include several dose groups andrequires a relatively large number of animals, particularly if the natural incidenceof a tumor type is low. as one would surmise, studies evaluating complete carcinogenicity are expensive due to both the length of time and the number of animals involved.because carcinogenesis is a multistep process, another experimental approach is to assume the agent of interest (rf) acts as either an initiator or apromoter where a twophase protocol is required for testing. òinitiationó is dean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfined as a genotoxic event where the carcinogen interacts with the dna andintroduces genetic changes that may later result in malignancy. òpromotionó isoperationally defined, where the promoting agent is applied subsequent to initiation and generally over a protracted period of time. promotion is associated witha number of subcellular events that are generally nongenotoxic and is responsible for the conversion of initiated cells to cancerous cells. to evaluate rf as aninitiator, one high dose of rf would be given, followed by repeated exposure to aknown promoter (e.g., 12otetradecanoylphorbol13acetate, tpa) over a longterm. if rf were to be investigated for possible promotional effects, the animalswould be treated with a known initiator (e.g., 7,12dimethyl benz[a]anthracene,dmba), and subsequently exposed to rf over a long term (months). these initiation/promotion approaches have the advantage of using fewer animals over ashorter period of time resulting in less cost. however, a given model is usuallylimited to evaluating a specific type of cancer. because current knowledge onpossible biological mechanisms of the rf exposures is limited, other than thermal effects of high doses, the applicability of these studies to cancer developmentin humans exposed to rf may also be limited.longterm animal bioassayslongterm animal bioassays, often conducted in two species (usually ratsand mice), and in both male and female animals for two years, provide a reasonable surrogate for humanlifetime exposure. a relatively small number of longterm animal bioassays have been performed exposing rats and mice to rf signalsbetween 10 and 2000 mhz. almost all of the studies performed at nonthermallevels have indicated no pathological or carcinogenic effects. this includes studies with a focus on brain cancer at 836 and 860 mhz (1.1 to 1.6 w/kg, adey andothers 1999, 2000; ~1 w/kg, zook and simmens 2001, respectively), as well ascomplete histopathology in lifespan and hematology studies at 835/847, 800, and2450 mhz (1.3 w/kg, laregina and others 2003; up to 12.9 w/kg, spalding andothers 1971; 0.3 w/kg, frei and others 1998; respectively). although some pathological effects have been reported at thermal levels (roberts and michaelson1983; prausnitz and susskind 1962), the only report of an increased tumor incidence with longterm rf exposure at nonthermal levels was by chou and others(1992). they reported a small increase in overall tumor occurrence in rats exposed for 24 months to 2450 mhz (sar of 0.150.4 w/kg). there was no effectin the chou and others study on a number of other parameters including metabolism, immune function, hematology, serum chemistry, thyroxin levels, proteinparameters, growth, or openfield behavior. it should be noted that the one bioassay cancer study investigating a frequency (435 mhz) most closely related to thepave paws frequency also found no overall increase in cancer in exposed animals (1.0 mw/cm2; toler and others 1997). some organs (specifically the adrenalan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects113glands) did show slight trends toward increased cancer in rf exposed animals;however, the number of tumors was small and no statistically significant differences could be determined between the exposed and control groups.radiation or chemically initiated and transgenic animal studiessimilar to longterm animal bioassays, studies in which tumors have beeninitiated by means other than rf have been mostly negative. many different initiation models have been used in these studies in which rodents have been exposed to radiofrequencies between 800 and 1500 mhz. the experimental modelsused include: brain tumors initiated in rats with ethyl nitrosourea (836 and 860mhz, approximately 1 w/kg) (adey and others 1999, 2000; zook and others2001, respectively); benz(a)pyrene initiated sarcomas in rats (900 mhz, 0.075and 0.27 w/kg) (chagnaud and others 1999); dimethylbenzanthracineinitiatedrat mammary tumors (900 mhz, sars from 0.017 to 0.07 w/kg) (bartsch andothers 2002; anane and others 2003); diethyl nitrosamineinduced hepatomas inrats (929 and 1500 mhz) (imaida and others 1998); and radiationinduced mouselymphomas (902 mhz, 0.35 w/kg) (heikkinen and others 2001). in all of thesecited cancer studies, no adverse effects of rf exposure were noted. in addition to chemicals and radiation, genetically initiated animal models(transgenic mice) have also been studied in rf carcinogenicity testing. no effectsof rf exposure on mutagenicity or tumor development were found using pkz1transgenic mice (900 mhz, 4 w/kg) (sykes and others 2001). another study byrepacholi and others (1997) in pim1 mice reported an association between longterm rf exposure [900 mhz, 0.131.4 w/kg] and mortality from a certain subtype of lymphoma. a subsequent study performed at multiple dose levels withmore uniform and more fully characterized exposure (900 mhz, multiple levelsto 4.0 w/kg) did not confirm the positive effects reported in the original study(utteridge and others 2002).tumorcell injection studiesa few studies of tumor progression, using nonthermal rf exposure levels,have been conducted by injecting tumor cells into mice and determining growthrate, survival, and metastatic progression. although increased survival of the host,as well as inconsistent evidence of either augmentation or suppression of immunefunction has been reported in response to thermal levels of rf exposure, no sucheffects were observed in studies using lower levels of exposure (salford and others 1993, 915 mhz, up to 8.3 w/kg; higashikubo and others 1999, 836 and 847mhz, 0.75 w/kg).an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114assessment of potential health effects from pave pawssummary of animal cancer studiesmost animal bioassay studies have not demonstrated increased cancer riskresulting from long or shortterm rf exposure at nonthermal levels. in the veryfew studies at thermal levels within the frequency range of interest (102000mhz), only inconsistent evidence of exposure effects have been reported, andthose have not been confirmed in similar or replicate studies.human behavioral studiesmost of the rf behavioral studies in humans have focused on frequenciesassociated with cellular telephony (800/900 to 1800 mhz). areas of investigationhave included hypersensitivity to exposure, sleep, memory, attention behaviors,or other cognitive functions.a wide range of subjective health responses have been attributed to rf exposures (see review, sandstrom and others 2001), including headaches, fatigue, dizziness, and nausea. the number of reports, however, from studies actually conducted under controlled research conditions, is quite small. in those blind studies(where exposure or nonexposure status was not known by the researchers orsubjects during experimentation), koivisto and others (2001, hietanen and others(2002), zwamborn and others (2003), found no effects of rf exposure.the studies examining sleep patterns in people exposed to rf fields havepresented mixed results with some effects reported, although the positive responses remain relatively illdefined. an initial report by mann and roschke(1996) suggested that rf exposure (900 mhz) resulted in decreased latency tosleep onset and a reduction in rapid eye movement (rem) sleep. these observations were not replicated in further studies (wagner and others 1998, 2000).borbely and others (1999) and huber and others (2003) reported changes in thespectral power in nonrem sleep but rem sleep and onset latency were unaffected. a reduction in the percentage of slowwave sleep was observed bylebedeva and others (2001) when subjects were exposed throughout the night.in humans exposed to a 900 mhz at 1 w/kg sar, huber and others (2000,2002) observed changes in the spectral power of eeg patterns in the initialphases of sleep, but when the exposure was to a continuouswave signal, nosignificant effects occurred. two other recent studies (mann and roschke, 2004)found no changes in sleep patterns and no evidence of sleep disturbances due torf exposure.cognitive function has been the focus of a number of recent studies evaluating performance and rf exposure. preece and others (1999) observed decreasedchoice reaction time in people exposed to analog 902 mhz fields. however, digital signals did not produce such changes. nor were there effects from exposure insimple reaction times or in spatial memory. the choice reaction time changeswere ascribed to possible thermal impacts of the signal. in another study at 902an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects115mhz, kovisto and others (2000) reported decreased response times in simplereaction and vigilance tasks with localized heating in the brain as the possibleexplanation for the effects. using an improved experimental design, the sameresearch group was unable to confirm the inital findings and reported no changesin the reaction times or error rates with exposure (haarala and others 2003). therehave been a few additional studies examining different cognitive functions andmemory. many of these studies show improved performance on recognitionmemory task (lass and others 2002), improvement on cognitive tasks (edelstynand oldershaw 2002), a fielddependent improvement in memory (males only) at1800 mhz (smythe and costall 2003), and a facilitating effect on attention inmobile phone users (lee and others, 2001).animal behavioralteration of behavior in animals has provided the foundation for human rfexposure guidelines for the past two decades (ansi c95.11982; ncrp, 1986;ieee/ansi c95.11992). however, nearly all of the reported studies, includingthose showing behavioral responses in exposed animals, have been conducted inan rfintensity range that would be expected to produce thermal sensations and/or heating of tissue (e.g., brown and others 1994; akyel and others 1991;dõandrea and others 2003).acute thermal responses in animals can include perception, aversion, workperturbation or work stoppage, decreased endurance, and even convulsions anddeath. behavioral effects of rf in the nonthermal range, however, are moredifficult to identify. studies usually conducted in mice or rats and using nonthermal levels of rf exposure (and even some using thermal levels of exposure),have generally reported no effects on various aspects of behavior, including operant behavior (1.25 ghz at less than 7.6 w/kg, akyel and others 1991; 1.3 ghz atless than 3 w/kg, lebovitz 1981 and lebovitz and seaman 1983; 900 mhz at17.5 to 75 mw/kg, bornhausen and scheingraber 2000); cognitive behavior (900and 1800 mhz at 0.5 w/kg, sienkowicz and others 2000); and performance andactivity changes in rats exposed in utero (915 mhz at 3.6 w/kg, jensh and others1982a,b). an additional study examined chick behavior (450 mhz at 5 mw/cm2,sagan and medici 1979). one report does suggest behavioral changes with apparent nonthermal acute rf exposures, including reduced aggressive behavior inrats (1.3 ghz at 0.65 mw/cm2, frey and spector 1986). additionally, performance in spatialnavigation tests has been examined in a number of studies usingradialarm or water mazes (at 900 and 1800 mhz, 0.5 w/kg, sienkiewicz andothers 2000, and at 900 mhz, up to 3.5 w/kg, dubreuil and others 2002), with noindication of adverse effects. there has been a report of reduced performance in aradialarm maze at 2450 mhz by lai and others (1994); however, cobb andothers (2004) were unable to demonstrate similar results in rats, also exposed at2450 mhz,and other studies have also been unable to confirm laiõs resultsan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116assessment of potential health effects from pave paws(cosquer and others 2004; cobb and others 2004; cassel and others 2004).yamaguchi and others (2003) reported no effects in a tmaze performance studyat 1.4 ghz until the exposure reached clearly thermal levels (25 w/kg).with chronic lowlevel rf exposures, reports on behavioral effects have beengenerally negative (dõandrea and others 1980), although positive reports at nearthermal levels (2.7 w/kg wholebody average) have been reported (mitchell andothers 1977, 1981, 1988) at 2450 mhz.summary of behavioral studiesresults from laboratory studies in humans have indicated subtle and transient effects; however, the health implications remain unclear. there is someevidence that acute exposure may result in minor facilitation effects on attentionfunctions and decreases in some specific reaction times to stimuli. effects onsleep have been reported but remain mixed and illdefined. the available data aretoo sparse to determine if subjective responses can be caused by rf exposure,although the strongest studies indicate no effects on a range of endpoints.disruption of complex behavioral performance in several animal species,under diverse exposure conditions, has been used as a basis for setting humanexposure guidelines since 1982. the threshold sar selected to establish the standard was chosen at 4 w/kg, a level based upon thermal effects and often (but notalways) accompanied by an increase in core body temperature of ~1.0oc. alteration of an assortment of other behaviors, both learned and unlearned, can alsooccur in animals at sars between 1and 4 w/kg, subject to the frequency of thesignal and the size of the animal. it appears that the behavioral changes due to rfexposure at these levels are reversible, and no consistent evidence exists for longterm, permanent effects. extrapolation of animal data to humans has been usefulin setting exposure standards. however, human ability to discriminate andcognitively act upon perception of intense rf fields is generally superior to thatability in animals and therefore animal data may tend to underestimate thresholdlevels for safety.other physiological studieseeg and brain electrical activityhumans exposed to mobilephone rf fields have generally not shown effects of exposure on the spontaneous, awake electroencephalogram (eeg)(hietanen and others 2000; roschke and mann 1997). however, possiblechanges have been observed when exposure was given during the performanceof memory tasks or under other more demanding paradigms (freude and others1998, 2000; eulitz and others 1998. krause and others reported changes in eegsof humans exposed to 902 mhz for both auditory tasks (krause and othersan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects1172000a) and visual memory tasks (krause and others 2000b). additionally, croftand others (2002) determined the resting eeg parameters to be changed duringan auditory discrimination task. several studies evaluating sleep parameters haveexamined eeg in human subjects as a way to assess rf impacts on sleep. thesestudies have been discussed above in the section on behavior and rf exposure inhumans.studies in a variety of animals, including rats, rabbits, cats, and monkeyshave shown various changes in eeg measurements from the brain (rabbits at 30mhz, 0.52 kv/m, takashima and others 1979; cats at 147 mhz, unspecifiedsar, bawin and others 1973; rats at 945 mhz, unspecified sar, vorbyov andothers 1997; rats at 900 mhz, 1.3 w/kg, thuroczy and others 1994); however thetypes of changes are not consistent across studies nor have they generally beenindependently and systematically confirmed.effects on blood pressure/heart ratea stimulation study in humans by braune and others (1998) initially reportedincreases in heart rate (hr) and blood pressure (bp). however, these effects werenot replicated in the same laboratory (braune and others 2002), and were also notconfirmed by an additional independent human study (tahvanainen and others2004). animal studies have reported effects of rf exposure on bp and hr andother cardiac functions (e.g., lu and others 1992); however, these have all beenconducted at exposure levels in which thermal increases would be expected in thetissue.blood brain barrier studiesusing rf exposures of 2450 mhz, frey and others (1975) initially reportedthat at approximately 1 w/kg an increase in blood brain barrier (bbb) permeability was observed in rats. using a 1.3 ghz rf signal, oscar and hawkins (1977)reported increased bbb permeability at 0.4 w/kg (cw) and 0.1 w/kg (pw).preston and others (1979) suggested that the changes observed by oscar andhawkins may have been due to variations in blood flow, so oscar and others(1981) subsequently determined that increased local brain blood flow did occurfollowing rf exposure. in following up this finding, oscar and coworkers useda technique to measure bbb permeability that is insensitive to bloodflow change,and reported no effect of rf radiation on bbb (gruenau and others 1982). thusthe effect originally reported by oscar and hawkins (1977) was probably an artifact. using techniques similar to those of oscar and hawkins, at 2450 mhz,preston and others (1979) and preston and prefontaine (1980) reported no effectof rf exposure on bbb permeability at whole body sars (0.026 w/kg) or atsars in the head (0.081.8 w/kg). additional efforts to establish the occurrenceof the bbb effects observed by oscar and hawkins (1977) and frey and othersan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118assessment of potential health effects from pave paws(1975) have been unsuccessful (ward and others 1982; ward and ali 1985;merritt and others 1978).pigs have been exposed repeatedly to 452 mhz fields intermittently for 8 h/d for 90 days. the bbb showed no leakage in exposed animals, nor didneurohistological and enzymehistochemical preparations show any evidence ofdamage to nervous tissue in the brain (sutton and others 1982). further animalstudies in mice also have demonstrated no bbb permeability changes with eithera onehour exposure at 4 w/kg (whole body) or after a lifetime of exposure atsars ranging from 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, and 4.0 w/kg (whole body) (finnie and others2001, 2002).at 2450 mhz, sutton and carroll (1979) observed that bbb permeabilitywas increased in rats when the temperature in the brain was 40o c or more. furthermore, when the core body temperature of the rat was kept at 30o c duringexposure of the head, the exposure time had to be lengthened to produce anydisruptive effects on the bbb. these observations suggest that rfinduced hyperthermia may indeed be the cause of bbb disruption during exposure. merrittand others (1978) also showed that bbb permeation in rats was impacted byproviding either hot air or rf radiation to heat the animals to 40oc and concludedthat hyperthermia was the causative factor, not rf energy per se. williams andcolleagues (1984ad) report on a series of experiments in which they concludethat rf exposure (at 2450 mhz) produced bbb effects that result from temperaturedependent changes and not as a direct result of the rf energy. fritze andothers (1997) also found bbb permeability changes in rats consistent with thermal effects. a number of other papers have also demonstrated changes in bbbpermeability resulting from thermal effects of rf exposure (lin and lin 1980,1982; goldman and others 1984; neilly and lin 1986; moriyama and others1991; ohmoto and others 1996).there are a few papers that report bbbpermeation effects in animals exposed to rf fields below those considered to be òthermal.ó persson and others(1997) observed an increase in bbb permeability by about threefold in animalsexposed to cw 915 mhz radiation. however, the changes did not vary with sarfrom 0.02 to 8.3 w/kg. results using modulated rf exposure were not sardependent either, with the lowest sars (0.00040.008 w/kg) demonstrating thegreatest permeability changes, and at the highest sars (1.78.3 w/kg) no modulated frequency was effective in increasing bbb permeation. the 1997 paper bypersson and others appears to include data from previous studies in their laboratory (salford and others 1993, 1994; persson and others 1992) and a recent paper(salford and others 2003) from this research laboratory describes effects of 915mhz rf on the bbb in rats exposed to very low sars (< 0.2 w/kg). no exposureresponse relationship was found in work performed in another laboratory(chang and others 1982) in which only one of six rf exposure levels (at 1 ghz)affected bbb permeability in dogs.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects119immune and endocrinefunction studiesthere are very few studies in humans examining endocrine status during orfollowing exposure to rf fields. mann and others (1998) observed no changes inserum melatonin, growth hormone, or luteinizing hormone levels during exposure of volunteers to 900 mhz, although cortisol production showed a small transient increase. no effect on urinary levels of 6hydroxymelatonin sulfate wasreported in humans exposed to 900 mhz fields (bortkiewicz and others 2002). inaddition, radon and others (2001) observed no changes in melatonin, cortisol, ormarkers of immune function when humans were exposed for 4 hours to 900 mhzfields.in animals, most of the studies investigating immune and endocrine functionhave been performed at 2450 mhz, with only a few in the 10 mhz to 2000 mhzrange. a few of those laboratory studies report alterations in various hormones(abhold and others 1981) and neurotransmitters (inaba and others 1992; maussetand others 2001) at 900 mhz in animals exposed to low intensities (nonthermallevels) of rf. there are reported increases as well as decreases in immunecellsubpopulations, exposed at 900 mhz (dasdag 2000), and decreased levels ofimmunoglobin titer and cellularimmunity function depending upon modulationfrequency of the rf signal used for exposure (450 mhz, lyle and others 1983).most of the lowlevel exposure studies indicate no significant changes inhormone levels or activity (900 mhz, vollrath and others 1997, and heikkanenand juutilainen 1999). in addition, a number of studies have been reported inwhich rf exposure, at levels insufficient to cause increased temperatures in tissue, does not produce observable changes in immune cell function, differentiation, mitogenic activity, or other hematological parameters (djordjevich and others 1977; 100 mhz, smialowicz and others, 1981a,b; 900 mhz, chagnaud andveyret 1999).a notable exception to these studies is the work of toler and others (1988)who studied the changes in bloodborne factors during six months of exposure toa 435 mhz radiation at 0.3 w/kg. while most factors were not observed to undergo significant change, dopamine levels were found to drop almost immediately at the start of the exposure period, and remained depressed throughout thesixmonth exposure period. dopamine levels at the end of the study period wereonly onehalf those in the shamexposed animals. although not yet replicated, theresults of thisstudyareimportant to consider due to its size, the magnitude andduration of altered dopamine response, and because the exposure frequency(435mhz) is the center frequency of the pave paws radar.those studies in which effects have been observed in immunesystem parameters or endocrine function are predominantly at exposure levels at 2450 mhzthat are clearly in the thermal rf range (gildersleeve and others 1988; lu andothers 1985, 1986, 1987; michaelson and others 1961). using thermal levels ofrf exposure, one study found no effect on autoimmune response (anane andan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsothers 2003); however, many studies observed either increased or decreased immunecell function (bogolyubov and others 1987, 1988; liburdy 1977, 1979,1980; takashima and asakura 1983; smialowicz and others 1981a,b, 1982a,1982b) as well as the induction of stress markers (cleary and others 1980). thereported effects appear to be similar to the effects of nonrf heating.summary for other physiological parametersthe originally reported effects of lowlevel rf exposure on the bbb havenot been confirmed. however, many investigators have produced results that indicate changes in the permeability of the bbb when a significant increase intemperature occurs as a result of absorption of rf energy. the thermal effectshave been demonstrated through a range of endpoints, including uptake of radiotracers, dyes, and proteins. some studies have even shown uptake of virus particles and drugs to be influenced by rfproduced thermal increases. based onmodeling studies, localized exposure of the head at 1.6 w/kg will produce a 0.1ocincrease in brain temperature, an increase that is small in comparison to the temperature increases associated with changes in bbb permeability described above.the reports of permeability changes in the bbb at sars <4 w/kg generally arenot useful in arriving at exposure guidelines since the effects at these low levelshave not been confirmed and no doseresponse relationship has been established.rf studies investigating hematologic, immunologic, and endocrinologic endpoints in animals exposed to rf have produced both positive and negative results. however, most of the studies in which effects were observed have beenperformed at intensities of rf exposure expected to result in increased temperatures. in the few studies that have reported effects at nonthermal exposure levels,the observations are inconsistent across studies and not in general agreement withthe larger body of evidence pointing toward noneffects at these levels. certainly,there is a lack of evidence of rfinduced effects that can be directly related toadverse health responses.teratology, reproduction, and developmentteratogenicityduring pregnancy, heat stress in animals where maternal body temperaturesare raised to thresholds of 40.542.0oc has been demonstrated to increase theincidence of birth defects (boreham and others 2002; bennet and others 1990).similarly, rf exposure of pregnant rodents, sufficient to increase maternal corebody temperature (wholebody average sars of > 9 w/kg), has also been shownto be teratogenic (27 mhz, lary and others 1982, 1983, 1986; 970 mhz, bermanand others 1992; 915 mhz, jensh and others 1982a, 1997; guillet and michaelson1977). exposure to rf at ~3 w/kg at 2450 or 100 mhz has been reported to causean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects121a decrease in purkinje cells in the cerebellum of neonatal rats (albert and others1981a) but not squirrel monkeys (only at 2450 mhz, albert and others 1981b).at reduced exposure levels of 2450 mhz rf, lower than those causing malformations but still thermal in nature (~45 w/kg), fetal mass appears to bediminished (marcickiewicz and others 1986).lower levels of rf exposure that produce no significant thermal elevation intissue have not been associated with teratogenesis (schmidt and others 1984).continuous exposure of rats during gestation at 0.4 w/kg (2450 mhz) producedno effect on brain development, brain weight, or dna, rna, and protein content(merritt and others, 1984). a longterm exposure study in squirrel monkeys, alsoconducted at 2450 mhz, with wholebody exposures of up to 3.4 w/kg, found noeffect in a broad array of endpoints including birth defects, development, behavior, eeg, biochemistry, and hematology (kaplan and others 1982). in contrast,after exposure of rats to 27 mhz, tofani and colleagues (1986) have reportedteratogenic effects in the offspring after maternal exposure at wholebody average sars as low as 0.0001 w/kg. clearly, this study, which has not been replicated independently, is inconsistent with the majority of laboratory evidence reporting teratogenic effects of rf exposure only when associated with increases inmaternal temperature. lowlevel exposures at 428 mhz were reported to cause adecrease in chick hatching, although there were no developmental abnormalitiesor evidence of a dose response associated with the effect (saito and others 1991;saito and suzuki 1995). in a series of studies in another laboratory, quail eggswere exposed to rf at 2450 mhz (braithwaite and others 1991, gildersleeve andothers 1987; galvin and others 1981; mcree and others 1983; inouye and others1982). there were no observed effects on hatching, body weight, malformations,or hematologic parameters at power density levels (~14 w/kg) that maintained atemperature of 37oc, although changes could be observed with exposures producing higher temperatures.development and differentiationseveral recent studies have been undertaken to address the potential influence of rf exposure on developmental and differentiation processes. lary andconover (1987) completed a literature review of all teratogenesis studies extantto that date, including all studies with exposures from 300 to 3000 mhz, andbelow the ansi exposure limit of 0.4 w/kg. they found no reports of teratogenic effects in the absence of organismal heating. however, saito and suzuki(1995), in a study involving exposure of chick embryos to a 428 mhz, 5.5 mw/cm2 incident field, showed severelydelayed development according to the hamburgerhamilton staging. ten replications of 10 eggs were completed, with developmental anomalies observed at sars in the range of 8.6 mw/kg to 47.1mw/kg.klug and others (1997) examined the effects of 150 mhz rf with exposuresan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsof cw, and modulated at 16, 60, and 120 hz, on the development and differentiation of rat embryos. using sars of 0.2, 1.0, and 5.0 w/kg, no statistical differences between exposed and control embryos were observed following 48 hoursof exposure. a few sporadic changes were observed under some exposure conditions, specifically increases in somite numbers at modulation frequencies of 16and 120 hz.reproductiontemporary sterility was reported to occur in male rats exposed to 1.3 ghz atlevels sufficient to cause intratesticular temperatures of ~40oc (lebovitz andothers 1983, 1987). longerlasting alterations of reproductive efficiency havebeen observed with rf exposures producing temperatures greater than 45oc inanimal testes. in several studies examining chickens exposed to moderately highlevels of rf, the exposure was determined to cause a slight decrease in number ofeggs laid (krueger and others 1975; giarola and krueger 1974). however, inthese studies, thermal parameters were not well characterized. a study at 900mhz by dasdag and others (1999) reported that exposure to rf for 1 month at0.141 w/kg resulted in decreased diameter of seminiferous tubes, but no othereffects were observed in a histological examination of all major organ tissues.there is some question with regard to the nonthermal nature of the observedeffect since the study also reported an increase in rectal temperature. an additional report indicates an effect of lowlevel rf exposure on reproductivecompetance in rodents (magras and xenos 1997), although significant flaws instudy design and control make the interpretation difficult.summary: reproduction and developmentalthough a number of studies have reported teratogenic effects of rf exposure in animal models, the positive results have almost always come from studies where significant temperature increases were observed in the dam. the fewstudies in which adverse effects on reproduction and/or development have beenreported from nonthermal levels of rf exposure are relatively isolated. in addition, there appear to be possible speciesspecific differences in teratogenic responses to rf exposure suggesting that extrapolation of animal data to humansmay not be straightforward. examined in total, the available literature doesnot indicate any consistent effect of acute or chronic rf exposure on reproduction and development in animals unless significant temperature increasesare produced. there are no human laboratory studies addressing this area ofinvestigation.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects123in vivo studies: conclusionsrelatively few human laboratory studies investigating the rf exposure forpossible health effects have been performed. almost all of these were conductedat fairly low intensity levels using frequencies relevant to cellular telephony. results have been mixed in the areas of rf effects on sleep and other behaviors andbrain activity as determined by eeg. the range of effects, however, has beeninconsistent from study to study without robust replication or direct implicationsfor health impacts. futhermore, studies examining rf effects on hormone or immune parameters have almost universally been negative.with animal studies, across a wide range of biologic endpoints, a considerable number of studies have been conducted to evaluate the impact of rf exposure. the majority of laboratory studies have been performed at 2450 mhz, whichis outside the frequency window of interest as defined for the purposes of thispave paws study (see appendix a). however, in some cases, because littlebiological information was available from animals exposed at lower frequencies,some review of 2450 mhz data was utilized. the strong indication from the collected data suggests that various biological effects occur but generally only atfield intensities where temperature is elevated in the biological target. effects atnonthermal levels are seen only infrequently and seldom have they been independently replicated. nonetheless, certain studies were sufficiently large, relevantto pave paws, and demonstrated robust and significant effects, suggesting thatreplication would be merited. specifically, the air forcefunded studies on bloodborne endpoints by toler and others (1988) indicating depressed dopamine levels(and not to be confused with the toler cancer studies noted earlier) deserve to bereplicated utilizing exposure patterns more representative of the pave pawssystem than those used by toler and others.referencesabhold, r.h., m.j. ortner, m.j. galvin, and d.i. mcree. 1981. studies on acute in vivo exposure ofrats to 2450mhz microwave radiation. ii. effects on thyroid and adrenal axes hormones. radiatres 88:448455.adey, w.r., c.v. byus, c.d. cain, r.j. higgins, r.a. jones, c.j. kean, n. kuster, a. macmurray,r.b. stagg, and w. haggren. 1999. spontaneous and nitrosoureainduced primary tumors of thecentral nervous system in fischer 344 rats chronically exposed to 836 mhz modulated microwaves. radiat res 152:293302.adey, w.r., c.v. byus, c.d. cain, r.j. higgins, r.a. jones, c.j. kean, n. kuster, a. macmurray,r.b. stagg, and g. zimmerman. 2000. spontaneous and nitrosoureainduced primary tumors ofthe central nervous system in fischer 344 rats chronically exposed to frequencymodulatedmicrowave fields. cancer res 60:18571863.akyel, y., e.l. hunt, c. gambrill, and c. vargas, jr. 1991. immediate postexposure effects of highpeak power microwave pulses on operant behavior of wistar rats. bioelectromagnetics 12:183195.albert, e.n., m.f. sherif, n.j. papadopoulos, f.j. slaby, and j. monahan. 1981a. effects of nonionizing radiation on the purkinje cells of the rat cerebellum. bioelectromagnetics 2:247257.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsalbert, e.n., m.f. sherif, and n.j. papadopoulos. 1981b. effects of nonionizing radiation on thepurkinje cells of the uvula in squirrel monkey cerebellum. bioelectromagnetics 2:241246.anane, r., m. geffard, m. taxik, d. bodet, b. billandel, p.e. dulou, and b. veyret. 2003. effects ofgsm900 mhz microwaves on the experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (eae) rat model.bioelectromagnetics 24:211213.anane r., p.e. dulou, m. taxile, m. geffard, f. crespeau, and b. veyret. 2003. effects of gsm900microwaves on female rats bearing dmbainduced tumours. radiat res 160:492497.ansi (american national standards institute). 1982. safety levels with respect to radio frequencyelectromagnetic fields, 300 khz to 100 ghz. report no. ansi c95.1 ð1982. new york, ny:the institute of electrical and electronic engineers, inc.ansi. 1992. ieee standard for safety levels with respect to human exposure to radio frequencyelectromagnetic fields, 3 khz to 300 ghz. report no. c9511992, new york, ny: the institute of electrical and electronic engineers, inc.bartsch, h., c. bartsch, e. seebald, f. deerberg, k. dietz, l.vollrath, and d. meeke. 2002. chronicexposure to a gsmlike signal (mobile phone) does not stimulate the development of dmbainduced mammary tumors in rats: results of three consecutive studies. radiat res 157:183190.bawin, s.m., r.j. gavalasmedici, and w.r. adey. 1973. effects of modulated very high frequencyfields on specific brain rhythms in cats. brain res 58:365384.bennet, g.d., v.k. mohl, and r.h. finnell. 1990. embryonic and maternal heat shock responses to ateratogenic hyperthermic insult. reprod toxicol 4:113119.berman, e., c. weil, p. phillips, h.b. carter, and d. house. 1992. fetal and maternal effects ofcontinual exposure of rats to 970mhz circularlypolarized microwaves. electro magnetobiol11:4354.bogolyubov, v.m., s.b. pershin, i.d. frenkel, v.d. sidorov, a.i. galenchik, z.a. sokolova, and i.b.laprun. 1987. immunobiological effect of bitemporal exposure of rabbits to microwaves. b expbiol med 102:11181120.bogolyubov, v.m., s.m. zubkova, i.d. frenkel, z.a. sokolova, and i.b. laprun. 1988. the functional state of thymus cells following microwave exposure of endocrine glands. radiat res115:4453.borbely, a.a., r. huber, t. graf, b. fuchs, e. gallmann, and p. achermann. 1999. pulsed highfrequency electromagnetic field affects human sleep and sleep eletroencephalogram. neuroscilett 275:207210.boreham, d.r., j.a. rolling, j. misonoh, and r.e.j. mitchel. 2002. teratogenic effects of mild heatstress during mouse embryogenesis: effect of trp53. radiat res 158:443448.bornhausen, m. and h. scheingraber. 2000. prenatal exposure to 900 mhz, cellphone electromagnetic fields had no effect on operantbehavior performances of adult rats. bioelectromagnetics21:566574.bortkiewicz, a., b. pilacik, e. gadzicka, and w. szymczak. 2002. the excretion of 6hydroxymelatonin sulfate in healthy young men exposed to electromagnetic fields emitted bycellular phoneñan experimental study. neuroendocrinol lett 23:8891.braune, s., c. wrocklage, j. raczek, t. gailus, and c.h. lucking. 1998. resting blood pressureincrease during exposure to a radiofrequency electromagnetic field. lancet 351:18571858.braune, s., a. riedel, j. schultemonting, and j. raczek. 2002. influence of a radiofrequency electromagnetic field on cardiovascular and hormonal parameters of the autonomic nervous system inhealthy individuals. radiat res 158:352356.braithwaite, l., w. morrison, l. otten, and d. pei. 1991. exposure of fertile chicken eggs to microwave radiation 2.45 ghz, cw during incubation: technique and evaluation. j. microwave poweree 26:206214.brown, d.o., s.t. lu, and e.c. elson. 1994. characteristics of microwave evoked body movementsin mice. bioelectromagnetics 15:143161.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects125cassel, j.c., b. cosquer, r. galani, and n. kuster. 2004. wholebody exposure to 2.45 ghz electromagnetic fields does not alter radialmaze performance in rats. behav brain res 155:3743.chagnaud, j.l., j.m. moreau, and b. veyret. 1999. no effect of short term exposure to gsmmodulated lowpower microwaves on benzo(a)pyreneinduced tumours in rat. int j radiat biol75:12511256.chagnaud, j.l. and b. veyret. 1999. 900 mhz (gsm) exposure on immune parameters in rats. int jradiation biol 75:111113.chang, b.k., a.t. huang, w.t. joines, and r.s. kramer. 1982. the effect of microwave radiation 1.0ghz on the bloodbrain barrier in dogs. radio sci 17:165168.chou, c.k., a.w. guy, l.l. kunz, r.b. johnson, j.j. crowley, and j.h. krupp. 1992. longtermlowlevel microwave irradiation of rats. bioelectromagnetics 13:469496.cleary, s.f., f. nickless, l.m. liu, and r. hoffman. 1980. studies of exposure of rabbits to electromagnetic pulsed fields. bioelectromagnetics 1:345352.cobb, b.l., j.r. jauchem, and e.r. adair. 2004. radial arm maze performance of rats followingrepeated low level microwave radiation exposure. bioelectromagnetics 25:4957.cosquer b., r. galani, n. kuster, and j.c. cassel. 2004. wholebody exposure to 2.45 ghz electromagnetic fields does not alter anxiety responses in rats: a plusmaze study including test validation. behav brain res: in press.croft, r.j., j.s. chandler, a.p. burgess, r.j. barry, j.d. williams, and a.r. clarke. 2002. acutemobile phone operation affects neural function in humans. clin neurophysiol 113:16231632.dõandrea, j.a., o.p. gandhi, j.l. lords, c.h. durney, l. astle, l.j. stensaas, and a.a. schoenberg.1980. physiological and behavioral effects of prolonged exposure to 915 mhz microwaves. jmicrowave power ee 15:123135.dõandrea, j.a., e.r. adair, and j.o. delorge. 2003. behavioral and cognitive effects of microwaveexposure. bioelectromagnetics suppl 6:s39s62.dasdag, s. 2000. do cellular phones alter blood parameters and birth weight of rats. electromagnetobiol 19:107113.dasdag, s. m.a. ketani, z. akdag, a.r. ersay, i. sari, o.c. demirtas, and m.s. celik. 1999. wholebody microwave exposure emitted by cellular phones and testicular function of rats. urol res27:219223.djordjevich, z., n. lazarevich, and v. djokovich. 1977. studies on the hematologic effects of longterm lowdose microwave exposure. aviat space envir med 1977:516518.dubreuil, d., t.m. jay, and b. veyret. 2002. 900 mhz and 1800 mhz (gsm) exposure on spatiallearning & memory in rats. behav brain res 129:203210.edelstyn, n. and a. oldershaw. 2002. the acute effects of exposure to the electromagnetic fieldemitted by mobile phones on human attention. neuroreport 13:119121.eulitz, c., p. ullsperger, g. freude, and t. elbert. 1998. mobile phone modulate response patterns ofhuman brain activity. neuroreport 9:32293232.finnie, j.w., p.c. blumbergs, j. manavis, t.d. utteridge, v. gebski, and j.g. swift. 2001. effects ofglobal system for mobile communication (gsm)like radiofrequency fields on vascular permeability in mouse brain. pathology 33:338340.finnie, j.w., p.c. blumbergs, j. manavis, t.d. utteridge, v. gebski, and r.h. davies. 2002. effectof longterm mobile communication microwave exposure on vascular permeability in mousebrain. pathology 34:344347.frei, m.r., r.e. berger, s.j. dusch, v. guel, j.r. jauchem, j.h. merritt, and m.a. stedham. 1998.chronic exposure of cancerprone mice to lowlevel 2450 mhz radiofrequency radiation.bioelectromagnetics 19:2031.freude, g., p. ullsperger, s. eggert, and i. ruppe. 1998. effects of microwaves emitted by cellularphones on human slow brain potentials. bioelectromagnetics 19:384387.freude, g., p. ullsperger, s. eggert, and i. ruppe. 2000. microwaves emitted by cellular telephonesaffect human slow brain potentials. eur j appl physiol 81:1827.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsfrey, a.h., s.r. feld, and b. frey. 1975. neural function and behaviour: defining the relationship.ann ny acad sci 247:433439.frey, a.h. and j. spector. 1986. exposure to rf electromagnetic energy decreases aggressive behavior. aggressive behav 12:285291.fritze, k., c. sommer, b. schmitz, g. mies, k.a. hossmann, m. kiessling, and c. wiessner. 1997.effect of global system for mobile communication (gsm) microwave exposure on bloodbrainbarrier permeability in rat. acta neuropathol 94:465470.galvin, m.j., d.i. mcree, c.a. hall, j.p. thaxton, and c.r. parkhurst. 1981. humoral and cellmediated immune function in adult japanese quail following exposure to 2.45 ghz microwaveradiation during embryogeny. bioelectromagnetics 2:269278.giarola, a.j. and w.f. krueger. 1974. continuous exposure of chicks and rats to electromagneticfields. ieee t microw theory 22:432437.gildersleeve, r.p., m.j. galvin, d.i. mcree, j.p. thaxton, and c.r. parkhurst. 1987. reproduction ofjapanese quail after microwave irradiation 2.45 ghz cw during embryogeny.bioelectromagnetics 8:921.gildersleeve, r.p., d.g. satterless, d.i. mcree, t.e. bryan, and c.r. parkhurst. 1988. plasma corticosterone in hemorrhaged japanese quail after microwave irradiation in ovo. comp biochemphysiol 89:415424.goldman, h., j.c. lin, s. murphy, and m.f. lin. 1984. cerebrovascular permeability to rb86 in therat after exposure to pulsed microwaves. bioelectromagnetics 5:323330.gruenau, s., k.j. oscar, m.t. folker, and s.i. rapoport. 1982. absence of microwave effect onbloodbrain barrier permeability to c14sucrose in the conscious rat. exp neurol 75:299307.guillet, r. and s.m. michaelson. 1977. the effect of repeated microwave exposure on neonatal rats.radio sci 12:125129.haarala, c., l. bjornberg, m. ek, m. laine, a. revonsuo, m. koivisto, and h. hamalainen. 2003.effect of a 902 mhz electromagnetic field emitted by mobile phones on human cognitive function: a replication study. bioelectromagnetics 24:283288.heikkanen, p. and j. juutilianen. 1999. chronic exposure to 50hz magnetic fields or 900mhzelectromagnetic fields does not alter nocturnal 6hydroxymelatonin sulfate secretion in cba/smice. electro magnetobiol 18:3342.heikkinen, p., v.m. kosma, t. hongisto, h. huuskonen, p. hyysalo, h. komulainen, t. kumlin, t.kumlin, t. lahtinen, s. lang, and j.juutilainen. 2001. effects of mobile phone radiation on xray induced tumorigenesis in mice. radiat res 156:775785.hietanen, m., a.m. hamalainen, and t. husman. 2002. hypersensitivity symptoms associated withexposure to cellular telephones: no causal link. bioelectromagnetics 23:264270.hietanen, m., t. kovala, and a.m. hamalainen. 2000. human brain activity during exposure toradiofrequency fields emitted by cellular phones. scan j work env hea 26:8792.higashiukubo, r., v.o. culbreth, d.r. spitz, m.c. laregina, w.f. pickard, w.l. straube, e.g.moros, and j.l. roti. 1999. radiofrequency electromagnetic fields have no effect on the in vivoproliferation of the 9l brain tumor. radiat res 152:665671.huber, r., t. graf, k.a. cote, l. wittmann, e. gallmann, d. matter, j. schuderer, n. kuster, a.a.borbely, and p. achermann. 2000. exposure to pulsed highfrequency electromagnetic fieldduring waking affects human sleep eeg. neuroreport 11:33213325.huber, r., v. treyer, a.a. borbely, j. schuderer, j.m. gottselig, h.p. landolt, e. werth, t. berhold,n. kuster, a. buck, and p. achermann. 2002. electromagnetic fields, such as those from mobilephones, alter regional cerebral blood flow and sleep and waking eeg. j sleep res 11:289295.huber, r., j. schuderer, t. graf, k. jutz, a.a. borbely, n. kuster, and p. achermann. 2003. radiofrequency electromagnetic field exposure in humans: estimation of sar distribution in the brain,effects on sleep and heart rate. bioelectromagnetics 24:262276.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects127imaida, k., m. taki, t. yamaguchi, t. ito, s. watanabe, k. wake, a. aimoto, y. kamimura, n. ito,and t. shirai. 1998. lack of promoting effects of the electromagnetic nearfield used for cellularphones (929.2 mhz) on rat liver carcinogenesis in a mediumterm liver bioassay. carcinogenesis 19:311314.inaba, r., k schishido, a. okada, and t. moroji. 1992. effects of whole body microwave exposureon the rat brain contents of biogenic amines. eur j appl physiol 65:124128.inouye, m., n. matsumoto, m.j. galvin, and d.i. mcree. 1982. lack of effect of 2.45 ghz microwave radiation on the development of preimplantation embryos of mice. bioelectromagnetics3:275283.jensh, r.p. 1997. behavioral teratologic studies using microwave radiation: is there an increased riskfrom exposure to cellular phones and microwave ovens? reprod toxicol 11:601611.jensh, r.p., w.h. vogel, and r.l. brent. 1982a. postnatal functional analysis of prenatal exposure ofrats to 915 mhz microwave radiation. j am coll toxicol 1:7390.jensh, r.p., i. weinberg, and r.l. brent. 1982b. teratologic studies of prenatal exposure of rats to915 mhz microwave radiation. radiat res 92:160171.kaplan, j., p. polson, c. rebert, k. lunan, and m. gage. 1982. biological and behavioral effects ofprenatal and postnatal exposure to 2450mhz electromagnetic radiation in the squirrel monkey.radio sci 17:135144.klug, s., m. hetscher, s. giles, s. kohlsmann, and k. kramer. 1997. the lack of effects of nonthermalrf electromagnetic fields on the development of rat embryos grown in culture. life sci 61:17891802.koivisto, m., c. haarla, c.m. krause, a. revonsuo, m. laine, and h. hamalainen. 2001. gsmphone signal does not produce subjective symptoms. bioelectromagnetics 22:212215.koivisto, m., a. revonsuo, c.m. krause, c. haarla, l. sillanmaki, m. laine, and h. hamalainen.2001. effects of 902 mhz electromagnetic field emitted by cellular telephones on responsetimes in humans. neuroreport 11:413415.krause, c.m., l. sillanmaki, m. koivisto, a. haggqvist, c. saarela, m. laine, and h. hamalainen.2000a. effects of electromagnetic field emitted by cellular phones on the eeg during a memorytask. neuroreport 11:761764.krause, c.m., l. sillanmaki, m. koivisto, a. haggqvist, c. saarela, m. laine, and h. hamalainen.2000b. effects of electromagnetic fields emitted by cellular phones on the electroencephalogram during a visual working memory task. int j radiat biol 76:16591667.krueger, w.f., a.j. giarola, j.w. bradley, and a. shrekenhamer. 1975. effects of electromagneticfields on fecundity in the chicken. ann ny acad sci 247:391400.lai, h., a. horita, and a.w. guy. 1994. microwave irradiation affects radialarm maze performancein the rat. bioelectromagnetics 15:95104.laregina, m., e.g. moros, w.f. pickard, w.l. straube, j. baty, and j.l. roti. 2003. the effect ofchronic exposure to 835.62 mhz fdma or 847.74 mhz cdma radiofrequency radiation onthe incidence of spontaneous tumors in rats. radiat res 160:143151.lary, j.m. and d.l. conover. 1987. teratogenic effects of radiofrequency radiation. ieee eng medbiol mag, march, 42.lary, j.m., d.l. conover, e.d. foley, and p.l. hanser. 1982. teratogenic effects of 27.12 mhzradiation in rats. health phys 29:381383.lary, j.m., d.l. conover, p.h. johnson, and j.r. burg. 1983. teratogenicity of 27.12 mhz radiationin rats is related to duration of hyperthermic exposure. bioelectromagnetics 4:249255.lary, j.m., d.l. conover, p.h. johnson, and r.w. hornung. 1986. doseresponse relationship between body temperature and birth defects in radiofrequencyirradiated rats. bioelectromagnetics7:141149.lass, j., v. tuulik, r. ferenets, r. rilsalo, and h. hinrikus. 2002. effects of 7 hzmodulated 450mhz electromagnetic radiation on human performance in visual memory tasks. int j radiat biol78:937944.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128assessment of potential health effects from pave pawslebedeva, n.n., a.v. sulimov, o.p. sulimova, t.i. korotkovskaya, and t. gailus. 2001. investigation of brain potentials in sleeping humans exposed to the electromagnetic field of mobilephones. crit rev biomed eng 29:125133.lebovitz, r.m. 1981. prolonged microwave irradiation of rats: effects on concurrent operant behavior. bioelectromagnetics 2:169186.lebovitz, r.m. and l. johnson. 1983. testicular function of rats following exposure to microwaveradiation. bioelectromagnetics 4:107114.lebovitz, r.m., l. johnson, and w.k. samson. 1987. effects of pulsemodulated microwave radiation and conventional heating on sperm production. j appl physiol 62:245252.lebovitz, r.m. and r.l. seaman. 1983. pulse modulated and continuous wave microwave radiationyield equivalent changes in operant behavior of rodents. physiol behav 30:891898.lee, t.m., s.m. ho, l.y. tsang, s.h. yang, l.s. li, c.c. chan, and s.y. yang. 2001. effect onhuman attention of exposure to the electromagnetic field emitted by mobile phones. neuroreport12:729731.liburdy, r.p. 1977. effects of radiofrequency radiation on inflammation. radio sci 12:179183.liburdy, r.p. 1979. radiofrequency radiation alters the immune system: modulation of t and blymphocyte levels and cellmediated immunocompetence by hyperthermic radiation. radiat res77:3446.liburdy, r.p. 1980. radiofrequency radiation alters the immune system. ii. modulation of in vivolymphocyte circulation. radiat res 83:6673.lin, j.c. and m.f. lin. 1980. studies on microwave and bloodbrain barrier interaction.bioelectromagnetics 1:313323.lin, j.c. and m.f. lin. 1982. microwave hyperthermiainduced bloodbrain barrier alterations. radiatres 89:7787.lu, s.t., n.a. lebda, s. pettit, and s.m. michaelson. 1985. the relationship of decreased serumthyrotropin and increased colonic temperature in rats exposed to microwaves. radiat res104:365386.lu, s.t., s.j. lu, and s.m. michaelson. 1986. effects of microwaves on the adrenal cortex. radiatres 107:234249.lu, s.t., n.a. lebda, s. pettit, and s.m. michaelson. 1987. effects of microwaves on three differentstrains of rats. radiat res 110:173191.lu, s.t., d.o. brown, c.e. johnson, s.p. mathur, and e.c. elson. 1992. abnormal cardiovascularresponses induced by localized high power microwave exposure. ieee t biomed eng 39:484492.lyle, d.p., p. schechter, w.r. adey, and r.l. lundak. 1983. suppression of tlymphocyte cytotoxicity following exposure to sinusoidally amplitudemodulated fields. bioelectromagnetics 4:281292.magras, i.n. and t.d. xenos. 1997. rf radiationinduced changes in the prenatal development ofmice. bioelectromagnetics 18:455461.mann, k. and j. roschke. 1996. effects of pulsed highfrequency electromagnetic fields on humansleep. neuropsychobiology 33:4147.mann, k. and j. roschke. 2004. sleep under exposure to high frequency electromagnetic fields. sleepmed rev 8:95107.mann, k., p. wagner, g. brunn, f. hassan, c. hiemke, and j. roschke. 1998. effects of pulsed highfrequency electromagnetic fields on the neuroendocrine system. neuroendocrinology 67:139144.marcickiewicz, j., b. chazan, t. niemiec, g. sokolska, m. troszynski, m. luczak, and s.szmigielski. 1986. microwave radiation enhances teratogenic effect of cytosine arabinoside inmice. biol neonate 50:7582.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects129mausset, a., r. deseze, f. mountpeyroux, and a. privat. 2001. effects of radiofrequency exposure onthe gabaergic system in the rat cerebellum: clues from semiquantitative immunochemistry.brain res 912:3346.mcree, d.i., j.p. thaxton, and c.r. parkhurst. 1983. reproduction in male japanese quail exposed tomicrowave radiation during embryogeny. radiat res 96:5158.merritt, j.h., a.f. chamness, and s.j. allen. 1978. studies on bloodbrain barrier permeability aftermicrowaveradiation. radiat environ bioph 15:367377.merritt, j.h., k.a. hardy, and a.f. chamness. 1984. in utero exposure to microwave radiation and ratbrain development. bioelectromagnetics 5:315322.michaelson, s.m., r.a.e. thomson, and j.w. howland. 1961. physiological aspects of microwaveirradiation of mammals. am j physiol 201:351356.mitchell, d.s., w.g. switzer, and e.l. bronaugh. 1977. hyperactivity and disruption of operantbehavior in rats after multiple exposures to microwave radiation. radio sci 12:263271.mitchell, c.l., d.i. mcree, n.j. peterson, h.a. tilson, m.g. shandala, m.i. rudnev, v.v. varetskii,and m.i. navkatikyan. 1981. results of a united states and soviet union joint project on nervous system effects of microwave radiation. environ health persp 81:201209.mitchell, c.l., d.i. mcree, n.j. peterson, and h.a. tilson. 1988. some behavioral effects of shortterm exposure of rats to 2.45 ghz microwave radiation. bioelectromagnetics 9:259268.moriyama, e., m. salcman, and r.d. broadwell. 1991. bloodbrain barrier alteration after microwaveinduced hyperthermia is purely a thermal effect. i. temperature and power measurements.surg neurol 35:177182.ncrp (national council on radiation protection and measurements). 1986. biological effects anexposure criteria for radiofrequency electromagnetic fields, ncrp report 86. bethesda, md:national council on radiation protection.neilly, j.p. and j.c. lin. 1986. interaction of ethanol and microwaves on the bloodbrain barrier ofrats. bioelectromagnetics 7:405414.ohmoto, y., h. fujisawa, t. ishikawa, h. koizumi, t. matsuda, and h. ito. 1996. sequential changesin cerebral blood flow, early neuropathological consequences and bloodbrain barrier disruptionfollowing radiofrequencyinduced localized hyperthermia. int j hyperther 12:321334.oscar, k.j. and t.d. hawkins. 1977. microwave alteration of the bloodbrain barrier system of rats.brain res 126:281293.oscar k.j., s.p. gruenau, m.t. folker, and s.i. rapoport. 1981. local cerebral blood flow aftermicrowave exposure. brain res 204:220225.persson, b.r., l.g. salford, and a. brun. 1997. bloodbrain barrier permeability in rats exposed toelectromagnetic fields used in wireless communication. wirel netw 3:455461.persson, b.r., l.g. salford, a. brun, and l. malmgren. 1992. increased permeability of the bloodbrain barrier induced by magnetic and electromagnetic fields. ann ny acad sci 649:356358.prausnitz, s. and c. susskind. 1962. effects of chronic microwave irradiation on mice. ire t biomedelectr 104108.preece, a.w., g. iwi, a. daviessmith, k. wesnes, s. butler, e. lim, and a. varey. 1999. effect ofa 915 mhz simulated mobile phone signal on cognitive function in man. int j radiat biol75:447456.preston, e. and g. prefontaine. 1980. cerebrovascular permeability to sucrose in the rat exposed to2,450mhz microwaves. j appl physiol: respiratory environ excercise physiol 49:218223.preston, e., e.j. vavasour, and h.m. assenheim. 1979. permeability of the bloodbrain barrier tomannitol in the rat following 2450 mhz microwave irradiation. brain res 174:109117.radon, k., d. parera, d.m. rose, d. jung, and l. vollrath. 2001. no effects of pulsed radio frequencyelectromagnetic fields on melatonin, cortisol, and selected markers of the immune system inman. bioelectromagnetics 22:280287.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsrepacholi, m.h., a. basten, v. gebski, d. noonan, j. finnie, and a.w. harris. 1997. lymphomas ineðpim1 transgenic mice exposed to pulsed 900 mhz electromagnetic fields. radiat res147:631640.roberts, n.j. and s.m. michaelson. 1983. microwaves and neoplasia in mice: analysis of a reportedrisk. health phys 44:430433.roschke, j. and k. mann. 1997. no shortterm effects of digital mobile radio telephone on the awakehuman electroencephalogram. bioelectromagnetics 18:172176.sagan, p.m. and r.g. medici. 1979. behavior of chicks exposed to lowpower 450mhz fields sinusoidally modulated at eeg frequencies. radio sci 14:239245.saito, k. and k. suzuki. 1995. maldevelopment of early chick embryos induced by nonthermogenicdose radio frequency radiation at 428 mhz for the first 48 hours. cong anom 35:275283.saito, k., k. suzuki, and s. motoyoshi. 1991. lethal and teratogenic effects of longterm lowintensity radio frequency radiation at 428 mhz on developing chick embryo. teratology 43:609614.salford, l.g., a. brun, j.l. eberhardt, l. malmgren, and b.r.r. persson. 2003. nerve cell damage inmammalian brain after exposure to microwaves from gsm mobile phones. environ healthpersp 111:881883.salford, l.g., a. brun, j.l. eberhardt, and b.r.r. persson. 1993. experimental studies of brain tumour development during exposure to continuous and pulsed 915 mhz radiofrequency radiation. bioelectroch bioener 30:313318.salford, l.g., a. brun, k. sturesson, j.l. eberhardt, and b.r.r. persson. 1994. permeability of thebloodbrain barrier induced by 915 mhz electromagnetic radiation, continuous wave and modulated at 8, 16, 50, and 200 hz. microsc res techn 27:535542.sandstrom, m., j. wilen, g. oftendal, and k.h. mild. 2001. mobile phone use and subjective symptoms. comparison of symptoms experienced by users of analogue and digital mobile phones.occup med (lond) 51:2535.schmidt, r.e., j.h. merritt, and k.h. hardy. 1984. in utero exposure to lowlevel microwaves doesnot affect rat fetal development. int j radiat biol 46:383386.sienkiewicz, z.j., r.p. blackwell, r.g. haylock, r.d. saunders, and b.l. cobb. 2000. lowlevelexposure to pulsed 900 mhz microwave radiation does not cause deficits in the performance ofa spatial learning task in mice. bioelectromagnetics 21:151158.smialowicz, r.j., j.s. ali, e. berman, s.j. bursian, j.b. kinn, c.g. liddle, l.w. reiter, and c.m.weil. 1981a. chronic exposure of rats to 100 mhz (cw) radiofrequency radiation: assessmentof biological effects. radiat res 86:488505.smialowicz, r.j., c.m. weil, p. marsh, m.m. riddle, r.r. rogers, and b.f. rehnberg. 1981b. biological effects of longterm exposure of rats to 970mhz radiofrequency radiation.bioelectromagnetics 2:279284.smialowicz, r.j., m.m. riddle, r.r. rogers, and g.a. stott. 1982b. assessment of immune responsiveness of mice irradiated with continuous wave or pulsemodulated 425 mhz radio frequencyradiation. bioelectromagnetics 3:467470.smialowicz, r.j., m.m. riddle, c.m. weil, p.l. brugnolotti, and j.b. kinn. 1982a. exposure of ratsto 425mhz cw radiofrequency radiation: effects on lymphocytes. j microwave power ee17:211221.smythe, j.w. and b. costall. 2003. mobile phone use facilitates memory in male, but not female,subjects. neuroreport 14:243246.spalding, j.f., r.w. freyman, and l.m. holland. 1971. effects of 800 mhz electromagnetic radiation on body weight, activity, hematopoiesis, and life span in mice. health phys 20:421424.sutton, c.h., q. balzano, o. garay, and f.b. carroll. 1982. 452 mhz exposure on blood brain barrierpermeability in pigs. j microwave power ee 17:280281.sutton, c.h. and f.b. carroll. 1979. effects of microwaveinduced hyperthermia on the bloodbrainbarrier of the rat. radio sci 14:329334.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.animal and human studies addressing health effects131sykes, p.j., b.d. mccallum, m.j. bangay, a.m. hooker, and a.a. morley. 2001. effect ofradiofrequency exposure on intrachromosomal recombination in mutation and cancer. radiatres 156:495502.takashima, s. and t. asakura. 1983. desickling of sickled erythrocytes by pulsed radiofrequencyfield. science 220:411413.takashima, s., b. onaral, and h.p. schwan. 1979. effects of modulated rf energy on the eeg ofmammalian brains: effects of acute and chronic irradiations. radiat environ biophys 16:1527.tahvanainen, k., j. nino, p. halonen, t. kuusela, t. laitinen, e. lansimies, j. hartikainen, m.hietanen, and h. lindholm. 2004. acute heart rate and blood pressure responses during cellularphone use. bioelectromagnetics 25:7383.thuroczy, g., g. kubinyi, m. bodo, j. bakos, and l.d. bakos. 1994. simultaneous response of brainelectrical activity (eeg) and cerebral circulation (reg) to microwave exposure in rats. revenviron health 10:135148.tofani, s., g. agnesod, p. ossola, s. ferrini, and r. bussi. 1986. effects of continuous lowlevelexposure to radiofrequency radiation on intrauterine development in rats. health phys 51:489499.toler, j., v. popovich, s. bonasera, p. popovich, c. honeycutt, and d. sgoutas. 1988. longtermstudy of 435 mhz radiofrequency radiation on bloodborne end points in canulated ratsñpartii: methods, results and summary. j microwave power ee 23:105136.toler, j.c., w.w. shelton, m.r. frei, j.h. merritt, m.l. meltz, and m.a. stedham. 1997. longterm,lowlevel exposure of mice prone to mammary tumors to 435 mhz radiofrequency radiation.radiat res 148:227234.utteridge, t.d., v. gebski, j.w. finnie, b. vernonroberts, and t.r. kuchel. 2002. longterm exposure of eðpim1 transgenic mice to 898.4 mhz microwaves does not increase lymphoma incidence. radiat res 158:357364.vollrath, l., r. spessert, t. kratzsch, m. keiner, and h. hollmann. 1997. no shortterm effects ofhighfrequency electromagnetic fields on the mammalian pineal gland. bioelectromagnetics18:376387.vorobyov, v.v., a.a. galchenko, n.i. kukushkin, and i.g. akoev. 1997. effects of weak microwavefields amplitude modulated at elf on eeg of symmetric brain areas in rats. bioelectromagnetics18:293298.wagner, p., j. roschke, k. mann, w. hiller, and c. frank. 1998. human sleep under the influence ofpulsed radiofrequency electromagnetic fields: a polysomnographic study using standardizedconditions. bioielectromagnetics 19:199202.wagner, p., j. roschke, k. mann, j. fell, w. hiller, c. frank, and m. grozinger. 2000. human sleepeeg under the influence of pulsed radiofrequency electromagnetic fields. results frompolysomnographies using submaximal high power flux densities. neuropsychobiology 42:207212.ward, t.r. and j.s. ali. 1985. bloodbrain barrier permeation in the rat during exposure to lowpower 1.7 ghz microwave radiation. bioelectromagnetics 6:131143.ward, t.r., j.a. elder, m.d. long, and d. svendsgaard. 1982. measurement of bloodbrain barrierpermeation in rats during exposure to 2450mhz microwaves. bioelectromagnetics 3:371383.williams, w.m., m. del cerro, and s.m. michaelson. 1984a. effect of 2450 mhz microwave energyon the bloodbrain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. b. effect on the permeability to hrp. brainres 7:171181.williams, w.m., w. hoss, m. formaniak, and s.m. michaelson. 1984b. effect of 2450 mhz microwave energy on the bloodbrain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. a. effect on the permeabilityto sodium fluorescein. brain res 7:165170.williams, w.m., s.t. lu, m. del cerro, and s.m. michaelson. 1984c. effect of 2450 mhz microwaveenergy on the bloodbrain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. d. brain temperature and bloodbrain barrier permeability to hydrophilic tracers. brain res 7:191212.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132assessment of potential health effects from pave pawswilliams, w.m., j. platner, and s.m. michaelson. 1984d. effect of 2450 mhz microwave energy onthe bloodbrain barrier to hydrophilic molecules. c. effect on the permeability to [c14] sucrose. brain res 7:183190.yamaguchi, j., g. tsurita, s. ueno, s. watanabe, k. wake, m. taki, and h. nagawa. 2003. 1439mhz pulsed tdma fields affect performance of rats in a tmaze only when body temperatureis elevated. bioelectromagnetics 24:223230.zook, b.c. and s.j. simmens. 2001. the effects of 860 mhz radiofrequency radiation on the induction or promotion of brain tumors and other neoplasms in rats. radiat. res. 155:572583.zwamborn, a.p., s.h.. vossen, b.j. van leersum, m.a. ouwens, and w.n. makel. 2003. effects ofglobal communication system radiofrequency fields on well being and cognitive functions ofhuman subjects with and without subjective complaints. netherlands organization for appliedscientific research (tno), fel03c148.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1338epidemiological studies of thepossible adverse health effects ofpulsed radar emissionsin this chapter we discuss a limited range of studies that addressed potentialhealth effects among populations exposed to pulsedradiofrequency wavelengths.ideally, the best studies would be carried out in the fields of radar stations. unfortunately, such studies are very limited in number and quality. one of the reasonsis the difficulty of determining the precise dosage of the radar waves received bythe population over a long period of exposure. as a result, epidemiological studies in such populations are few in number. when such studies are undertaken,they usually occur after long exposures and often within the context of occupational exposures. a large number of such studies deal with implied exposures dueto assignment on death certificates such as òelectrician.ówe include in this chapter those studies which have been undertaken in situations where there have been serious concerns about possible health effects, suchas in the case of the exposure in the moscow embassy (lilienfeld and others1978). in other instances there has been a defined cohort exposed to radar emissions of various types with followup for specific outcomes (hill 1990; robinetteand others 1980; groves and others 2002). we also include studies of polishmilitary personnel and of the region that was irradiated by the skrunda radarfacility, which report health effects of radar emissions not previously or subsequently confirmed by other observations.exposures at the u.s. embassy in moscowa substantial rf exposure of employees working in the u.s. embassy inmoscow (lilienfeld and others 1978) occurred between 1953 and 1976. thoseemployees were exposed to microwave energy (500 mhz3.0 ghz) at levels of 5an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsw/cm2 to 15 w/cm2 for periods of 9 to 18 hours per day. to determine thepossible effects on morbidity and mortality, the health status of 1827 departmentof state employees at the moscow embassy was compared with the health statusof 2561 employees and their dependents at other u.s. embassies in neighboringeastern states using health records, health questionnaires, and death certificates.it was concluded that personnel working at the u.s. embassy in moscow from1953 to 1976 suffered no ill effects from microwaves beamed at the building.exposures at the mit radiation laboratorya cohort of 1592 white male physicists and engineers participating in a radarresearch and development project during word war ii was evaluated for mortality (hill 1990). it was not possible to assign precise personal exposures althoughclasses of exposure were assigned. overall and causespecific mortality, usingstandardized mortality ratios, was examined up until 1980 for an average survivalof 36 years. comparisons were made with all u.s. white males, and with a cohortof physicians. the mit radiation laboratory experienced a lower than expectedmortality based on a comparison with ageadjusted mortality in u.s. males, aswell as with the comparison with the cohort of physicians. among the differentcauses of death there was a slight elevation of rates for hodgkinõs disease andcirrhosis of the liver, neither of which reached statistical significance.two studies of a u.s. navy cohorta total of 40,890 u.s. naval personnel, believed to be exposed to radar energy while aboard navy ships, was studied for potential adverse health effects. norf measurements were taken of the cohort, consisting only of men, who werecategorized into high exposure and lower exposure based only upon job classification. this cohort was the subject of two separate investigations, including theoriginal report by robinette and others (1980) and subsequently by groves andothers (2002), which included an extended followup period.in the initial investigation (robinette and others 1980), the individuals werefrom u.s. navy technical schools (19501954). followup in this study was viahospital records, the social security administration, and the national death index. cause of death was obtained from death certificates. in the first study, therewas a finding of significantly increased trauma mortality in the group with significantly elevated microwave exposure. on further examination, this increasedmortality was the result of military aircraft accidents. total mortality was notsignificantly different in the two groups. while mortality from cancer, stroke,chronic nephritis, influenza and pneumonia, and liver disease was elevated amongthe group with the higher level of exposure, none reached statistical significance.the subsequent study of this cohort by groves and others (2002), including afollowup period of approximately 40 years, provided an opportunity to identifyan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.epidemiological studies135potential delayed health effects. in this study, comparisons of mortality were madebetween the two exposure groups and agespecific mortality rates in the u.s.white population. a total of 8393 deaths were identified for a cumulative crudemortality rate of 20.7%. the result for the comparison of the low radar exposurewith that of the u.s. population was 0.80 (0.780.82) and for the high radar exposure rate it was 0.69 (0.670.71). this indicates that the whole cohort was inbetter health than the whole u.s. white male population of the same age distribution, an effect often referred to as the òhealthy worker effect.ó the only causes ofdeath with a statistically significant elevated smr were for warrelated deathsand for accidents involving air transportation in the highexposure cohort (49.6[27.589.6]) and (4.74 [3.895.76]), and war injuries were also significantly elevated in the lowexposure cohort (9.13 [2.2836.5]). nonsignificant elevationsin the smr were observed for lymphocytic leukemia (1.12 [0.691.83]) and nonlymphocytic leukemia (1.24 [0.901.69]) in the subgroup defined as highpotential exposure. there were some weaknesses in the studies consisting of lack ofexposure measurements and potential losses in the followup which would have atendency to lower smrs. the authors of the more recent study conclude, òradarexposures had little effect on mortality in this cohort of u.s. navy veteransó.radio location station at skrundathe radio location station at skrunda in latvia was part of the early warning system of the soviet union (romancuks 1996). the station had 2 pulsedradar systems operating at 152 to 162 mhz, at a power of 1250 kw. the pulseduration was 0.8 msec with an interpulse interval of 41 msec and a pulse repetition rate of 24.5 hz. the averagepower level at nearby residential locations wasless than 10 w/cm2 and the peak power level at these locations was 500 w/cm2. the radar systems were equipped with a pair of antennas measuring 250 12 m, which were angled slightly towards each other.selected children in the vicinity of the skrunda station underwent psychophysical testing. a total of 609 children aged 918 living within 20 km of theskundra station were assumed to be exposed. the test battery (polytest 8802),requiring 70 minutes to complete, including 11 tests that measure tapping rates,reaction to visual and auditory stimuli, attention, and memory (kalmins and others 1996), was administered to 609 children. among participants, 224 childrenlived where they were directly exposed, 385 children lived nearby but were notdirectly exposed, and an additional 357 children lived in nonexposed areas andserved as controls. the authors concluded that children living in the exposed areaperformed worse on the tests than children living in the nearby area and evenworse than the children in the control group. many of the differences in performance were not statistically significant and many of the differences were foundto show correlation differences of 0.25 and were barely significantly differentfrom 0.0. in some categories performance on psychophysical tests appeared to bean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsstatistically impaired for children living in the radar line of sight compared tothose living behind the radar and those living in a nearby community. the impairment occurred in all ages tested (918 years) in a tapping test, but in other casesthe effect was only in one sex or in certain age groups. for instance, reactiontimes to auditory stimuli were significantly impared in ages 912 years, whileages 1314 years showed no statistical difference on this test. the authors notethat òevidence for a factor other than electromagnetic fields having caused theobserved results was not found, but its existence cannot be ruled out . . .ó. thesmall populations exposed in the skrunda radio stations do not make it likely thatfurther epidemiological studies in this population can be mounted.polish military studiesover the years 19711985 there was a study of cancer morbidity (first diagnosis of cancer) in a population consisting of career personnel in the armedforces of poland (szmigielski 1996). this population varied over the years from118,500 to 142,200 with a mean of 127,800 (9620). based on military records,the authors designated a fraction of this population, which varied between 3400and 3700 persons (mean 3720 360), as exposed to rf/microwave radiation.this population was divided into 4 agegroups (2029, 3039, 4049, and 5059years). the study consisted of a series of annual crosssectional assessments ofmorbidity in a series of populations. this approach would be sensitive to changesin age makeup in each of the population groups over the period of study, or topossible changes in the exposure characteristics, but it also makes it difficult tocompare the results of this study with conventional cohort studies that follow aparticular cohort over a period of years. the exposed part of the population wasexposed to pulsemodulated 1503500 mhz radiation with 8085% not exceeding 0.2 mw/cm2 and 1520% at 0.20.4 mw/cm2. individual exposures couldnot be determined. the total incidence of cancer diagnoses was determined byage groups for the total population and for the exposed population. cancer occurrence was determined for the following sites: oral cavity, pharynx, esophagusand stomach, colorectal, liver/pancreas, lung, bones, skin including melanoma,kidney and prostate, brain and nervous system, thyroid, and hematopoietic andlymphatic systems. cancer incidence in the nonexposed population was used asthe expected rate for the total population. the overall cancer morbidity rate was57.6 per 100,000 per year and the cancer morbidity rate was 119.1 per 100,000per year in the exposed population. the gross observed/expected ratio thereforewas 2.07 (1.123.58). the study reported significantly increased cancer morbidity in all exposed age groups except in 5059yearold subjects exposed to radiation. the largest subclass increases were from chronic myelocytic leukemia,acute myeloblastic leukemia, and nonhodgkinõs lymphoma (13.9, 8.62, and5.82, respectively).an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.epidemiological studies137summarythe results of the studies cited here are mixed in characteristics. on the onehand are the results of studies of populations that are reasonably described interms of radar exposure such as the population in the u.s. embassy (lilienfeldand others 1978). they are reinforced by similar exposures in the mit radiationlaboratory (hill 1990), which also indicate a lack of health effect. in the mitstudy the exposure characteristics were doubtful, but the duration of the exposure was early in 1942 until 1980. in all these studies there was uncertainty inthe exposure classification. the total exposure in terms of people was small, butthe followup was adequate to determine that there were negligible effects ofexposure.the next investigation was of a large cohort in the u.s. navy (40,890 people)that was followedup by two study groups that were relatively independent ofeach other (robinette and others 1980; groves and others 2002). in the first study,followup was from 1950 to 1974. the group was divided up into two cohorts, thefirst of which comprised 20,109 individuals who, based on their job description,had a higher exposure than the second cohort of 20,780 individuals, who receiveda much lower exposure. there were no direct exposure measurements made ineither group after the initial assignment of dose. neither investigation identifiedstatistically significant associations with exposure and adverse healthrelated outcomes.the committee has reviewed two studies that were connected with theskrunda radio location system. this system was operating at a slightly lowerfrequency than pave paws but at a higher power level of 1250 kw. the firststudy reported a lower annual treering width following the startup of the facilityin 1971 and is reported in a previous chapter (chapter 6 on biological effects). asecond report addressed performance in a psychophysical test administered toyouths of 918 years. the annual treering width appeared affected (diminished)after the skrunda radio location system became operational. in some catagoriesperformance on psychophysical tests appeared to be statistically impaired for children living in the radar line of sight compared to those living behind the radar andthose living in a nearby community (all ages tested 918 yearolds in a tappingtest and ages 912 in reaction time to auditory stimuli; ages 1314 showed nostatistical difference on this latter test). other tests were not statistically conclusive and the overall health impact on the children living in the line of sight to thebeam, if any, is unclear.the last study we report on is by szmigielski (1996). szmigielski studiedcancer morbidity (firstcancer morbidity) in a varying population of 118,500 to142,200 with a mean of 127,800 (127,800 9620). the authors designated afraction of this population as exposed to radar 1503,500 mhz with 8085% notexceeding 0.2 mw/cm2 and 1520% exposed to 0.20.6 mw/cm2. the exposedpopulation consisted of 3400 to 4600 men with a mean of 3720 360. the canceran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsincidence in the nonexposed population was used as the background rate. for thewhole population the smr was 2.07 (1.123.58) for the observed/expected ratio,and the highest subclasses were for chronic myelocytic leukemia, acute myeloblastic leukemia, and nonhodgkinõs lymphoma (13.9, 8.62, and 5.82). the interpretation of this study and its relevance to pave paws is problematic becausethe radar exposure is 0.17 3,720 ( 360)  0.4 mw/cm2 or 250 v/cm2, anamount considerably above the power densities experienced by the pave pawspublic. because the 250 v/cm2 is elevated above the comparison levels andbecause the measurement of smr is different from most of the other studies wehave, the committee concludes that this finding is sufficiently different from thepave paws findings in chapter 9 of this report that additional data would berequired to determine its significance with respect to possible health effects resulting from exposures to pave paws.referencesgroves, f.d., w.f. page, g. gridley, l. lisimaque, p.a. stewart, r.e. tarone, m.h. gail, j.d. boice,and g.w. beebe. 2002. cancer in korean war technicians: mortality survey after 40 years. amj epidemiol 155:810818.hill, d. 1990. a longitudinal study of a cohort with past exposure to radar: the mit radiation followup study (meeting abstract). bioelectromagnetics society, 12th annual meeting 1014 june,san antonio, tx abstract no. a26 p. 6.kalmins, t., r. krizbergs, a.a. kolodynski, and v.v. kolodynska. 1996. motor and psychologicalfunctions of school children living in the area of the skrunda radio location station in latvia. scitotal environ 180:8793.lilienfeld, a.m., j. tonascia, s. tonascia, c.h. libauer, g.m. cauthen, j.a. markowitz, and s.weida. 1978. foreign service study: evaluation of foreign service and other employees fromselected eastern european posts. ntis document no. pb28b 163/9ga p. 436.robinette, c.d., c. silverman, and s. jablon. 1980. effects upon health of occupational exposure tomicrowave radiation (radar). am j epidemiol 112:3953.romancuks, a. 1996. measurement of the intensity of the electromagnetic radiation from the skrundaradio location station. sci total environ 180 (1):5156.szmigielski, s. 1996. cancer morbidity in subjects occupationally exposed to high frequency (radiofrequency and microwave) electromagnetic radiation. sci total environ 180:917.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1399health considerations in thecape cod populationintroductionthis chapter begins with a discussion of issues in epidemiologic research andthen describes the status of disease on cape cod. this discussion is followed byan assessment of the sample size and statistical power needed to evaluate healthrisks of the pave paws radar. finally the committee presents a geographicalcorrelation study of health effects associated with exposure to the pave pawsradar in the upper cape cod region surrounding the massachusetts military reserve where pave paws is located.the population characteristics of cape cod are important in interpretation ofobserved health effects and evaluation of epidemiological studies and are described briefly here.trend in commutingthe trend in commuting to boston has risen dramatically over the past 40years (cccr 2003). while the population of barnstable county has tripled, offcape commuting has increased 1440 percent. in 2000, approximately 15% ofbarnstable countyõs working residents commuted offcape to work, almost a50% increase over the number commuting offcape in 1990. nearly half the commuters went to the greater boston area.age structure of the populationthe percent of the population on cape cod aged 65plus rose from 22.8% in1996 to 23.1% in 2000. this represents 36.7% of all households on cape cod.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsoverall, 26% of cape households have retirement income (us census bureau,census 2000). based on analysis of the 2000 census, all 15 cape towns sawgrowth in the 85plus age group. barnstable county led the 14 massachusettscounties with the highest median age of 44.6. furthermore, 11 cape towns rankedin the top 20 oldest communities in massachusetts.the poverty level of cape cod is comparable to the state of massachusetts asa whole. overall, for families with children, the demographic poverty level is3.4% for the state and 3.5% for cape cod. for those without children, the corresponding numbers are 2.2% and 2.1%.population growthcensus data from 1980 and 1990 indicate that the growth of the state overallwas 1.049% during this decade and for barnstable county (cape cod) it was1.26%. this reflects the trend of more retired elders moving to the cape and agrowing population commuting to jobs in the greater boston area, in part withbetter intrastate road access.the miser data resource1 used to project the annual and decadelevel growthin future massachusetts populations indicates that the actual recorded growth from1990 to 1995 was 1.026% for the state of massachusetts as a whole and 1.068%for cape cod. furthermore, the projected growth from 1990 to 2000 was 1.053%for the decade for the state as a whole and 1.180% for barnstable county.prevalence of risk factors on the capethe committeeõs access to historic data on risk factors was limited by theiravailability on brfss and insufficient numbers of responders to provide accurate estimates for counties. the cape does have a lower prevalence of obesitythan the state of massachusetts as a whole through the 1990s (brfss data).issues in epidemiologic researchepidemiologic research can encompass a spectrum of strategies and methodological approaches to describe the occurrence of and risk factors for disease.research designs can include descriptive, ecologic, case series, crosssectional,casecontrol, cohort, and clinical trials. the type of information derived fromthese different strategies typically differs substantially with regard to the metricsobtained and the level of causal inference. within the context of considering po1the massachusetts institute for social and economic research (miser) was founded in 1981 bythe university of massachusetts. miser is an interdisciplinary research institute of the college ofsocial and behavioral sciences.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population141tential health effects from the pave paws facility, a combination of epidemiologic approaches can be recommended, which will provide information relevantto this issue.as a general rule, most epidemiologic investigations are hypothesisrelated.while the hypothesis focus can be hypothesis generating, the nature of epidemiologic research is typically hypothesis testing. hypothesis generation is restrictedto situations where there exists a lack of substantive data on an underlying mechanism of disease causation. any observed associations are then evaluated for anyexisting or speculative mechanisms that may support the observation. one common outcome is the proposal of laboratory or animalbased experiments thatmight provide confirmatory data relating to the observed association. within ahypothesisgeneration study, it is possible to define either the exposure(s) or theeffect(s) of interest. for example, within a cohortstudy design, multiple effectsand/or exposure can often be addressed, depending on the cohort characterizationand followup. in the situation of a casecontrol study, the hypothesisgenerationcomponent would be focused on exposurespecific factors. a subject of importance in research designated as hypothesis generating is the issue of multiplecomparisons. that is, when researchers investigate many different factors and/oreffects the probability of observing some significant associations increases due torandom chance.hypothesis testing is within the context of available data to support a tenablebiologic mechanism between a given exposure (e.g., pave pawsrelated) and aspecific health effect. by definition, hypothesistesting epidemiologic researchspecifies the exposure and outcome of interest as well as the direction of effect(i.e., increase of risk or protective effect).given the lack of sufficient supportive data to propose specific hypotheses tobe tested (that is, supported by a reasonable and justified underlying biologicalrationale) the spectrum of healthrelated effects that could be considered withinthe context of the pave paws is almost unlimited. thus, associations observedas the result of multiple comparisons must be viewed with extreme caution andconsidered tentative until reproduced in another population or supported by biologically based evidence. some examples of possible health effects that might beconsidered within a hypothesisgenerating exercise include cancer, cardiovascular disease, immunodeficiency, autoimmune disease, infertility, pregnancy outcomes, birth defects, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism, depression,dementia, asthma, or endocrinopathies. the ability to conduct scientifically validresearch is dependent on (1) the feasibility of complete ascertainment and characterization of disease state(s) of interest, many of which include a heterogeneousgroup of diseases, (2) a sufficient level of statistical power to detect levels of riskconsidered to be of importance, and (3) the ability to accurately characterize, indetail, the exposure of interest among the relevant population. deficiencies in oneor more of these attributes can invalidate the results and corresponding conclusions of epidemiologic research.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142assessment of potential health effects from pave pawshealth on cape codthe health of the population can be monitored using a range of measuresincluding the incidence or onset of new cases of disease, the prevalence or frequency of the condition in the population, and mortality, usually reported as therate of death in the population. other measures such as a personyears of life lostmay be used to rank the impact of conditions on the population. the massachusetts department of public health produces reports that summarize both the burden of disease and the prevalence of risk factors for chronic conditions for thestate as a whole. data on cancer are reported using the resources of the statetumor registry and birth defects are reported using specialized data collectionprocedures. many other conditions, however, are not routinely summarized eitherfor the state as a whole or for smaller subdivisions such as counties or towns.therefore we have available extensive data on cancer, more recent data on birthdefects, and no comparable data on heart disease, stroke, or other major leadingcauses of disability and death.premature mortality the overall burden of illness for the state has been summarized in the measure of premature mortality (eyles and birch 1993). this is defined as the deathsoccurring before age 75, and may be considered to reflect a general measure ofthe overall health of the population. while premature mortality reflects both thecommunitylevel health status and other correlates, such as access to care, it isimportant to note that the figures also include deaths from external causes (e.g.,accidents, suicides, homicides, etc.). moreover, premature mortality does not giveus a source to identify why an area may be high or low, and because it is a generalmeasure of early death, it may not precisely measure overall health. in fact, fromtime to time, it may obscure important disease burdens in subgroups of the population. the most recently reported data from massachusetts draw on the reporteddeaths in 2001.2 the state average premature mortality rate was 347 (95% confidence interval 342 to 352) deaths per 100,000 persons ages 074, after adjustmentto the age distribution of the 2000 census. the prematuremortality rates for townson upper cape cod are summarized in table 91.of note, only one of the towns, bourne, has a premature mortality rate in2001 that is higher than the state average of 347 (342352), though this differenceis not statistically significant. importantly, many factors can contribute to thismeasure. the reports summarized below focus on the incidence of cancer andbirth defects, which are more proximate in time to any environmental exposurethan is mortality, except in the situation of natural disasters associated with traumaand death.2premature mortality 2001: http://www.state.ma.us/dph/bhsre/death/2001/premtrmortal2001.pdf.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population143table 91ageadjusted premature mortalityrates (deaths per 100,000) for upper cape codtownspremature mortality ratetown(95% confidence interval)barnstable275 (233324)bourne388 (307489)falmouth333 (276400)mashpee332 (241454)sandwich288 (218379)source: premature mortality rates, massachusetts department of public health. (premature mortality 2001, www.state.ma.us/dph/bhsre/death/2001/pretrmortal2001.pdf).cancerfrom the inception of the massachusetts cancer registry and the initialanalysis of cancer incidence by towns, there has been concern that the rates ofcancer are elevated in the cape cod population. this has led to a range of analyses that the committee has summarized in this section. in december 1987, themassachusetts department of public health issued a request for proposals to respond to three important public health issues affecting the upper cape cod(barnstable, bourne, falmouth, mashpee, and sandwich).apparent elevations in cancer incidence and mortality were observed for certain kinds of cancer as compared to the statewide averages and the lower capecod region. consistently elevated mortality rates for lung cancer and leukemiawere seen for the towns of falmouth and bourne. in addition, since the inceptionof the massachusetts cancer registry in 1982, statistically significant excesseswere seen in the incidence of cancers of the breast, colon and rectum, lung, andblood forming organs, and statistically variable increases were seen for cancersof the pancreas, kidney, and bladder in at least one of the upper cape towns.secondly, there were many known or suspected environmental hazards affecting the upper cape. these included both groundwater and air contaminantsfrom a variety of sources including the massachusetts military reservation.third, there was substantial concern among citizen advocates who pressedforcefully and consistently for an indepth evaluation of the relationship betweenthe environmental hazards and cancer rates. the upper cape cod cancerincidence study was conducted by drs. aschengrau and ozonoff of boston university school of public health and submitted to the department of public health inseptember 1991. these investigators undertook a populationbased casecontrolstudy that evaluated the relationship between exposures to known or suspectedenvironmental hazards and nine types of cancer. cases consisted of newly diagan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsnosed cancers in the years 1983 to 1986 among permanent upper cape residents.the main environmental exposures considered were air and water pollution associated with the massachusetts military reservation, canal electric plant, thebarnstable airport, and other sources, perchlorethylene in water distribution system pipes, radiofrequency radiation from pave paws, electromagnetic radiation from 115 kv transmission lines and substations, and possible exposure topesticides among residents who lived near cranberry bogs.the study consisted of incident cancer of lung, n = 251, breast, n = 265,colon and rectum, n = 315, bladder, n = 62, kidney, n = 35, pancreas, n = 37,leukemia, n = 36, brain, n = 37, and liver, n = 4, as reported by the massachusettscancer registry in the years 1983 to 1986. since many individuals were deceasedby the start of the study, the living and deceased upper cape residents were selected as controls (n = 1285). trained interviewers queried all subjects or thenextofkin either by telephone or in person to obtain demographic, occupational,and residential history and information on potential confounding variables suchas cigarette smoking. overall, approximately 81% of cases and 79% of controlswere interviewed. the majority of the environmental exposure data was collectedindependently of the interview and linked to the study subjects using the residential histories.each exposure was examined separately in relation to all cancers combined,and then for the individual cancer sites. most exposures were categorized as dichotomous variables, and then further analyzed according to distance, cumulativeduration, and direction. the strength of the association between a particular exposure and each cancer site was measured by the odds ratio. most analyses wereconducted with and without latency to account for the possibility that the exposures under study could be either cancer initiators or a combination of both initiators and promoters.few study subjects had potential exposure to drinkingwater contaminantsfrom groundwater plumes emanating from various sites on or off the massachusetts military reservation. those plumes, including the ashmet valley plume, donot appear to account for much, if any, of the cancer burden to the population.results suggest approximately twofold elevations in the risk of brain canceramong those who ever had a residence supplied with public water on the uppercape, particularly from the barnstable water company. these findings cannot beconsidered conclusive because of limitations in the data. these limitations include the lack of details regarding the historical pattern of water contamination inthe area and patterns of water use among the subjects, the large number of subjects dropped from these analyses because of missing data, and the almost complete overlap between exposures to the barnstable water company and barnstableairport for which an elevation in braincancer risk is also seen.the investigators examined another public drinkingwater exposure,perchlorethylene (pce) from the waterdistribution pipes, in relation to leukemia, bladder, and kidney cancer. a twofold increase in the risk of leukemia andan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population145bladder cancer among those supplied with water from pipes that leached pcewas observed. these risk estimates were not statistically stable, a reflection ofsmall numbers. for these reasons, the results are consistent with the hazards ofpce contamination in some of the distribution systems of the upper cape.among residents located in proximity to the gun and mortar position on themassachusetts military reservation, the investigators observed associations between possible airborne exposure and the risk of lung and breast cancer. subjectswho lived closer to the gun and mortar positions had a modest increase in the riskof lung cancer. likewise, there was an increase in risk of breast cancer amongsubjects who lived closer to the sites. among residents exposed for more than 20years, the investigators found an increase in the risk of lung and breast cancer.nonmeaningful elevations were seen for the other cancer sites.while no association was seen for pave paws, the exposure data wereinadequate for these investigators to draw sound conclusions (greatly enhancedpowerdensity data and modeled powerdensity estimates became available in2004 (bsl 2004)). possible pesticide exposure associated with living near thecranberry bogs was also examined. again, an increase in risk of brain cancer wasseen among individuals who ever lived within half a mile of a bog. the riskremained elevated when subjects with other relevant exposures were excluded.other potential environmental exposures were also considered, including electromagnetic radiation from transmission lines. results suggest that extremely lowfrequency electromagnetic fields may relate to increases in the risk of bladdercancer and breast cancer. an association was also observed for brain canceramong those who ever swam in johns pond and leukemia among those ever swimming in local ponds.a comparison of the calculated sir for 5 categories consisting of total cancers, breast, colon, lung, and prostate cancer during 19871994 versus 19951999 for 5 towns in upper cape cod (see table 92) demonstrated no consistentpattern of increase during the latter time period. during these two time periods,a decrease was observed in 15 out of 25 sirs, no change in 4 out of 25 sirs,and an increase in 6 out of 25 sirs, thus suggesting that increasing duration ofthe presence of the pave paws radar has not resulted in increased incidence ofcancer. analyses covering longer durations may be required to confirm this initial observation.in summary, these results across the spectrum of potential environmentalexposures point to numerous potential associations that require further investigation as the results were largely inconclusive. the limited number of cases included in the study for each cancer site preclude definitive conclusions.it should be noted that multiple comparisons are an issue whenever a statetumor registry breaks out incidence data for every town. data are presented for351 cities and towns in the commonwealth of massachusetts. rothman andgreenland in their text point to the limitations of using tumor registry data forsuch descriptive statistics. smaller towns will have higher variability and be atan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146table 92comparison of standardized incidence ratios for upper cape cod during periods 19871994 vs. 19951999total cancerbreastcolonlungprostatetown19871994199519991987199419951999198719941995199919871994199519991987199419951999barnstable1131021151011197912396124125bourne114114117101110118123109116114falmouth122114119118120101116106154121mashpee121151101142113137109155178196sandwich10997119110999910468134106source: massachusetts department of public health.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population147increased risk of reporting significant variation from the state average. also, adjacent towns are at risk of increased (or decreased) cancer incidence because ofautocorrelation among risk factors that are not accounted for in the agestandardized data. (rothman and greenland,1998).the results from the upper cape cancerincidence study stimulated additionalinvestigations, of both the health effects associated with environmental exposures from the massachusetts military reservation, and the silent spring investigation of breast cancer. in addition, the bureau of environmental health assessment of childhood cancer incidence on cape cod commissioned a study from1982 for 1994. these are reviewed in sequence.massachusetts military reservationryan and colleagues (mdph 2002) employed extensive analytic techniquesto explore the possible associations between the massachusetts military reservation and health among upper cape cod residents. in particular, they observed thatthe female lungcancer rates were higher than expected in the immediate uppercape area, especially in the vicinity to the south, east, and west of the massachusetts military reservation. rates of lung cancer begin declining in regions furtheraway from the massachusetts military reservation, although there are isolatedareas of apparently high rates. while lungcancer rates were high in the uppercape, particularly for females, the excesses occur over a broad area of approximately 20 to 30 square miles, making it unlikely that a single nearby point sourceof exposure is responsible.with respect to birth weights, ryan and colleagues extended analysis over alarger spatial area, and across a 7year time frame, showed good consistencyamong different methodologic approaches. unlike the cancer studies, the analysis showed that additional data added in this analysis attenuated the previousreported associations. birth weights in the upper cape appear now, on average,modestly higher than the statewide average. while there has been a downwardtrend in birth weights across the state of massachusetts, some of this trend isexplained in terms of changes in time periods, particularly an increase in thenumber of multiple births. the lower than expected birth weights found in thewareham area and in a few other locations, including mashpee in the later years,do not suggest any particular relationship with the massachusetts militaryreservation.the investigators concluded that lack of a consistent finding between thelungcancer rates and birthweight maps leads to the conclusion that althoughsome exposures from the massachusetts military reservation may have contributed to the induction of lung cancers this does not seem to lend support for anassociation with birth weights.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsbreast cancerthe massachusetts department of public health awarded funds to the silentspring institute, which conducted a study of breast cancer in relation to environmental risk factors drawing on data from 1982 to 1990. the investigators notedthat 9 of the 15 towns in massachusetts with significantly elevated breast cancerwere located on cape cod, for the period from 1982 to 1990. furthermore, townsin the midcape and lower cape were among those with the highest incidencecompared to the rest of the state. five of these mid and lowercape towns hadincidence rates that were 25 to 55% higher than the state average. the silentspring study looked in substantial detail at the potential environmental contamination that may relate to risk of breast cancer, focusing on environmental estrogens, pce exposure, ddt exposure, and the role of the massachusetts militaryreservation as potential sources of exposure. the investigation concluded thatbreastcancer rates on cape cod do not appear to be fully explained by the individual characteristics of the women (including, for example, age, family history,reproductive history, alcohol consumption, smoking, and age at onset of menstruation and menopause). a number of specific environmental facilities of concern including the pave paws radar system, the massachusetts military reservation, canal electric plant, and pilgrim nuclear power station were consideredand fail to explain why breastcancer rates are elevated capewide. however, theinvestigators could not rule out localized effects from these various facilities.breast cancer is predominantly driven by female hormones (colditz 1998;willett and others 2000). while the studies of breast cancer on cape cod haveconsidered a number of reproductive risk factors (aschengrau and others 1998;coogan and aschengrau 1998; coogan and aschengrau 1999; aschengrau andothers 2003; mckelvey and othes 2004), it appears that in these analyses, the useof postmenopausal estrogens, which significantly increase the risk of postmenopausal breast cancer, were not included. the investigators did, however, note thatthe use of mammography could not explain the increase in incidence that wasobserved.a detailed analysis of residence on cape cod and risk of breast cancer(mckelvey and others 2004) included some 1121 cases of breast cancer occurring between 1988 and 1995 and 992 controls. these cases and controls weredrawn from the entire cape. after adjusting for age, family history, parity, age atfirst birth, education, body mass index, and history of breast cancer, longer duration of residence on cape cod was associated with increased risk of breast cancer. in general, after excluding women with a history of breast cancer, thosewomen who had lived 20 or more years on cape cod had significantly elevatedrisk. for example, those living 40 to 47 years on cape cod had an adjusted relative risk of 1.57 (95% ci 1.07 to 2.29). although uncontrolled confounding cannot be ruled out, it is unlikely that duration of residence is related to use of postmenopausal hormones or other established risk factors. importantly, this elevatedan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population149risk of breast cancer is not limited to the upper cape, or other defined subregionon the cape.upper cape cod cancerincidence review, 1986 to 1994the massachusetts department of public health, bureau of environmentalhealth assessment, reported the cancer rates for towns in cape cod through theòupper cape cod cancer incidence review, 19861994ó released in june 1999.the study population for the statistical review included individuals who wereresiding in the massachusetts towns of barnstable, bourne, falmouth, mashpee,and sandwich between january 1986 and december 1994. those five towns arecollectively referred to as upper cape cod. the 1990 united states census datawere used to represent the population of those towns for the year 1990. caseswere identified through the massachusetts cancer registry. a total of 6244 primarycancer cases were diagnosed between 1986 and 1994 among residents ofthe five upper cape towns.cancer cases were selected for inclusion based on the reported address ofresidence, not the address of the diagnosing hospitals. massachusetts residentsdiagnosed at outofstate hospitals were also included in the series because of themassachusetts cancer registryõs reciprocal reporting agreements with stateswhere massachusetts residents may be diagnosed including connecticut, florida,maine, new hampshire, new york, and rhode island. it is estimated that themassachusetts cancer registry files contain data on 90 to 95% of reportablecases.to estimate the standardized incidence ratios (sirs) for each town, the incidence in the town is compared to the incidence for a given cancer in the state as awhole, which is used to represent the cancer experience of a comparable ònormaló population. thus the expected number of cases was estimated using standard approaches, within agespecific strata, of age, and then summed across agegroups, to provide the overall expected number of cases for each town.the descriptive analysis of cancerincidence data for the upper cape townsaddressed 23 specific cancer types as well as total cancer incidence for the uppercape as a whole, for each of the five towns, and for each of the 30 census tractsthat compose the upper cape. cancer incidence for cancer types combined for theupper cape as a whole was elevated significantly compared to the massachusettsstatewide experience. cancer, however, is not one disease but rather a collectionof different diseases, with distinct etiologies. the majority of cancers among uppercape residents were diagnosed in the lung, breast, prostate, and colorectalorgans. these four cancer sites comprise slightly more than half of all cancersobserved both on cape cod and in the united states overall. for the five uppercape towns combined, statistically significant elevations were observed for female breast cancer, colorectal cancer among males and both sexes combined,female lung cancer, and prostate cancer. in addition, statistically significant elan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsevations were seen for melanoma. no statistically significant elevations for theupper cape as a whole were seen in the other leading specific cancer types evaluated in this study (see table 93).the overall excess incidence of cancer in the upper cape towns was 11%(sir = 111; 95% ci 108113). this was consistent for men (sir = 112) and forwomen (sir = 110).it is of note that there is no common risk factor for breast, prostate, lung, andcolorectal cancer other than increasing age. breast and prostate cancers are largelyhormonal in origin, cigarette smoking predominantly causes lung cancer, andcolorectal cancer has many lifestyle factors that reflect a western lifestyle (including lack of physical activity, obesity, alcohol, low folate intake, height, etc.).table 93cancer cases diagnosed on upper cape cod, 19861994, andstandardized incidence rate ratios (sir)typemalefemaletotalsir95% cibladder16757224102(89116)brain50469699(80121)breast5935940110(103117)cervical06262118(90151)colon/rectum491427918112(105120)esophagus42216397(74124)hodgkins281543116(84156)kidney8157138106(89125)larynx66975103(81129)leukemia6833101105(85127)liver21113299(68139)lung & bronchus497417916112(105120)melanoma (skin)9676172135(116157)mouth and pharynx9652149101(86119)multiple myeloma20254590(66121)nhl869418095(82110)ovary0101101100(81122)pancreas6266128112(93133)prostate100101001130(122139)stomach673810593(76112)testis33033122(84172)thyroid123547107(79143)uterus014614694(79110)other221201422102(93112)total321029276137111(108113)source: upper cape cod cancer incidence review 19861994. final report volume 2. appendixc. mass. department of public health, bureau of environmental health assessment, environmentalepidemiology unit, june 1999.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population151this raises concern that the estimation of the expected number of cases of cancermay be distorted due to the population characteristics of cape cod residents, thedistribution of age within any fiveyear age group, and the general construct ofthe definition of residents. for this definition of residence, for example, is a resident defined for the massachusetts cancer registry the same as a resident defined for the united states census?the massachusetts department of public health updated information of cancer incidence and mortality with its report òcancer incidence and mortality inmassachusetts 19962000.ó through 2000, total cancermortality rates declinedsignificantly while incidence rates varied according to cancer site. the city andtown supplement reports the cancer data for towns and is most recently available for the period 19951999.3 data for upper cape cod towns are summarizedin table 94.these updated data indicate that the incidence of cancer remains elevated inthree of the five upper cape towns, breast cancer in two, and prostate cancer inthree. on the other hand, significantly lower than expected rates of colon cancerare observed in barnstable, while lung cancer is significantly elevated in mashpeebut significantly reduced in sandwich. while the small number of cases in eachtown may contribute to this variability, it is clear that the picture of elevatedincidence across these four leading cancers has changed considerably in thesemore recent data.childhood cancerthe bureau of environmental health assessment of the massachusetts department of public health released a report in september 1999 òassessment of3http://www.state.ma.us/dph/bhsre/mcr/99/supplement/tables.htm.table 94standardized incidence ratios, 19951999, for upper cape codtownstotalbreastcolonlungprostatetowncancer(f)(total)(total)(m)barnstable10210179 (p < 0.01)96125 (p < 0.001)bourne114 (p < 0.01)101118109114falmouth114 (p < 0.001)118 (p < 0.05)101106121 (p < 0.001)mashpee151 (p < 0.001)142 (p < 0.05)137155 (p < 0.001)196 (p < 0.001)sandwich971109968 (p < 0.001)106source: cancer incidence in massachusetts 19951999: city and town supplement.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152assessment of potential health effects from pave pawschildhood cancer incidence on cape cod, massachusetts, 1982 to 1994.ó thisreport addressed cancer among children up to and including age 19 at the time ofdiagnosis on cape cod. all cancers diagnosed in children between 1982 and1994 and reported through the massachusetts cancer registry were included.the purpose of the evaluation was to discuss the types of cancer that were occurring among cape cod children and to identify areas with a greater than expectedoccurrence of childhood cancer. like other health evaluations, this investigationwas initiated at the request of cape cod citizens who were concerned that childhood cancer might be a problem on cape cod.each cancer case was geocoded to the location of the childõs residence at thetime of diagnosis. standardized incidence ratios were calculated to estimate thenumber and types of cancers diagnosed among children, and determine if this wasdifferent from what was expected based upon statewide childhood cancer rates.a total of 101 cancers were diagnosed among children on cape cod between1982 and 1994. overall, this total represents 19% more cancer than would havebeen expected over this 12year period. in absolute terms, this is 17 excess cases.the three most common types of cancer diagnosed were lymphomas (n = 26),leukemias (n = 23), and central nervous system tumors (n = 17) (other cancerswere renal 8, soft tissue 10, carcinoma 9, other 7). the observed elevation in totalcancer was mostly due to elevations in lymphomas and leukemia among midcape children, and to a lesser extent leukemia among lowercape residents (seetable 95). childhood cancer did not appear to concentrate in specific areas withintowns or within specific time periods over the 12 years of data accumulation. inaddition, the types of cancer most commonly observed in the ages of diagnosisgenerally followed patterns observed elsewhere in massachusetts. these resultsdo not suggest common environmental factors being responsible for the observedexcess childhood cancer.birth defectsin 1996, the centers for diease conrol and prevention awarded five years offunding to the massachusetts department of public health to establish the massachusetts center for birth defects research and prevention. an active birth defects surveillance system involves trained personnel who validate passive reportsof birth defects cases to the department, and actively seek cases in hospitals andother health facilities. this approach provides more complete ascertainment ofcases, more accurate data on cases, and more rapid reporting of cases. the centercollected data on birth defects in the eastern part of massachusetts from october1997 to october 1998. since october 1998, the surveillance program has beencollecting cases statewide from the 53 birth hospitals and childrenõs hospital,boston. the report of 1999 statewide data represents the first full year of surveillance data (mdph 2001).all cases represent diagnoses before the infant reached one year of age. thean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population153table 95standardized incidence rates, childhood cancer, cape cod,19821994observedexpectedsir (95% ci)all of cape codleukemia2320.5112 (71169)lymphoma2613.3195 (127286)cns1721.380 (46128)upper cape codleukemia1213.092 (48192)lymphoma118.3132 (66236)cns1013.574 (35136)mid cape codleukemia75.9120 (48246)lymphoma133.9332 (177568)cns76.1114 (46235)lower cape codleukemia41.6ncalymphoma21.1nccns01.7ncanot calculated.infant or fetus must have a structural defect that met diagnostic criteria, and theinfant was live born, or the fetus was stillborn with gestational age greater than orequal to 20 weeks or with a weight of at least 350 grams.overall for massachusetts in 1999, 1.1% of births in the state had one ormore birth defects. the rate of birth defects per 10,000 births was 108.2 (95%confidence interval 101.2 to 115.5). this was based on a total of 875 diagnosedand reported birth defects. the most common defects among live births and stillbirths in 1999 were atrial septal defect (95 cases), ventricular septal defect (71cases), cleft lip with and without cleft palate (69 cases), trisomy 21 (down syndrome, 67 cases), hypospadias (2nd and 3rd degree, 49 cases), cleft palate without cleft lip (44 cases), obstructive genitourinary defect (42 cases), pulmonaryvalve atresia and stenosis (34 cases), coarctation of the aorta (25 cases), and endocardial cushion defects (25 cases).when the rate is evaluated by region in the state, the lowest rate is reportedfor the southeast, a region that includes the cape and islands and extends north toencompass a total population generating 15,000 births. the 130 cases of birthdefects diagnosed in 1999 represents a rate of 86.1 per 10,000 births (95% confidence interval 71.9 to 101.5). the apparently lower rate may be because of somebirths being delivered in rhode island where massachusetts surveillance was notan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsconducted. the limited number of birth defects each year precludes firm conclusions and requires accumulation of additional years of surveillance data to generate stable estimates of rates.sample size and statistical power to investigatehealth risks of the pave paws radarintroductionwhen investigating the occurrence of disease within a defined population, itis important to recognize the inherent limitations that may be encountered whenmaking a determination of whether or not there is an excess in the number ofexpected cases. disease rarely occurs in a uniform manner within the generalpopulation. that is, disease within a defined population can, by random chance,vary in occurrence according to time and place. thus, in order to evaluate ifdisease is occurring in excess, one must take into consideration the random variation that can occur. this is done by statistically considering the probability that agiven observation may occur by chance alone. conversely, one is often facedwith the question of what level of excess can be ruled out with some reasonablelevel of confidence.the concept of statistical power refers to the ability to detect a given level ofexcess within a defined population. calculation of statistical power requires assumptions and/or estimates of the (1) expected incidence of disease, (2) proportion of the population exposed to the factors of interest, (3) size and compositionof the population, and (4) level of risk one would like to detect/rule out. considerthe following example. prior to embarking on a study to determine if there is twofold or greater occurrence of a specific disease among the residents of a designated city, a researcher calculated the statistical power to be 0.75. this meansthat if a twofold excess truly does exist the researchers will have a 0.75 (i.e., 3 outof 4) chance of detecting the twofold difference.power calculationsusing cancer as an example, the following calculations have been made forthe upper cape cod population assuming (1) cancer rates for the united statesobtained from the surveillance, epidemiology and end results program,(2) 12% of the residents in upper cape cod reside in a location that results inexposure to the sidelobes of the pave paws radar beam, (3) the populationsize and composition of upper cape cod is that obtained for the 2000 u.s. census (see figure 91) and would be observed over a 10year period, and (4) alpha= 0.05 for a twosided test. the power calculations have been made for a spectrum of risk, ranging from 1.1 (i.e., 10% increase) to 2.5 (250% increase).however, it is not likely that any singlesource exposure would etiologicallyan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population155figure 91power to detect total cancer (excluding nonmelanoma skin cancer) occurrence.be associated with an increase in the broad spectrum of malignancies seen in thegeneral population. rather, it is more likely that if the pave paws radar isassociated with an increase in cancer risk, there will be some level of specificityas to the types/forms of malignancy. therefore, it is important to consider statistical power within a cancerspecific context.summarized in table 96 is the diagnosisspecific power calculation for theupper cape cod population. highlighted are those cancerspecific groups wherepower would be considered sufficient to detect a modest level of risk (i.e., lessthan twofold).concerns have been raised regarding the potential excess of malignanciesamong the pediatric population in the upper cape. since the incidence of cancerin children under the age of 15 years is relatively low, compared to rates amongthe adult populations, it is not surprising that the power to detect anything exceptextremely large (i.e. >100fold) risks does not exist. even when considering alldiagnoses combined, there would be 80% power to detect a 9fold (900% increase). as with adult malignancies, it is unlikely that a single exposure (e.g.,radar) would increase the occurrence of multiple types of malignancy. accordingly, it is not possible to study increases of specific pediatric cancers in theupper cape cod in order to rule out risks less than 100fold in excess.for the residents of cape cod, it is unclear what minimal level of risk wouldprovide sufficient assurance that the pave paws facility is not adversely impacting health. if the answer is 99% assurance that there is not an increase ofan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156table 96 minimum relative risk detectable in population followed for 10 years, assuming 12.5% of the populationexposed, and background seer cancer incidence rates 19752001 (all ages), alpha = 0.05 twosided testtotal population (25,300)males (13,000)females (12,300)power =. 8power = .9power =. 8power =. 9power= . 8power = .9any cancer1.121.141.181.211.171.20colon & rectum1.421.491.691.841.651.78lung & bronchus1.381.451.621.751.591.70breast1.341.40>100.00>100.001.351.41corpus uteriññññ3.114.01ovarian2.893.64ññ5.098.30prostateññ1.551.65ññtesticularññ78.52>100.00ññbladder1.812.002.492.992.372.81kidney & renal pelvis2.332.733.815.343.534.78hodgkin lymphoma3.8022.18>100.00>100.0062.79>100.00nonhodgkin lymphoma1.852.062.593.132.462.93lymphoid leukemia3.945.6210.6733.849.0023.22myeloid leukemia3.534.788.4320.337.2815.33myeloma3.634.998.9623.017.6916.99pancreas2.342.753.845.413.554.83liver3.945.6210.6733.849.0023.22soft tissue7.8117.4970.25>100.0043.74>100.00bone & joint>100.00>100.00>100.00>100.00>100.00>100.00an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population157greater than 1%, then research would not be able to satisfactorily address suchconcerns. using cancer as an example and assuming 10 years of observation ofthe population, one could reasonably anticipate that welldesigned and wellconducted research, either prospective or retrospective in design, could address moderately low levels of risk (i.e., between 1.4 and 2.0) for some of the more commoncancers (i.e., colorectal, lung, breast, prostate, bladder, and nonhodgkinõs lymphoma). for other diagnoses the ability to address less than a twofold risk wouldrequire extended length of observation of exposed residents.statistical analysesintroductionto characterize challenges inherent in the epidemiological assessment of thehealth effects associated with exposure to the pave paws radar, we conducteda geographical correlation study within the upper cape cod region surroundingthe massachusetts military reservation (mmr) where pave paws is located.our statistical analysis focused mainly on the 30 census tracts in five towns shownin map 1, and it was organized as follows. first, we conducted an exposuremap 1location of 30 census tracts in upper cape cod region studied in statisticalanalysis.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsassessment study where we estimated: (a) the percent of the population in thecape that is exposed to the pave paws radar by age and gender; and (b) thepowerdensity exposure (average and peak) from three different sources at eachcensus tract weighted by population density. second, we performed a geographiccorrelation study to estimate associations between standard incidence ratios(sir) and estimated exposure to pave paws adjusted by socioeconomic statusand other spatially correlated factors.exposure assessment studypercent of population exposed to pave paws radar beamwe first estimated the geographical areas in the cape that had a nonzeroexposure to the pave paws radar beam. those areas were identified by takinginto account: (a) that exposure occurs only in the area with direct line of sight tothe radar, and (b) the operating triangle of the radar (an area has direct line ofsight to the pave paws radar only if there is no higher ground in between).because the main beam of the radar ends at 0.1 degree above the horizontal, theseareas are exposed to the power radiated primarily by the sidelobes of the radar,which have much lower power densities than the main beam. we determinedregions with line of sight to the pave paws radar by using a digital elevationmap (map 2) from the geocomm international corporation.4we then further refined the calculations by taking into account the totalheight of the radar (105 feet) and the pave paws radar scanning angle (347degrees to 227 degrees). the regions with nonzero exposure are shown in map3. map 4 shows the estimates areas with nonzero exposures as provided bo useby mitre.to estimate the percent of the population exposed to the pave paws radarbeam we proceeded as follows. first, we used the 1990 and the 2000 censusbureau data to determine the population size by age and gender at each location.because of the small sample size within each census block, we aggregated thepopulation density by censusblock group (map 5).within each censusblock group, we estimated the number of persons exposed to the radar by multiplying the population in that censusblock group bythe proportion of area within that census block group with nonzero exposure. wethen summed the estimated number of persons exposed across the 117 censusblock groups (102 censusblock groups in year 2000), and divided the sum by thetotal population. overall we estimated that in 1990, 11.8% of the population living in upper cape cod was exposed to the pave paws radar beam. percentagesof the total population exposed to the pave paws radar beam by age and gender are presented in table 97.4http://gisdatadepot.com/dem may 2004.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population159digital elevation model map 2 digital elevation model. data from geocomm international corporation.map 3shaded areas over land indicate nonzero exposures.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsmap 4 estimated areas with nonzero exposure as provided by mitre.117 census block groups wthn 30 census tracts n 1990 map 5117 census block groups within 30 census tracts in 1990.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.161table 97estimated proportion of population living under the line of sight of pave paws radar1990 census2000 censusmalefemalemalefemaleage grouppopulationproportionpopulationproportionpopulationproportionpopulationproportionsizeexposedsizeexposedsizeexposedsizeexposedall ages51,75911.8%56,48111.8%63,21312.4%69,07112.4%043,98912.3%3,77412.5%3,73613.5%3,50513.8%5146,95912.5%6,75712.7%9,21613.4%8,81913.2%15246,47810.3%5,97011.1%6,64911.0%5,94911.6%25348,23811.6%8,84111.7%6,50712.1%7,12812.3%35448,22612.5%8,65312.2%10,28212.6%11,25912.5%45545,01012.0%5,46911.8%9,28312.4%10,14912.5%55644,85111.8%5,75411.3%6,59312.3%7,80512.3%65745,11311.8%6,22711.7%6,30212.3%7,32311.9%75842,34811.8%3,61710.7%3,75112.0%5,16111.9%85+54710.3%1,4199.7%89411.2%1,97311.3%an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsthere was little difference in exposure between each age and gender group.based on 2000 census data, the estimated proportion of population living in thearea exposed to the pave paws radar beam increased slightly to 12.4%. thechanges in population distribution in the past decade had little effect on the proportion of population living under the line of sight from the pave paws radar.average and peak powerdensity assessmentbecause cancerincidence data was made available to us only at censustractlevel, to carry out a geographic correlation study and to estimate association between cancer incidence and exposure to the pave paws radar beam, we neededto estimate average and peak power density at each census tract. three sets ofpowerdensity data were used in this analysis. the first set was calculated basedon two simple assumptions. the first assumption was that only the area withdirect line of sight to the radar and under the radarõs operation angle would beexposed to the radar beam. the second assumption was that power density decreased as the distance from the radar increased. this relationship was estimatedby fitting a power curve between the average powerdensity obtained from themitre technical report (mitre 2000) and the distance to the radar. the fittedcurve is equal to average power density (w/cm2) = 8972*distanceð1.325(meters).with these two assumptions, we calculated both average and peak powerdensity at locations 180 meters apart within the study region (map 6).the committee is aware that these are very simplistic assumptions. nonetheless, this first dataset provided a good basis for validating datasets from othersources. in this report, we refer to this estimated exposure to the pave pawsbeam as òsimple.óthe second estimated powerdensity dataset was provided by mitre corporation at locations 200 meters apart (map 7).detailed descriptions of the pave paws radar powerdensity calculationscan be found in the mitre technical report (mitre 2000). the third dataset wasobtained from broadcast signal lab (bsl) (map 8).to estimate the radiofrequency exposure from the pave paws radar ineach censusblock group on cape cod (bsl 2004), bsl utilized òthe comstudypropagation modeling softwareó in conjunction with an analytical model of thepave paws antenna supplied by the mitre corporation. we obtained powerdensity estimates at locations 140 meters apart in the eastwest direction and 188meters apart in the northsouth direction (map 8).we then estimated exposure at each census tract by weighting powerdensityvalues in w/cm2 at each location by the corresponding population density at thecensus block (map 9).population density was calculated by dividing the number of individuals living in the census block in 2000 by total square miles of dry land. the 2000 censusdata were used because the census bureau did not provide 1990 census informaan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population163map 6simple average power densities. map 7mitre average power densities.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsmap 8bsl average power densities.pymap 9population densities at census block level.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population165tion at the censusblock level. we then aggregated the exposure estimates at eachlocation to obtain average and peak powerdensity exposures in each census tractin 1990. the resulting average powerdensity exposure estimates at the censustract level from the three data sources are shown in figure 92. (note that resultsshown for bsl are magnified by a factor of 100.)as expected, since the òsimpleó exposure estimates partly depended on mitre powerdensity estimates, these two set of results were very similar. althoughbsl predicted nonzero exposure in almost the whole study region, its resultingestimates were generally lower than those from mitre. most census tracts having high exposure estimates from the mitre dataset also had relatively highestimates from the bsl dataset. for census tract 137, the difference was due to alarge proportion of its area being situated outside the pave paws operatingangle and that bsl estimates took into account reflection of the radar signal inthis region. it is important to notice that the absolute magnitude of the densityestimates would not affect the statistical significance of the variable of interest inour geographiccorrelation study.socioeconomic factor adjustmentin the period of 19861994, totalcancer incidence was 11% higher in uppercape cod compared to the state of massachusetts (sir 95% ci: 108113; seetable 92). this elevated sir might be caused by three potential confoundingfactors: age distribution, smoking behavior, and socioeconomic status (ses).confounding due to age distribution can be controlled in the calculation of theexpected cancerincidence counts. in the upper cape cod cancerincidence re0.000.020.040.060.080.100.120.140.16122123124125126127128129130131132133134135136137138139140141143144145146147148149150151152census tractpower density (w/cm2)simplemitrebsl x 100figure 92 average density estimate comparison.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsview, the expected counts were calculated using 10 age categories in lieu of 6 agecategories used by massachusetts cancer registry in its 1997 report. these additional age groups provided extra precision in the calculation of the expected cancerincidence count, addressing the concern of confounding by age. since smoking has been identified as a risk factor of multiple cancers, it is important to findout if differences in smoking behavior exists between the population in uppercape cod and in the state of massachusetts. results from massachusetts behavioral risk factor surveillance system (brfss) for the period 1999 to 2001 estimated similar proportions of current smokers with 19% and 20% in upper capecod and the state of massachusetts, respectively. the small sample size in thisstudy (304 in upper cape cod) provides little statistical power to demonstrate anydifference in the estimates. in the health risks and preventive behaviors reportthat combined brffs results from 1994 to 1999, the estimate of current smokersin the cape and islands was 18.3% (95% ci 14.8%21.7%) compared to 21.2%(95% ci 20.4%21.9%) in massachusetts. this difference is not statistically significant. the last concern is the difference in ses between the population inupper cape cod and in the state of massachusetts that may change the expectednumber of cancer incidences. for example, if one type of cancer has a higherdetection rate in a population with high socioeconomic status due to better access to health care and one supposes that a wealthy population lives in uppercape cod, then one should expect to see more cancer diagnosed in upper capecod. failing to adjust for this higher than expected number of cancer incidenceswill overestimate the sir. to assess the potential confounding due to ses disparity, we examined the percentage of population older than 18 years living below the line of poverty from the 1990 census data.upper cape cod has 6.5% of its population living below the poverty linecompared to 8.3% in massachusetts (see figure 93). this difference required the0%5%10%15%20%25%30%122123124125126127128129130131132133134135136137138139140141143144145146147148149150151152census tract% below poverty(massachusetts)figure 93 percent population (18 years +) living below line of poverty 1990.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population167adjustment of the cancer sir by socioeconomic status in addition to the standardadjustment by age and gender.model 1 describes the indirect adjustment made to obtain sir further adjusted by socioeconomic status. one important data requirement is the knowledge of the cancer incidence rate for a particular age, gender, and poverty groupin massachusetts. however, limited sesrelated information is collected by themassachusetts cancer registry.because of data unavailability for indirect ses adjustment on cancerincidence ratios, we explored the potential association of ses and cancer sir usingdata from the òupper cape cod cancer incidence review, 19861994ó and sesdata from the census bureau. since 62% of all cancer incidences in upper capecod during that period were one of the four major cancer types (colorectal, breast,lung, prostate cancer), we used the sir of these four major cancer types as response variable, and the percentage of population older than 18 living below thepoverty line as a measure of socioeconomic status. these data were fitted usinga loglinear model (model 2) taking into account unobserved explanatory variables that are assumed to be spatially correlated (mdph 2002). the parameter in this model represents the association between sir and ses, namely how sirvaries with respect to changes in ses. this association will be presented as permodel 1siroeensesadjustedccccijkckji/*whererrijkcceccnijkcicrijkcimodel 2ii iilog i i0*sesi i0 i an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168assessment of potential health effects from pave pawscent change in relative risk of cancer incidence for each percent increase in population above age 18 living below the line of poverty.all models were implemented in winbugs 1.4 statistical programming language. we employed a standard procedure reporting small coefficient estimates and 1 as a percent change in relative risk per unit change in ses and exposure,respectively. besides colorectal cancer, our analyses of cancer incidence on upper cape cod demonstrated little association between socioeconomic factors andthe standardized incidence ratio of three major cancer types (see table 98).in the case of colorectal cancer, data showed 2.5% increase in relative risk(95% ci: 0.54.6%) per 1% additional population living below poverty. this suggested that colorectal cancer sir could be understated for higherincome censustracts with higherincome levels.furthermore, if these higherincome census tracts had higher exposure, thenwe might underestimate the association between exposure and sir. plotting sesby exposure (figure 94) revealed no strong relationship between these two variables; hence, results from our geographic correlation study should not be sensitive to the ses adjustment.table 98 association between socioeconomic status and cancer incidenceratio% change in relative riskper 1% increase incancer typespopulation below poverty95% c.i.colorectal cancer2.480.54  4.57breast cancerð1.04ð2.72  0.59prostate cancerð0.90ð3.79  1.90lung cancer1.49ð0.78  3.530.00.10.10.2richerépoorercensus tract ranked by sespower density (w/cm2)figure 94census tract mitre averagedensity exposure by ses ranking,an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population169geographic correlation studyto measure the association between the estimated pave paws powerdensity exposure (average and peak) and cancer incidence at censustract level, wefitted a loglinear model taking into account spatial correlation for unobservedvariables. in addition, we controlled for ses by introducing the percentage ofpopulation over 18 years of age living below the poverty level in our model(model 3). for each of the four major cancer types, the cancer incidence datarevealed little evidence of association with our estimated exposure and we determined that controlling for ses did not lead to qualitative changes in the relativerate estimates (figure 95).ˇ0˘40˘ˆ0˘0˘ˆ0˘40˘˙˙˝˙p˙˛˙˙˙˝˙p˙˛˙w/cmˆ w˚o˚ sesfigure 95 association between mitre average powerdensity exposure and cancerincidence with/without controlling for ses. ccñcolorectal cancer, bcñbreast cancer,pcñprostate cancer, lcñlung cancer.model 3ii iilog i i01* i *sesi i0 1 pave pawsi an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsbased on model 3, we found no statistically significant association betweenmitre average powerdensity exposure estimates and any of the four major cancer types (figure 96). we also conducted a sensitivity analysis by fitting thesame model using bsl average powerdensity exposure estimates (figure 97)and mitre peak powerdensity exposure estimates (figure 98). we found thatour result was not sensitive to the choice of exposure estimates.due to the large powerdensity estimates at census tracts 1336 and 138,results in figures 96 to 98 might be highly influenced by these few censustracts. we, therefore, refitted the statistical model by using bsl average powerdensity expressed in decibels with respect to microwatts per centimeter square(dbw/cm2) where exposure in dbw/cm2 = 10*log10 exposure in w/cm2. similar to the spatial correlation analysis conducted in the w/cm2 scale, after controlling for ses, the associations between exposure and cancer incidence werenot statistically significant for all four major cancers (figure 99).80%60%40%20%0%20%40%cc mcc fccbcpclc mlc flc% change in rr per 0.1w/cm2 increse in average densityfigure 96 association between mitre average density exposure and cancer incidence.ccñcolorectal cancer, bcñbreast cancer, pcñprostate cancer, lcñlung cancer. m =male, f = female.80%60%40%20%0%20%40%cc mcc fccbcpclc mlc flc% change in rr per 0.001w/cm2 increse in average densityfigure 97 association between bsl average density exposure and cancer incidence.ccñ colorectal cancer, bcñbreast cancer, pcñprostate cancer, lcñlung cancer. m =male, f = female.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population17180%60%40%20%0%20%40%cc mcc fccbcpclc mlc flc% change in rr per 1mmw/cm2 increse in peak densityfigure 98association between mitre peakdensity exposure and cancer incidence.ccñcolorectal cancer, bcñbreast cancer, pcñprostate cancer, lcñlung cancer. m =male, f = female.80%60%40%20%0%20%40%cc mcc fccbcpclc mlc flc% change in rr per 1mw/cm2 increse in peak densityfigure 99 association between bsl average density exposure (decibel) and cancerincidence. ccñcolorectal cancer, bcñbreast cancer, pcñprostate cancer, lcñlungcancer. m = male, f = female.geographic correlation study summaryto combine evidence of all 24cancer types, we fit a hierarchical model asspecified in model 4. neither of the two exposure estimates showed statisticallysignificant association with cancer incidence between 1986 and 1994. for peakdensity exposure, we estimated a 6.5% decrease in relative risk (95% ci: ð14.2 1.2%) per 1 w/cm2 increase in the level of peak exposure. in addition, we estimated a 6.6% decrease in relative risk (95% ci: ð11.8  0.1%) per 0.1 w/cm2increase in averagedensity exposure.findings of the national research council committeeõs geographical correlation study by census tract of exposure to pave paws radar and cancer incidence should be interpreted with caution. first, because of the lack of sufficienthealthrelated statistics and confounders at a geographical resolution smaller thana census tract, our results could be affected by ecological and confounding bias.in addition, as in most environmental riskassessment studies, our censustractan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsexposure estimates could be affected by exposuremeasurement error. in fact,censustract exposure estimates are residential and might not represent the actualpersonal exposures. epidemiological studies that use healthrelated statistics(mortality, morbidity, and pregnancy outcomes) and potential confounders (smoking, pollution, ses) at a smaller level of spatial aggregation (i.e., censusblockgroup) and that take into account daily activity patterns in the exposure assessment would provide a more precise and comprehensive assessment of the potential health effects associated with an exposure to the pave paws radar.summary1. evaluation of previously reported data demonstrates that:¥in general, there is an absence or lack of sufficient healthrelated statistics available for cape cod residents to allow for a detailed descriptive analysiswithin smaller and more specific subdivisions such as counties, towns, censustract, and census block. populationbased data are available only for outcomesrelating to cancer, birth defects, birth weight, and premature mortality, althoughthe size of the population within geopolitical areas of interest does not alwaysallow for a sufficient number of outcomes to allow adequate evaluation.¥the observed elevated cancerincidence rates among residents of capecod have not been adequately explained through subsequent investigations.¥while previous casecontrol and ecologic correlation studies have notprovided compelling evidence for elevated cancer risk associated with exposureto the pave paws radar, it cannot be concluded from these studies thatthe pave paws radar is not associated with cancer risk. the previous studieshave limitations relating to cancerspecific sample size and detailed exposureassessment.¥because of the limited population of upper cape cod, it will not bemodel 4oµµikikikikpcrccereiloglog*µexposureikkk01iiikkokbnn001111pavean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population173possible to conduct cancerspecific research studies with statistical power to ruleout small or moderate levels of increased risk related to exposure to the pavepaws radar beam.¥the international epidemiology institute has proposed a study at thecounty level using counties west of pave paws (out of pave paws operating angle) as a control. this study proposes to evaluate health outcomes beforeand after the startup of the pave paws radar, which should strengthen anyassociation, or lack thereof, of health effect with the pave paws radar.2.geographical correlation by census tract of exposure to pave pawsradar and cancer incidence (analysis conducted by this nrc committee):¥using available information on population density, topography, and direction of the pave paws radar beam it is estimated that about 16,400 people incape cod reside in the sidelobes of the main pave paws beam.¥analysis of the occurrence of specific cancers, including colorectal,breast (female), prostate, and lung, did not identify any significant associationwith estimated peak or average powerdensity exposure to the pave pawsbeam.¥statistical adjustment for socioeconomic status, utilizing the percent ofpopulation below the poverty level, had little impact on the observed correlations.the lack of censustract level information on confounding factors such as smoking and diet remains a limitation of our geographical correlation study. however,for a confounding factor to have significant effect on the results, it needs to bestrongly related to the cancer incidence and inversely correlated with exposureestimates.referencesaschengrau, a., c. paulu, and d. ozonoff. 1998. tetrachloroethylenecontaminated drinking waterand the risk of breast cancer. environ health persp 106 (suppl 4):947953.aschengrau, a., s. rogers, and d. ozonoff. 2003. perchloroethylenecontaminated drinking waterand the risk of breast cancer: additional results from cape cod, massachusetts. environ healthpersp 111:16773.bsl (broadcast signal lab). 2004. draft final test report on a survey of radio frequency energyfield emissions from the cape cod air force station pavepaws radar facility, broadcastsignal lab, medfield, ma.cccr (cape cod commission reporter). april 17, 2003. vol 13, no 4.colditz, g. 1998. relationship between estrogen levels, use of hormone replacement therapy, andbreast cancer. j natl cancer i 90:814823.coogan, p.f. and a. aschengrau. 1998. exposure to power frequency magnetic fields and risk ofbreast cancer in the upper cape cod cancer incidence study. arch environ health 53:359367.coogan, p.f. and a. aschengrau. 1999. occupational physical activity and breast cancer risk in theupper cape cod cancer incidence study. am j ind med 36(2):279285.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174assessment of potential health effects from pave pawseyles, j. and s. birch. 1993. a population needsbased approach to health care resource allocationand planning in ontario: a link between policy goals and practice. c j public health 84:112117.mckelvey, w., j.g. brody, a. aschengrau, and c.h. swartz. 2004. association between residenceon cape cod, massachusetts, and breast cancer. ann epidemiol 14(2):8994.mdph (massachusetts department of public health). 1999. upper cape cod cancer incidence review, 19861994 final report appendices. bureau of environmental health assessment environmental epidemiology unit. boston: boston university school of public health.mdph. 2001. massachusetts birth defects, 1999. bureau of family and community health, bureauof health statistics research and evaluation. boston: boston university school of public health.mdph. 2002. technical advisorsõ 3rd report (20002001). research on health and environmentalexposure massachusetts military reservation, louise ryan, joel schwarz, robert goble, anddale hattis. boston: harvard school of public health.mdph. 2003. cancer incidence and mortality in massachusetts 19962000: statewide report. boston:massachusetts department of public health.mitre. 2000. mitre technical report rf power density exposure at ground level for the pavepaws radar at cape codñquestions and answers. mitre corporation, bedford, ma.rothman, k.j. and s. greenland. 1998. modern epidemiology. philadelphia: lippincott williamsand wilkins.us census bureau. census 2000. http://www.census.gov/main/www/cen2000.html (november 2004).willett, w.c., b. rockhill, s.e. hankinson, d.j. hunter, and g.a. colditz. 2000. epidemiology andnongenetic causes of breast cancer. pp. 175220 in diseases of the breast, second edition. j.r.harris, m.e. lippman, m. morrow, and c.k. osborne, eds. philadelphia: lippincott williams& wilkins.annex 91: data sources¥cancer incidence data from 1986 to 1994 for 24 cancer types in 30 census tracts in upper cape cod (upper cape cod cancer incidence review 19861994[3])¥peak and average pave paws power density from mitre (map4&7)¥average pave paws power density from broadcast signal labñpave paws average exposure.rmx [map 8]¥digital elevation model (dem) downloaded from the geocomm international corporation (http://gisdatadepot.com/dem [map2 & map 3])¥total population in 1990 and 2000 by gender and by age at block grouplevelñcensus bureau (web table qtp1a & p12) [map 5 & table 1]¥total population in 2000 by census block in the form of gis datalayerfrom massachusetts geographic information system (http://www.state.ma.us/mgis/cen2000blocks.htm [map 9])¥poverty status in 1989 by gender and by ageñcensus bureau (web tablep118) [figure 2 & figure 3]an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.health considerations in the cape cod population175annex 92: geobugs code# rr'i( s!r'i( 100*mu'i(/e'i( ) 1 )an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.17610summary ofconclusions and recommendationsradar characteristicsboth phasedarray antennas and reflector antennas have time delays at wideangles. arrays and dishes of comparable size have comparable delays. pavepaws is a narrowband system (5 mhz) with significant filtering for interference reduction. this results in waveform rise and decay times that are severaltimes the maximum delay time of 60 nsec. effects of delay time were not observed in the extensive phase iv measurements.the large number of pave paws active elements (1792), and their irregular spacing, make the discretebeam formation almost indistinguishable from acontinuous formation. there is no evidence to indicate that phasedarray radareffects are different from those of dish radars; the phase ivmeasured waveformsaffirm this.precursors are portions of the signal waveform that can travel faster or slowerthan the main part of the signal. those precursors may occur in dispersive mediafor signals with large bandwidths. they have been calculated and measured, butonly for wideband signals, typically, 10,000 mhz bandwidth, in dispersive media. they may decay slowly, but only after significant attenuation in the cellularmedia. with respect to narrowband pave paws radar exposure, any precursors introduced into the human body would likely be below the noise level, andare unlikely to be of consequence. precursor formation is directly related to bandwidth (rise time) in nsec, and dispersion, but not to slope (v/m/nsec).extremelylowfrequency (elf) electric fields have been shown to producebiological effects at lowfield intensities. because pave paws is modulated atelf frequencies, it is theoretically possible that exposure to pave paws radaran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary of conclusions and recommendations177could result in inducing very low levels of elf fields in the body. to determinethe possible levels of elf energy induced by pave paws radar exposure, afourier analysis could be made of a representative searchpulse pattern, includingthe dead (maintenance) interval. this information, in combination with measurements of the nonlinearities in human tissue impedance at the carrier frequency,would allow an estimation of the extent to which the sideband energy is converted to elf energy in an exposed body and this in turn could be evaluated forpossible biological effects if the elfexposure levels are large enough to correspond to observed effects at elf frequencies. it should be noted that many radarsemploy diagnostic intervals in their waveforms that result in a small elf modulation.exposure levelspowerdensity measurements recorded by different groups at different timeswithin the communities surrounding the cape cod pave paws radar are generally consistent with each other and with modeled results. they show distributionpatterns that are strongly influenced by sitespecific local topography and intervening terrain at any given location. the available data and models of the pavepaws powerdensity emissions adequately characterize the spatial distributionof the exposures occurring throughout the communities of cape cod. the modeled power densities tend to be higher than measured powerdensities, perhapsdue to conservative assumptions made in the modeling effort.biologyno biological studies have been identified that used rf exposures identicalto the pave paws system. however, a variety of biological studies have beenundertaken based on shortterm (hours), mediumterm (weeks to months), andlongterm (years) rf exposures in the frequency range of pave paws.short exposure timesmany shortexposuretime studies (hours to days) have addressed the possibility of dna damage and other cellular responses following exposure to rf.dna damage is a normal occurrence in living cells, with estimates that mammalian cells encounter thousands of dna strand breaks/cell/day, most of which arerepaired without adverse effects. in numerous shortterm exposure studies, noreproducible effects on dna damage have been observed, as measured by a number of different methods (micronucleus formation, dna strandbreak analysis,apoptosis, and others). while some studies have shown significant effects ongene expression due to modulated rf exposure of cells in culture, these do notinclude endpoints traditionally associated with carcinogenesis.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsintermediate exposure timesin studies involving exposure times on the order of weeks to months at levelsof 900/1900 mhz, and in one case, 60 hz, there are reports of statistically significant changes in development and differentiation of tissues and organisms. in particular, studies of exposures of chick embryos have shown a delay in development and reduced fertilization. a decreased developmental stability was alsoobserved following exposure of fruit fly eggs. the implications of this observation for human embryonic development are unknown at this time.perhaps of greatest interest are the studies undertaken at 435 mhz (similar tothe central frequency of the pave paws system), which demonstrated a substantial and significant reduction in dopamine levels in exposed animals.long exposure timeslongterm exposure studies (multiple years) are principally twoyear bioassay experiments or carcinogenesis studies in animals and studies of changes inplant growth. a wide range of carcinogenesis studies have been conducted inanimals exposed to rf fields. such studies can generally be described as thosewith field intensities high enough to cause an increase in temperature in tissue(thermal) and those with field intensities below that level (athermal; comparableto the pave paws signal). review of the lowerintensity animal studies identified some potential influences of exposure, but no reproducible indications ofincreased cancer risk with exposure have been shown.tree growth studies have been undertaken with radar exposures similar tothose of pave paws at an earlywarning radar installation in latvia. thosestudies showed a dose and distancedependent decrease in treering width. plantgrowthresponse effects have been confirmed by changes in cellwall synthesisactivity after rf exposure.theoretical mechanismsat the present time there has been no physical mechanism shown to connectelectromagnetic fields at the exposure levels associated with the pave pawsradar to changes in chemical reactions that would lead to biological effects.biology recommendationsgiven the observation of longterm rfexposure effects in plants and theseveral (though unreproduced) reports of effects in intermediateduration exposures, the committee concludes certain additional studies on the biological effectsof pave pawsspecific rf exposures are warranted. in particular, studies usinglargescale genomic screening for gene and protein expression at the cellular levelan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary of conclusions and recommendations179and studies of plant growth in the area around the pave paws facility wouldimprove our understanding of possible biological effects of longterm exposuresto this radar.while biological responses do not necessarily translate into health effects, itis important to followup on known biological effects to determine if they relateto an identifiable health effect. the committee concludes that there is a need forthree types of studies:1.studies are recommended that include largescale genomic andproteomic screening to identify gene and proteinexpression patterns in cell andanimal studies after exposure to simulated pave paws radiation, both at levelsapproximating peakexposure levels of the cape cod population and at higherpower levels to identify potential threshold power densities for biological effects.the committee recognizes that the limitation of these studies is that they mayhave limited applicability to the human situation. however, the strength of thesestudies is that they will provide information covering a wide range of cellularactivity in a limited number of experiments and the information gained may beuseful in generating theoretical mechanismrelated hypotheses of the possibleeffects of pave paws exposures.2.studies to further investigate the potential influence of pave pawsexposure on neurotransmitter (e.g., dopamine) concentrations in the central nervous system are also recommended. the observation of a robust depression indopamine levels (~50%) with an onset concurrent with the start of exposure, andlasting for the duration of the exposure, could prove to be of great importance ifthis effect can be replicated. dopamine is closely involved in motor control (e.g.,depressed levels of dopamine are believed to be causal in the etiology ofparkinsons disease) and so there could be a direct link between these observations and health effects. it is recommended that these studies be undertaken utilizing modulation frequencies more representative of the pave paws systemrather than the 1 khz utilized by toler and others, as these lower modulationfrequencies are closer to dominant brainwave frequencies.3.studies of tree growth in the vicinity of the pave paws facility arealso recommended. evaluation of treering width, comparing rings from treesbefore and after the facility became operational with similar trees in areas thatprovide similar growth conditions outside the beam, should be possible with minimal or no impact on the environment. while these studies have the limitation ofnot being directly applicable to human health, they have the specific strength ofinvolving longterm exposures (years). in addition, if the findings replicate thelatvian treegrowth results, it is anticipated that the information from these studies could lead to mechanismgenerating hypotheses.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsepidemiologymassachusetts department of public health statistics for upper cape codusing the upper cape cod cancer incidence review of 19861994 from themassachusetts department of public health, statistically significant increases inthe standardized incidence ratio (sir) are seen for the following cancers:colorectal (sir 112), breast (sir 110), prostate (sir 130), and lung (sir 112)(table 92 in chapter 9).as an overall measure of health for the upper cape cod towns, prematuremortality before age 75 is a useful indicator. based on 2001 data, barnstable,falmouth, mashpee, and sandwich have lower mortality than the massachusettsstate average, while bourne has elevated mortality. the observed elevated cancerincidence rates among residents of upper cape cod have not been adequatelyexplained through subsequent investigations. a comparison of the calculated sir for 5 categories consisting of total cancers, breast, colon, lung, and prostate cancer during 19871994 versus 19951999for 5 towns in upper cape cod (see table 92) demonstrated no consistent patternof increase during the latter time period. during these two time periods, a decrease was observed in 15 out of 25 sirs, no change in 4 out of 25 sirs, and anincrease in 6 out of 25 sirs, thus indicating that increasing duration of exposureto the pave paws radar has not resulted in increased incidence of cancer.human epidemiology of pulsedrf exposuresstudies of the u.s. embassy in moscow, the radiation laboratory at mit,and of 40,000+ u.s. navy personal all showed no health effects ascribable to theexposure to radars. studies of the polish military and the populations near skrundain latvia can be considered as indicative of a possible need for followup studies.however, the difficulties in defining possible confounders reduces the weightgiven to these studies by the committee until they are supported by other epidemiological studies.committee analysis of pave paws and cancer incidencepeak and average powerdensity measurements obtained by use of (1) digitalelevation maps, which take into account the height and operating angle of theradar, (2) mitre data, and (3) the bsl report, all provided similar estimates ofthe exposure to the pave paws beam at each census tract within upper capecod (see figure 101 below) with the exception that the modeled estimates areconsistently higher than the measured power densities.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary of conclusions and recommendations181the analysis conducted by the nrc committee, based on 2000 data (table 97 in chapter 9), and using available information on population density, topography, and direction of the pave paws radar beam, estimated that the proportionof the population of upper cape cod residing (primary residence) in areas thatresult in direct exposure to the pave paws beam was 11.8% in 1990 and 12.4%in 2000.the analysis conducted by the nrc committee of the occurrence of all cancers combined, as well as specific cancers, including colorectal, breast (female),prostate, and lung, did not identify any increase in cancer risk with estimatedpeak or average powerdensity exposure to the pave paws beam. statisticaladjustment for socioeconomic status, utilizing the percent of population belowthe poverty level, had little impact on the observed correlations (figures 97 to 911 in chapter 9).epidemiology recommendationsthe size of the population on upper cape cod is sufficient (with 10 years ofobservation) to design and conduct research, either prospective or retrospective,that could address increases in risk levels between 40% and 100% for some of themore common cancer outcomes (i.e., colorectal, lung, breast, prostate, bladder,and nonhodgkin lymphoma; see table 96 in chapter 9).because of the limitations of exposure estimates, confounders, and range ofhealth outcomes it is recommended that future investigations integrate (1) exposure assessment and health at the censusblock level; (2) personal exposure char80706050403020100122124126128130132134136138140143145147149151census tractdbw/cm2bsl avg densitymitre avg densityfigure 101comparison of the two sets of census tract specific average powerdensityestimates. census tracts 123 and 124 have zero exposure estimates based on mitre dataand are omitted.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182assessment of potential health effects from pave pawsacteristics other than just residential location; (3) extensive consideration of potential confounders; and (4) health outcomes other than cancer. in addition, it isrecommended that geographicalcorrelation studies should be carried out for agespecific strata (e.g., under 30 or 45).an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.183division on earth and life studiesboard on radiation effects researchnovember 15, 2002lt. col. richard ashworth, chiefbioenvironmental engineeringoffice of the command surgeonheadquarters air force space command150 vandenberg street, suite 1105peterson afb, co 809144550dear col. ashworth,the national research council has been asked to update its 1979 report onthe analysis of exposures to and potential biologic effects of the pave pawsradar system. this update will be completed at a later date after an extensivereview of available data. the committee is to first determine whether availableresearch data on continuous and pulsed radiofrequency (rf) energy are adequatefor determining the biologic and potential health effects of the pave pawsphasedarray system (see appendix, lines 1ð3 of statement of task). the airforce has asked that this determination be communicated as a letter report. thecommitteeõs initial assessment is that the data on continuous and pulsed rf energy are not adequate for determining the biologic and potential health effects ofthe pave paws phasedarray system at this time. this conclusion is based ontwo observations.first, issues related to the rise and fall portions of the pave paws waveform have been raised, but cannot be addressed, because we have available onlyappendix ainterim letter reportnational academy of sciences national academy of engineeringinstitute of medicine national research council advisers to the nation on science, engineering, and medicinean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184appendix apreliminary, but inadequate, measurements of the pave paws waveform. thesemeasurements are important to characterize transient aspects of pave pawsradiation and to answer a question raised by others about the comparability of thepave paws phasedarray radiation with radiation emitted by nonphased arraysystems. hopefully, the significance of the pave paws wave shape will beclarified by the phase iv measurement data .second, although more than 2 decades of exposure to pave paws phasedarray radiation has been experienced by the cape cod population which shouldallow a direct evaluation of any adverse health effects, there are currently inadequate data about the distribution of population exposures in the cape cod region. adequate exposure data would be necessary to carry out this direct evaluation of the effects of the pave paws waveform. the 1978 and 1986 pavepaws powerdensity measurements are limited to 37 locations in proximity tothe pave paws site. apparently these measurements were not designed to covera wide range of census tracts for epidemiologic purposes. use of epidemiologicmethods is considered by this committee to be important to the determination ofpossible health effects of the pave paws radar. accordingly, adequate powerdensity measurements that discriminate the pave paws emissions and thatcover relevant census tracts are deemed necessary to facilitate the determinationof possible health effects. it is our understanding that powerdensity measurements will be commissioned by the pave paws steering group for use in theirepidemiology effort and that this information may be available to our committeeas well. the committee considers access to these data to be important to items 2and 3 of the committeeõs statement of task (see appendix, items 2 and 3 of thestatement of task). after the phase iv data are evaluated and during thecommitteeõs update of the 1979 national research council report, the committeewill reevaluate the adequacy of the existing rf energy literature for determiningthe potential biologic and health effects of the pave paws phasedarray system. the committee further expects that the phase iv measurement data, additional power density measurements, and computed exposure estimates that include a propagation model will be extremely useful in its attempts to evaluate thepotential health effects of the pave paws radar on the cape cod population.the committee recognizes that much research has been conducted over the past23 years that may provide insight into the possible biologic and health effects ofpave paws radiation, and the committee will be reviewing the cellular, animal, and epidemiologic rf exposure and health effect data in detail. to this endthe committee has constructed a set of potentially relevant rf field characteristics that will be used as guidelines in the identification of experiments in theliterature that could be relevant to the update of the 1979 research council report(see table).the ranges described are to indicate the focus of the committeeõs review,though the committee may determine that certain data obtained under other exposure conditions are relevant to its task. it is beyond the scope of this letter reportan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a185to list all possible sources of data that fall within the committeeõs proposed criteria to be reviewed. the committee is using a database with more than 37,000references in addition to the information that various members have acquired inworking in the field of bioelectromagnetics for many years. it should be furthernoted that the extensive literature on powerfrequency fields is not consideredrelevant to the evaluation of pave paws health effects in our study because thephysical mechanisms of interaction between powerfrequency fields and tissue,characterization of the pave paws waveform and identification ofwaveform characteristics suitable for the evaluation of biologic and potentialhealth effects of pave paws radarrelevant range ofdata to beconsidered bycharacteristicpave pawsthe committeecommentsfrequency420450 mhz10 mhz2 ghzathere are common mechanismsof interaction in the 10 mhz2ghz frequency rangeincident average<280 w/cm2b<1 mw/cm2specific absorption ratepower densityor sar <1 mw/gincreases for a given incident(<1 w/kg)power with increasing frequencymodulationpulsepulse (cdma,to include all existing rftdma, iden,pulsemodulation technologiesgsm, etc.)pulse width0.2516 ms0.001100 mspulse repetition rate0.0220 hz0.01 hz10 khzpulse rise time>20 ns10 ns < r < 10 sr should be less than the(r)charge relaxation time (/ forbiologic tissue, where is thedielectric permittivity of tissue,and the conductivity. maxestimated relaxation time is10 ms.exposure durationcontinuouscontinuous1 hr/dayaupper limit is intended to include cellphonefrequency research (which goes as high as 1.9 ghz).the 2.45 ghz research in the literature is continuous rf energy and would be excluded by the modulation criteria (pulsed exceptions will be considered).bthe mitre report on pave paws (2000) indicates that at the perimeter fence line the energylevel does not exceed the ieee thirtyminute average limit for human exposure. the ieee limit is 280microwatts per square centimeter.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186appendix aon the one hand, and rf energy and tissue at low field strengths, on the other, areexpected to be different. furthermore, studies of powerfrequency fields tend toconcentrate on the effects of magnetic fields whereas studies on the effects of rfenergy focus on powerdensity measurements or sarõs. in addition, the committee proposes to focus on pulsed modulated fields rather than continuous wavefields. continuous wave rf exposure experiments do not involve the same broadspectrum of energy and also utilize far lower peak exposure levels to attain thesame average exposure levels. as a result, inclusion of continuous wave studiesin the literature review may unfairly bias the observed results against any potential effects of exposure.references citedmitre. 2000. kramer, a.g., b.p. nelson, and r.e. wakefield. rf power density exposure atground level for the pave paws radar at cape cod  questions and answers. bedford, ma.nrc (national research council). 2002. letter report to the department of the air force from thecommittee to assess potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevelphasedarray radiofrequency energy: recommendations for phase iv measurements. washington, d.c.: national academy press http://www.nap.edu/books/ni000468/html/sincerely,frank barnes, ph.d.chairmancommittee to assess potential health effects from exposures topave paws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energyan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a187committee to assess potential health effects fromexposures to pave paws lowlevel phased arrayradiofrequency energyfrank e. barnes (chair), university of colorado at boulder, boulder, corobert c. hansen (vice chair), r. c. hansen, inc., tarzana, calarry e. anderson, battelle pacific northwest national laboratories,richland, wagraham a. colditz, harvard medical school, boston, mafrancesca dominici, johns hopkins university, baltimore, mdkenneth j. mcleod, state university of new york, binghamton, nykeith d. paulsen, dartmouth college, hanover, nhleslie l. robison, university of minnesota cancer center, minneapolis,mnsusan l. santos, university of medicine and dentistry of new jersey andeast orange, war related illness and injurystudy center, medford, majan a. j. stolwijk, professor emeritus, yale university, new haven, ctgayle e. woloschak, northwestern university, chicago, ilnational research council staffevan douple, study directorrick jostes, study directortajuana clayton, project assistantdoris e. taylor, staff assistantsponsorõs project officerlt. col. richard ashworth, u.s. air forcean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188appendix aappendixan assessment of potential health effects from exposures to pavepaws lowlevel phasedarray radiofrequency energystatement of taskthe committee will first determine whether continuous and pulsedradiofrequency (rf) energy research data are adequate for determining the biological and potential health effects of the pave paws phasedarray system.this determination will be communicated to the sponsor as a letter report. if theresearch data from continuous and pulsed rf energies are considered to be applicable for the determination of possible health effects of phasedarray rf energy,the committee will use this information to update the 1979 national researchcouncil analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologic effects of the pavepaws radar system. if the data are not applicable, the committee will use otherinformation that it determines to be relevant to phased array health effects toupdate the 1979 report. in this update the committee will evaluate potential biological and health effects, evaluate exposures of the public to electromagneticenergy from the pave paws system, and make recommendations for the needfor, and focus of, additional scientific studies to address continued scientific uncertainty related to health outcomes and exposure to lowlevel radiofrequencyenergy emitted by the pave paws radar system. at the completion of its work,the committee will provide an update of the 1979 research council report thatincludes a discussion of:1.the applicability of, and the level of uncertainty associated with, usingdata derived from cell, animal, and epidemiological studies employing continuouswave exposure for evaluation of potential adverse health effects followingphasedarray exposures;2.the extent of the exposure of the public to electromagnetic energy fromthe pave paws system;3.potential biological and health effects of the pave paws radar system, and4.recommendations for appropriate followon study design issues, including the strengths and limitations of the approaches suggested and the potentialvalue of the proposed work.referencenrc (national research council). 1979. analysis of the exposure levels and potential biologiceffects of the pave paws radar system. washington, dc: national academy press.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.189appendix bacronyms and abbreviationspolarizability; or lowest frequency dispersionafbair force baseafrlair force research laboratories (at brooks air force base,san antonio, texas)agniradvisory group on nonionizing radiationansiamerican national standards institutebmagnetic flux densitybdotsensor that measures the derivative of a magnetic fieldbbbbloodbrain barrierbpblood bressurebrfssmassachusetts behavioral risk factor surveillance systembslbroadcast signal laboratoriessecond frequency dispersioncacanadaca++calcium ioncccrcape cod commission reportercceccape cod environmental coalitioncdmacode division multiple access (cellular telephone technologyoriginally known as is95)ciconfidence intervalcnscentral nervous systemcoppscoalition for the operation of pave paws safelycrccrc press, boca raton, floridacwcontinuous wavean assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190appendix bdreflector diameter indtdfcossin)ddotsensor that measures the derivative of an electric fielddadaltondbdecibeldcdirect currentddtdichlorodiphenyltrichloroethanededdirected energy directorate (of the air force researchlaboratories at brooks air force base, san antonio, texas)demdigital elevation modeldmbadnadeoxyribonucleic aciddsbdoublestrand breaksdegreesfbandwidth (delta frequency)eelectric fieldeegelectroencephalogrameigbiloxi, mississippi)eisenvironmental impact statementelfextremely low frequencyemfelectromagnetic fieldepaenvironmental protection agencyffrequency; focal length indtdfcossin)frsprincipal frequency of the rise timefforce; frequency indtdfcossin)fdmafrequency division multiple access (cellular telephonetechnology)fmfrequency modulationftfeetthird frequency dispersiongaogeneral accounting officegygraycgy gray)gpsglobal positioning systemgsmhan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b191laboratories at brooks air force base, san antonio, texas)high performance liquid chromatographyheart ratehertz hertz) hertz)9 hertz) hertz)icnirpinternational commission on nonionizing radiationprotectionirinfraredieeeinstitute of electrical and electronic engineersiitriillinois institute of technology research institutekkg gram)wavelength indtdfcossin)mmetercmmeter)km meter)mamassachusettsmagmagnitudemisermassachusetts institute for social and economic researchmmrmassachusetts military reservationmpemaximum permissible exposuremsmississippinnanational academiesnasnational academy of sciencesncnot calculatedan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192appendix bncrpnational council on radiation protection and measurementsnrcnational research councilnrpbnational radiological protection boardnswcnaval surface weapons centerpave pawsfor phased array warning systempceperchloroethylenepiphysics internationalˇpercentazimuth angleqchargeˆratio of stored energy to dissipated energytechnique for sending data over coaxial cable or radio)rrfradiofrequencyrfemfradiofrequency electromagnetic fieldtype of coaxial cablernaribonucleic acidssarspecific absorption ratesecsecondmsec second)nsec9 second)psec second)sessocioeconomic statussirstandard incidence rates or standardized incidence ratiosmrstandard mortality rates or standardized mortality ratiosristanford research institute (type of dish antenna)ssbsinglestrand breaksssiswedish radiation protection institutetmt tesla)temtransverse electromagnetic (type of antenna)an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b193tpatrtransmitreceive modulestvtelevisionpolar anglerpulse rise timeultrahigh frequencyulraviolettype of ultraviolet lighttype of ultraviolet lightvvelocityvkv volt)veryhigh frequencywkw watts)watts per centimeter squared (power density) watts) per centimeter squared (power density)an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194committee biosketchesfrank s. barnes, ph.d. (chair), is distinguished professor in the department of electrical and computer engineering at the university of colorado atboulder. he received a ph.d. in electrical engineering from stanford university.his career has included research in a wide variety of applications in physics andelectrical engineering, focusing on fundamental research on the biological effectsof electromagnetic fields, surgical procedures, and telecommunications education. his research has included the effects of radio waves, fields from powerlines, and ultrasonic fields on biological systemsñtrying to understand themechanisms of interaction that might lead to identification of hazards, the settingof safety standards. dr. barnes is an aaas fellow, received the centennialaward and third millennium medal of the institute of electrical and electronicsengineers, and was elected to the national academy of engineering in 2001. hecurrently is an ex officio member of the u.s. national committee for the international union of radio science and a pastpresident of the bioelectromagneticssociety. in 2004 he was awarded the bernard m. gordon prize by the nationalacademy of engineering.robert c. hansen, ph.d. (vicechair), received his doctorate in electricalengineering from the university of illinois. since 1971, he has been a consultingengineer for electromagnetic antennas and systemsrelated problems and is recognized as an expert in nearfield phasedarray radar systems. in 1960, dr. hansenbecame a senior staff member in the telecommunications laboratory of stl(now trw), and was engaged in communication satellite telemetry, tracking,and command. from 1964 to 1966 he formed, and was director of, the test mission analysis office responsible for computer programs for the planning andan assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee biosketches195control of classified air force satellites. he is a fellow of ieee and iee, a registered professional engineer in california and england, and a member of theamerican physical society and sigma xi, the scientific research society, andtau beta pi, the engineering honor society. he was awarded an honorary doctor of engineering degree by the university of missourirolla in 1975 and waselected to the national academy of engineering in 1992. dr. hansen has writtenover 100 papers on electromagnetics and is the editor of several books, includingthe 3volume microwave scanning antennas, and author of phased array antennas. he received the ieee 2002 electromagnetics award.larry e. anderson, ph.d., received his ph.d. in biochemistry (neurochemistry) from the university of illinois. dr. anderson was program managerfor research efforts investigating the interactions between biological systems andnonionizing radiation at battelle, pacific northwest national laboratory and hasa faculty position at washington state university in biological science. he is aspecialist in neurochemistry whose research has included investigations on neurohormones and associated circadian biochemistry as well as the carcinogenecityof environmental physical agents principally powerfrequency fields, radiofrequency energy, and visible light. he is a pastpresident of the bioelectromagneticssociety and has served on a number of national and international committees onnonionizing radiation and health, including the national council on radiationprotection; international conference on high voltage systems; internationalagency for research on cancer working group on extremely low frequencyelectromagnetic fields; international union of radio science, commission k;international commission on nonionizing radiation protection; national institute of environmental health sciences, working group on biological effects ofstatic and elf electric and magnetic fields; and the world health organizationworking group on health protection, nonionizing radiation.graham a. colditz, m.d., dr.p.h., received his m.d. from the university of queensland, australia, and his dr.p.h. from harvard. he is currently aprofessor of medicine, harvard medical school, professor of epidemiology,harvard school of public health, and epidemiologist, brigham and womenõshospital. dr. colditz has a major interest in the etiology and prevention of cancerand is working with the massachusetts department of public health to translateresearch findings from ongoing cohort studies into public health strategies forprevention. he is the author or coauthor of 461 original reports and 85 reviews.one of his publications is among the top 5 mostcited breast cancer papers of the1990s.francesca dominci, ph.d., received her ph.d. in statistics from the university of padua, italy. she is currently an associate professor in the departmentof biostatistics, bloomberg school of public health, johns hopkins university.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196committee biosketchesdr. dominiciõs research has concentrated on timeseries analysis in environmental epidemiology, models for metaanalyses, and imputation techniques for incomplete data sets. dr. dominici is a member of the american statistical association and international biometric society. dr. dominici is the recipient of thewalter a. rosenblith new investigator award, the health institute, boston, ma,and the 2001 young investigator award of the statistics in epidemiology sectionof the american statistical association.kenneth j. mcleod, ph.d., obtained his doctorate in electrical engineering from the massachusetts institute of technology and did his postdoctoral workin cell biology at tufts university school of medicine. dr. mcleod is presentlyprofessor and chairman of the department of bioengineering at binghamtonuniversity. dr. mcleodõs primary research interests are directed toward understanding the mechanism of interaction of biophysical factors in the processes oftissue development, healing, and adaptation, including endogenous and exogenously induced electromagnetic fields. dr. mcleod is a pastpresident of thebioelectromagnetics society and the society for physical regulation in biologyand medicine. he received the kappa delta award for outstanding bioelectricalresearch in 1990 and the state university of new york award for excellence ininvention, creation, and discovery in 2004.keith d. paulsen, ph.d., obtained his doctorate in biomedical engineeringfrom dartmouth college and was an assistant professor in the department ofelectrical and computer engineering at the university of arizona from 1986 to1988. he is currently professor, thayer school of engineering, and director,radiobiology and bioengineering research program, norris cotton cancer center, dartmouth hitchcock medical center. he is a recognized expert in modelingand calculating the deposition of radiofrequency energies in various media and intissues. dr. paulsen received the morgan parker memorial fellowship for potential contribution in biomedical engineering. he has served on technical reviewgroups at the national cancer institute, the national science foundation, theu.s. army breast cancer research program, and the national institutes of health.he is currently a member of the radiation study section, national institutes ofhealth.leslie l. robison, ph.d., received his ph.d. in public health from theuniversity of minnesota. dr. robison is director, division of pediatric epidemiology/clinical research; associate director, university of minnesota comprehensive cancer center; and professor, department of pediatrics, school of medicine and division of epidemiology, school of public health. dr. robisonõsresearch has focused on the epidemiology of pediatric malignancies and longterm outcomes of pediatric cancer survivors. he is associate chair of thechildrenõs oncology group and principal investigator of the childhood canceran assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee biosketches197survivor study. he holds the childrenõs cancer research fund endowed chairin pediatric cancer, university of minnesota cancer center (1993ðpresent). dr.robison is an author of over 200 publications and has served on numerous boards,committees, and the nih epidemiology and disease control study section.susan l. santos, ph.d., m.s., has an m.s. in civil engineering and publichealth from tufts university and a ph.d. in law, policy, and society (concentration in risk communication) from northeastern university. dr. santos is currently assistant professor in the division of health education and behavioralsciences at the university of medicine and dentistry of new jerseyõs school ofpublic health. she is also director, risk communication, for the war relatedillness and injury study center in the east orange va medical center. she isowner and president of focus group risk communication and environmental management, a consulting firm, and is a senior faculty member at bostoncollege carroll school of management. in the past, she served as research program director at the columbia university center for risk communication, director of risk assessment services for abb environmental, and was an environmental engineer at the environmental protection agency (epa) where she wonthe epa bronze medal (1981) and the epa sustained superior performanceaward (1984). dr. santos is a member of the society for risk analysis, themassachusetts public health association, the american public health association (sections on environment and epidemiology), and the international association of public participation professionals.jan a.j. stolwijk, ph.d., is the susan d. bliss professor of epidemiologyand public health, emeritus, at the yale university school of medicine. he waschair of the department of epidemiology and public health from 1981 to 1989and from 1993 to 1994. dr. stolwijk has been a member of a number of nationalresearch council committees studying possible health effects of electromagneticfields including the committee to assess possible health effects of ground waveemergency network, the committee to assess possible health effects of exposure to residential electric and magnetic fields, and the committee to evaluateresearch on powerfrequency fields completed under the energy policy act of1992. he has also served as a member of the epa science advisory board andcommittees dealing with indoor air pollution and with particulate air pollution.an assessment of potential health effects from exposure to pave paws lowlevel phasedarray...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.