detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11252principles and practices for a federal statistical agency:third edition94 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309387859 | doi 10.17226/11252margaret e. martin, miron l. straf, and constance f. citro, editors; committeeon national statistics; division of behavioral and social sciences andeducation; national research councilprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on national statisticsmargaret e. martin, miron l. straf, and constance f. citro, editorsdivision of behavioral and social sciences and educationthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.eduprinciplesandpracticesfor afederal statistical agencythird editionprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, d.c. 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councilsof the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and theinstitute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report werechosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract/grant no. ses0112521 between the nationalacademy of sciences and the national science foundation, which provides fundingfrom a consortium of federal agencies. any opinions, findings, conclusions, orrecommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do notnecessarily reflect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support forthis project.international standard book number 0309095999 (book)international standard book number 0309548950 (pdf)additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 2101constitution avenue, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, d.c. 20055call (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area)this report is also available online at http://www.nap.edu.printed in the united states of americacopyright 2005 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.suggested citation: national research council (2005). principles and practices for afederal statistical agency, third edition. committee on national statistics. margaret e.martin, miron l. straf, and constance f. citro, editors. division of behavioral andsocial sciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. uponthe authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has amandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technicalmatters. dr. bruce m. alberts is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter ofthe national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers.it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing withthe national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programsaimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizesthe superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the nationalacademy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in theexamination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute actsunder the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressionalcharter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, toidentify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg ispresident of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciencesin 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has becomethe principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and thenational academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public,and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointlyby both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. bruce m. alberts and dr. wm. a.wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on national statistics20042005william f. eddy (chair), department of statistics, carnegie mellonuniversitykatharine abraham, joint program in survey methodology,university of marylandrobert bell, at&t research laboratories, florham park, njlawrence d. brown, department of statistics, wharton school,university of pennsylvaniarobert m. groves, survey research center, university ofmichigan, and joint program in survey methodology, ann arborjohn haltiwanger, department of economics, university ofmarylandpaul w. holland, educational testing service, princeton, njjoel l. horowitz, department of economics, northwesternuniversitydouglas massey, department of sociology, princeton universityvijayan nair, department of statistics and department of industrialand operations engineering, university of michigan, ann arbordaryl pregibon, google, inc., new york citykenneth prewitt, school of international and public affairs,columbia universitylouise ryan, department of biostatistics, harvard universitynora cate schaeffer, department of sociology, university ofwisconsinmadisonconstance f. citro, director, committee on national statisticsmargaret e. martin, consultantmiron l. straf, deputy director, division of behavioral and socialsciences and educationvprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsviithe committee on national statistics thanks the many people whocontributed their time and expertise to the preparation of this report. weare most appreciative of their cooperation and assistance.in expressing our gratitude to the staff, a special measure of recognition is due to margaret martin and miron straf, who were coeditors of theoriginal edition of this report. in preparing the second edition and thisthird edition, they were joined as editors by constance citro. earl pollackand christine covington chen assisted in preparing the third edition,which benefited from the editing of eugenia grohman. we also areindebted to many others who offered valuable comments and suggestions.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance withprocedures approved by the report review committee of the nationalresearch council (nrc). the purpose of this independent review is toprovide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution inmaking its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that thereport meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscriptremain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. wewish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report: joelgreenhouse, department of statistics, carnegie mellon university; jay e.hakes, directorõs office, jimmy carter library, atlanta, ga; danielprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.kasprzyk, surveys and information servicesdivision, mathematica policyresearch, inc., washington, dc; and janet norwood, consultant, chevychase, md.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusionsor recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the report before itsrelease. the review of this report was overseen by john c. bailar iii, department of health studies (emeritus), university of chicago. appointed bythe nrcõs report review committee, he was responsible for makingcertain that an independent examination of this report was carried out inaccordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments werecarefully considered. responsibility for the final content of this report restsentirely with the authoring committee and the institution.finally, we recognize the many federal agencies that support thecommittee on national statistics directly and through a grant from thenational science foundation. without their support and their commitment to improving the national statistical system, the committee work thatis the basis of this report would not have been possible.william f. eddy, chaircommittee on national statisticsviiiacknowledgmentsprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentspreface to the third editionxipreface to the second editionxiiipreface to the first editionxvpart i: principles and practices for a federal statistical agency1part ii: commentary13references49appendicesafundamental principles of official statistics of the united nationsstatistical commission59brelevant legislation and guidelines adopted since 200162cselected federal statistical world wide web sites, january 200567ixprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xipreface to the third editionthe committee on national statistics (cnstat) last revised its whitepaper on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency in 2001.first issued in 1992 on the committeeõs 20th anniversary, the white paperpresents and comments on three basic principles for statistical agencies tocarry out their mission effectively: relevance to policy issues, credibilityamong data users, and trust among data providers. the paper also discusses11 important practices, including a strong measure of independence, a commitment to quality and professional practice, and an active program ofmethodological and substantive research.the cnstat report has been widely cited and used by congress andfederal agencies. it has shaped legislation and executive actions to establishand evaluate statistical agencies, and agencies have used it to inform newlyappointed department officials, advisory committees, and others aboutwhat constitutes an effective and credible statistical organization.this third edition retains the outline and content of the second edition.the changes and additions reflect new circumstances, such as new forms ofthreats to data confidentiality and individual privacy. this third editionalso adds an appendix that documents legislation and regulations adoptedsince 2001 that importantly affect the operation of federal statisticalagencies.the principles and practices for a federal statistical agency articulatedhere remain guidelines, not prescriptions. we intend them to assistprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.statistical agencies and to inform policy makers, data users, and others aboutthe characteristics of statistical agencies that enable them to serve the publicgood.william f. eddy, chaircommittee on national statistics, 2005xiipreface to the third editionprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface to the second editionin 1992 the committee on national statistics (cnstat) issued awhite paper on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. thepaper responded to requests from congress and others for advice on whatconstitutes an effective statistical agency. it identified and commented onthree basic principles: relevance to policy issues, credibility among datausers, and trust among data providers. it also discussed 11 important practices, including a strong measure of independence and commitment to quality and professional practice (national research council, 1992).the cnstat report has been used by federal statistical agencies toinform department officials, advisory committees, and others. it has alsobeen used in a congressionally mandated study by the u.s. general accounting office (1995) to evaluate the performance of major statisticalagencies and in a review of the federal statistical system by a former commissioner of the bureau of labor statistics (norwood, 1995). its principlesinformed the establishment and later assessment of a new statistical agency,the bureau of transportation statistics (see national research council,1997b).eight years have passed since the white paper was first issued, and thecommittee decided that it would be useful to release a revised and updatedversion at this time. this second edition does not change the basic principles for federal statistical agencies, because the committee believes theseprinciples are and will continue to be important guides for effective practice. the second edition does revise and expand the discussion of some ofxiiiprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the practices that characterize an effective federal statistical agency and bringsthe discussion up to date with references to recent reports by the committeeand others.driving the revisions is our recognition of the need for statistical agencies to keep up to date and to meet the challenges for their missions that areposed by such technological, social, and economic changes as the widespread use of the internet for the dissemination and, increasingly, the collection of data, the heightened concern about safeguards for confidentialinformation, and the information requirements of a changing economy.new and revised text addresses the reasons for establishing a federal statistical agency, the necessity for and characteristics of independence of a federalstatistical agency, the need for continual development of more useful data,for example, by integrating data from multiple sources, practices for fairtreatment of data providers, the role of the internet in the release of data,and the need for effective coordination and cooperation among statisticalagencies to ensure that policy makers and citizens receive data that are accurate, relevant, and timely for their needs.we stress that the principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyarticulated here are guidelines, not prescriptions. we intend them to behelpful not only to the agencies, from whose experience we benefited inpreparing this revised edition, but also to inform others of the characteristics of effective statistical agencies that can serve policy makers in the executive and legislative branches, other data users, and the public well.john e. rolph, chaircommittee on national statistics, 2001xivpreface to the second editionprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface to the first editionfrom time to time the committee on national statistics (cnstat) isasked for advice on what constitutes an effective federal statistical agency.for example, congressional staff raised the question as they were formulating legislation for a bureau of environmental statistics, and the secretaryof the u.s. department of transportation asked cnstat for advice onestablishing a new bureau of transportation statistics, called for in theintermodal surface transportation efficiency act of 1991. the nationalresearch councilõs transportation research board had earlier turned tocnstat for information on common elements of the organization andresponsibilities of federal statistical agencies for its study on strategic transportation data needs. of interest in all of these requests are the fundamental characteristics that define a statistical agency and its operation.statistical agencies sometimes face situations that tax acceptable standards for professional behavior. examples occur when policy makers, regulators, or enforcement officials seek access to data on individual respondents from a statistics agency or when policy interpretations are added topress releases announcing statistical data. because the federal statistical system is highly decentralized, statistical agencies must operate under the policies and guidance of officials in many departments of government. not allof these officials are knowledgeable about what is generally accepted asproper for a federal statistical agency, and issues involving judgments aboutconflicting objectives also arise.in response to these situations, cnstat has prepared this òwhite paxvprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvipreface to the first editionperó on principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. this paperbrings together conclusions and recommendations made in many cnstatreports on specific agencies, programs, and topics, and it includes a discussion of what is meant by independence of a federal statistical agency and ofthe roles of research and analysis in a statistical agency. the commentarysection contains supplementary information to further explain or illustratethe principles and practices.in preparing this paper, cnstat and its staff solicited suggestionsfrom many involved with federal statistical agencies. a draft of the paperwas discussed by the heads of some federal statistical agencies at an openmeeting of cnstat, and a draft was also discussed at a meeting of thecouncil of professional associations on federal statistics. the committeeis grateful for the many suggestions and comments it received. when thereport is published, cnstat plans to seek an even wider discussion of it atmeetings of professional societies and to encourage reviews and commentaries. we hope that, in this way, the paper may evolve further and possiblyinfluence legislation, regulations, and standards affecting federal statisticalagencies.as we were completing our work on this report, the conference ofeuropean statisticians drafted a resolution on the fundamental principlesof official statistics in the region of the economic commission for europe(ece). although the two documents were done independently, there is alarge amount of agreement between them. we note particularly the emphasis the ece resolution places on the need for independence for officialstatistics agencies (united nations statistical commission and economiccommission for europe, 1991).1although focused on federal statistical agencies, many of the principlesand practices presented here also apply to statistical activities elsewhere,particularly to those in state and local government agencies and other statistical organizations. in addition, this paper and the ece resolution maybe useful to emerging democracies that seek to establish statistical organizations in their governments.the principles and practices articulated here are statements of best1the ece resolution was later adopted by the statistical commission of the unitednations (united nations statistical commission, 1994).principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface to the first editionxviipractice rather than legal or scientific rules. they are based on experiencerather than law or experiment. some of them may need to be changed aslaws change, society changes, or the practice of statistics changes. they arethus intended as guidelines, not prescriptions.burton h. singer, chaircommittee on national statistics, 1992principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1part i:principles and practicesfor a federal statistical agencydefinition of a federal statistical agencyestablishment of a federal statistical agencyprinciples for a federal statistical agency¥relevance to policy issues¥credibility among data users¥trust among data providerspractices for a federal statistical agency¥a clearly defined and wellaccepted mission¥a strong position of independence¥continual development of more useful data¥openness about sources and limitations of the data provided¥wide dissemination of data¥cooperation with data users¥fair treatment of data providers¥commitment to quality and professional standards of practice¥an active research program¥professional advancement of staff¥coordination and cooperation with other statistical agenciesnote: part i is a summary statement of principles and practices foran effective statistical agency. part ii, commentary, further explains,defines, and illustrates the topics in part i.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2principles and practices for a federal statistical agencydefinition of a federal statistical agencya federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal governmentwhose principal function is the compilation and analysis of dataand the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.the theory and methods of the discipline of statistics and related fieldsand the practice of the profession of statistics are brought to bear on thecompilation of data, on producing information from the data, and ondisseminating that information.¥the unit is generally recognized as a distinct entity. it may be locatedwithin either a cabinetlevel department or an independent agency, or itcould itself be an independent agency.¥compilation may include direct collection of data from individuals,organizations, or establishments or the acquisition of information fromadministrative records. it may include assembling information from avariety of sources, including other statistical agencies, in order to producean integrated data series, such as the national income and product accounts.¥analysis may take various forms. it includes methodological researchto improve the quality and usefulness of data. it also includes substantiveanalysisñfor example, developing indicators, modeling, making projections, interpreting data, and explaining relationships among survey statisticsat various levels of aggregation and other variables. analysis by a statisticalagency does not advocate policies or take partisan positions.¥dissemination means making information available to the public, toothers in the executive branch, and to congress.¥statistical purposes include description, evaluation, analysis,inference, and research. for these purposes, a statistical agency may collectdata from individuals, establishments, or other organizations directly, or itmay obtain data from administrative records, but it does not do so foradministrative, regulatory, or law enforcement purposes. statistical purposes relate to descriptions of groups and exclude any interest in or identification of an individual person or economic unit. the data are used solelyto describe and analyze statistical patterns, trends, and relationships involving groups of persons or other units.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices3establishment of a federal statistical agencystatistics that are publicly available from government agencies areessential for a nation to advance the economic wellbeing and quality of lifeof its people. its public policy makers are best served by statistics that areaccurate, timely, relevant for policy decisions, and credible. individuals andorganizations rely on highquality, publicly available data as the basis forinformed decisions on a wide variety of issues. even more, the operation ofa democratic system of government depends on the unhindered flow ofstatistical information that citizens can use to assess government actionsand for other purposes. federal statistical agencies are established to be acredible source of relevant, accurate, and timely statistics in one or moresubject areas that are available to the public and policy makers.òrelevant statisticsó are statistics that measure things that matter topolicy making and public understanding. relevance requires concern forproviding data that help users meet their current needs for decision makingand analysis, as well as anticipating future needs. òaccurate statisticsó arestatistics that match the phenomena being measured and do so in repeatedmeasurements. accuracy requires proper concern for consistency across geographic areas and across time, as well as for statistical measures of errors inthe data. òtimely statisticsó are those that are known close in time to thephenomena they measure. timeliness requires concern for issuing data asfrequently as is needed to reflect important changes in what is being studied,as well as disseminating data as soon as practicable after they are collected.òcredibilityó requires concern for both the reality and appearance ofimpartiality and of independence from political control. it is the primarymission of agencies in the federal statistical system to work to ensure thegoals of accuracy, timeliness, relevance, and credibility of statistical information.one reason to establish a separate statistical agency is the need for dataseries to be independent of control by policy makers or regulatory orenforcement agencies. other reasons include:¥the need for ongoing, uptodate information in a subject area thatextends beyond the scope of individual operating units, possiblyinvolving other departments or agencies;¥the need to protect the confidentiality of responses; and¥the opportunity to achieve greater efficiency of statistical production or higher data quality through a consolidated and more highlyprofessional activity.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4principles and practices for a federal statistical agencythe principles and practices for a federal statistical agency that arereviewed in this report pertain to individual agencies as separate organizational entities in the context of a decentralized system for providing federalstatistics. historically, the response of the u.s. government to new information needs has been to create separate statistical units, so that the unitedstates now has one of the most decentralized statistical systems of anymodern nation. this report does not comment on the advantages or disadvantages of the u.s. system compared with other models for organizinggovernment statistics. it discusses the need for federal statistical agencies tocoordinate and cooperate with other agencies on a range of activities,describes the coordinating role of the u.s. office of management and budget(omb), and reviews some mechanisms for interagency collaboration.principles for a federal statistical agencyprinciple 1: relevance to policy issuesa federal statistical agency must be in a position to provideinformation relevant to issues of public policy.a statistical agency must be knowledgeable about the issues andrequirements of public policy and federal programs and able to provideobjective information that is relevant to policy and program needs. inestablishing priorities for statistical programs for this purpose, a statisticalagency must work closely with the users of such information in the executive branch, congress, and interested nongovernmental groups.often, the provision of statistics concerning a particular subject area isitself a public policy, with the goal of serving a broad range of informationneeds of private and publicsector users as well as the public. to establishpriorities for such statistics, a statistical agency must maintain contact witha broad spectrum of users in the business sector, academia, state and localgovernments, and elsewhere.principle 2: credibility among data usersa federal statistical agency must have credibility based on arelationship of mutual respect and trust with those who use itsdata and information.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices5it is essential that a statistical agency strive to maintain credibility foritself and for its data. few data users are in a position to verify the completeness and accuracy of statistical information; they must rely on anagencyõs reputation as a credible source of accurate and useful statistics.to have credibility, an agency must be and must be perceived to be freeof political interference and policy advocacy. also important for credibilityis that an agency follow such practices as wide dissemination of data, openness about the data provided, commitment to quality and professionalpractice, and fair treatment of data providers.principle 3: trust among data providersa federal statistical agency must have a relationship of mutualrespect and trust with respondents who provide data and with alldata subjects whose information it obtains.data providers must be able to rely on the word of a statistical agencywhen they are asked to provide information about themselves. an agencyearns the trust of its data providers by ensuring appropriate confidentialityof responses. maintaining confidentiality, in particular, precludes the use ofindividually identifiable information for any administrative, regulatory, orlaw enforcement purpose.trust of respondents is achieved by respecting their privacy. suchrespect requires that an agency minimize the time and effort of respondentsto provide information and fairly inform respondents of the intended usesof their information. trust of respondents is also achieved by successfullyconveying to them the relevance of the data being collected for importantpublic purposes. respondents must be convinced not only that the datathey provide will be kept confidential, but also that these data are intendedfor effective, beneficial public use.practices for a federal statistical agencythe effective operation of a federal statistical agency must begin withtwo related elements: a clearly defined and wellaccepted mission togetherwith a strong position of independence. with these prerequisites, effectiveoperation involves a wide range of practices: continual development of moreuseful data, openness about sources and limitations of the data provided,wide dissemination of data, cooperation with data users, fair treatment ofprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6principles and practices for a federal statistical agencydata providers, commitment to quality and professional standards of practice, an active research program, professional advancement of staff, andcoordination and cooperation with other statistical agencies.practice 1: a clearly defined and wellaccepted missionan agencyõs mission should include responsibility for all elements ofits programs for providing statistical informationñdetermining sources ofdata, measurement methods, efficient methods of data collection andprocessing, and appropriate methods of analysisñand ensuring the publicavailability not only of the data, but also of documentation of the methodsused to obtain the data and their quality. the mission should include theresponsibility for assessing information needs and priorities and waysto meet those needs, which could include the establishment of a data collection program or the modification or discontinuance of an existingprogram.practice 2: a strong position of independencea widely acknowledged position of independence is necessary for astatistical agency to have credibility and to carry out its function to providean unhindered flow of useful, highquality information for the public,decision makers, analysts, and program planners inside and outside government. without the credibility that comes from a strong degree of independence, users may lose trust in the accuracy and objectivity of the agencyõsdata, and data providers may become less willing to cooperate with agencyrequests.in essence, a statistical agency must be distinct from those parts of thedepartment carrying out law enforcement and policymaking activities. itmust be impartial and avoid even the appearance that its collection, analysis,and reporting processes might be manipulated for political purposes or thatindividually identifiable data might be turned over for administrative, regulatory, or law enforcement purposes.the circumstances of different agencies may govern the form thatindependence takes. in some cases, the legislation that establishes the agencymay specify that the agency head be professionally qualified, be appointedby the president and confirmed by the senate, serve for a specific term notcoincident with that of the administration, and have direct access to thesecretary of the department in which the agency is located. legislation mayprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices7also specify that the statistical agency have its own appropriation andbudget. these organizational requirements allow a statistical agency toachieve a strong position of independence and credibility, but they areneither necessary nor sufficient.other characteristics related to independence are that the statisticalagency have:¥authority for professional decisions over the scope, content, andfrequency of data compiled, analyzed, or published. most statistical agencieshave such broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints, departmentalrequirements, omb review, and congressional mandates.¥authority for selection and promotion of professional, technical, andoperational staff.¥recognition by policy officials outside the statistical agency of theagencyõs authority to release statistical information without prior clearance.¥authority to ensure that information technology systems for dataprocessing and analysis securely maintain the integrity and confidentialityof data and reliably support timely and accurate production of key statistics.¥authority for statistical agency heads and qualified staff to speakabout the agencyõs statistics before congress, with congressional staff, andbefore public bodies.¥adherence to predetermined schedules in the public release of important statistical indicators to prevent even the appearance of manipulation of release dates for political purposes.¥maintenance of a clear distinction between statistical informationand policy interpretations of such information by the president, the secretary of the department, or others in the executive branch.¥dissemination policies that foster regular, frequent release of majorfindings from an agencyõs statistical programs to the public via the media,the internet, and other means.practice 3: continual development of more useful datastatistical agencies must continually look to improve their data systemsto provide information that is accurate, timely, and relevant for changingpublic policy needs. they must also continually seek to improve the efficiency of their programs for collecting, analyzing, and disseminating statistical information.ways for an agency to achieve these goals include:principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8principles and practices for a federal statistical agency¥seeking opportunities to combine data from multiple surveys or tointegrate data from surveys with data from administrative records, withappropriate safeguards for confidentiality. when separate data sets arecollected and analyzed in such a manner that they may be used together,the value of the resulting information and the efficiency of obtaining it maybe greatly enhanced.¥sharing technical information and ideas with other statisticalagencies. such sharing can stimulate the development of innovative datacollection, analysis, and dissemination methods that improve the accuracyand timeliness of information and the efficiency of data operations.¥establishing a balanced data collection program to provide relevantinformation for different types of data needs. such a program could includeonetime surveys on special topics, repeated surveys of crosssections of thepopulation that provide regularly updated statistics, and longitudinalsurveys that track people, firms, and institutions over time and make itpossible to analyze the causes and effects of changes in their circumstances.practice 4: openness about sources andlimitations of the data provideda statistical agency should be open about its data and their strengthsand limitations, taking as much care to understand and explain how itsstatistics may fall short of accuracy as it does to produce accurate data in thefirst place. data releases from a statistical program should be accompaniedby a full description of the purpose of the program, the methods andassumptions used for data collection, processing, and reporting, what isknown (and not known) about the quality and relevance of the data, appropriate methods for analysis that take account of variability and other sourcesof error in the data, and the results of research on the methods and data.when problems are found in a previously released statistic that couldaffect its use, an agency should issue a correction promptly and publicly. anagency should be proactive in seeking ways to alert known and likely usersof the data about the nature of the problem and the appropriate correctiveaction.practice 5: wide dissemination of dataa statistical agency should strive for the widest possible disseminationof the data it compiles. data dissemination should be timely and public.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices9also, measures should be taken to ensure that data are preserved and accessible to the public for use in future years.elements of an effective dissemination program include:¥an established publications policy that describes, for a data collectionprogram, the types of reports and other data releases to be made available,the audience to be served, and the frequency of release.¥a variety of avenues for data dissemination, chosen to reach as broada public as reasonably possible. channels of dissemination include, but arenot limited to, an agencyõs internet web site, government depository libraries,conference exhibits and programs, newsletters and journals, email addresslists, and the media for regular communication of major findings.¥release of data in a variety of formats (e.g., printed reports, variouskinds of computerreadable data files with careful, complete documentation), so that the information can be accessed by users with varying skillsand needs for data retrieval and analysis.¥procedures for release of information that preclude actual or perceived political interference. in particular, the timing of the public releaseof data should be the responsibility of the statistical agency. as noted earlier,adherence to predetermined release schedules for important indicatorsserves to prevent even the appearance of manipulation of release dates forpolitical purposes.¥policies for the preservation of data that guide what data to retainand how they are to be archived for future secondary analysis.practice 6: cooperation with data usersa statistical agency should consult with a broad spectrum of users of itsdata in order to make its products more useful. it should:¥seek advice on data concepts, statistical methods, and data productsfrom data users as well as from other professional and technical subjectmatter and methodological experts, using a variety of formal and informalmeans of communication that are appropriate to the types of input sought.¥seek advice on its statistical programs and priorities from externalgroups, including those with relevant subjectmatter and technical expertise.¥endeavor to provide wide access to data while maintaining appropriate safeguards for the confidentiality of individual responses.¥provide equal access to data to all users.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10principles and practices for a federal statistical agencypractice 7: fair treatment of data providersto maintain credibility and a relationship of respect and trust withdata subjects and other data providers, a statistical agency must observe fairinformation practices. such practices include:¥policies and procedures to maintain the confidentiality of data,whether collected directly or obtained from administrative record sources,and to inform data providers of the manner and level of protection.¥policies and procedures to inform data providers of the purposes ofdata collection and the anticipated uses of the information, whether theirparticipation is mandatory or voluntary, and, if voluntary, using appropriateinformed consent procedures to obtain their information.¥respecting the privacy of respondents by minimizing the contribution of time and effort asked of them, consistent with the purposes of thedata collection activity.¥recognizing the value of respondentsõ participation in data collection programs by accurately representing the statistical information theyprovide and by making it widely available.¥seeking, to the extent practicable, the advice of respondents, as wellas others, in planning the scope of the agencyõs statistical programs, designing its data collection procedures, and determining its data products.practice 8: commitment to quality andprofessional standards of practicea statistical agency should:¥use modern statistical theory and sound statistical practice in alltechnical work.¥develop strong staff expertise in the disciplines relevant to itsmission, in the theory and practice of statistics, and in data collection,processing, analysis, and dissemination techniques.¥develop an understanding of the validity and accuracy of its dataand convey the resulting measures of quality to users in ways that are comprehensible to nonexperts.¥undertake ongoing quality assurance programs to improve dataquality and to improve the processes of compiling, editing, and analyzing data.¥develop a strong and continuous relationship with appropriate professional organizations in the fields of statistics and relevant subjectmatter areas.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part i: principles and practices11¥follow good practice, in reports and other data releases, in documenting concepts, definitions, data collection methodologies, and measuresof uncertainty, and in discussing possible sources of error.practice 9: an active research programan effective statistical agency should have a research program that isintegral to its activities. because smaller agencies may not be able to affordas extensive a research program as larger agencies, ways should be sought tofoster sharing of research results and methods among agencies. agenciescan also augment their staff resources for research by obtaining the servicesof experts not on the agencyõs staff through consulting or other arrangements as appropriate.the research program of a statistical agency should include:¥research on the substantive issues for which the data were compiled.such research should be conducted not only to provide useful objectiveanalytical results, but also as a means to identify potential improvements tothe content of the data, suggest improvements in the design and operationof the data collection, and provide fuller understanding of the limitationsof the data.¥research to evaluate and improve statistical methods, in particularthe identification and creation of new statistical measures and the development of improved methods for analyzing errors in data that are due notonly to sampling variability, but also to other sources. research should alsobe conducted on ways to reduce the time and effort requested ofrespondents and to improve the timeliness, accuracy, and efficiency of datacollection, analysis, and dissemination procedures.¥research to understand how the agencyõs information is used, inorder to make the data more relevant to policy concerns and more usefulfor policy research and decision making.practice 10: professional advancement of staffa statistical agencyõs professional staff should be committed to the highest standards of quality work and professional practice. they should also becommitted to the highest standards of professional ethics with regard tomaintaining the agencyõs credibility as an objective, independent source ofaccurate and useful information obtained through fair information practices.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyto achieve a highcaliber staff, a statistical agency must recruit andretain qualified statisticians, analysts in fields relevant to its mission,methodologists who specialize in data collection and analysis, and otherstaff with skills that are needed for its efficient and effective operation. anagencyõs personnel policies should encourage staff to maintain and extendtheir technical capabilities through appropriate professional and developmental activities, such as attendance at professional meetings, participationin relevant training programs, and rotation of assignments. an agencyshould also seek opportunities to reinforce the commitment of its staff toethical standards of practice.practice 11: coordination and cooperation withother statistical agenciesa statistical agency must seek opportunities to cooperate with otherstatistical agencies to enhance the value of its own information and that ofother agencies in the federal statistical system. although agencies differ intheir subjectmatter focus, there is overlap in their missions and a commoninterest in serving the public need for credible, highquality statisticsgathered as efficiently as possible.when possible and appropriate, federal statistical agencies shouldcooperate not only with each other, but also with state and local statisticalagencies in the provision of data for subnational areas. federal statistical agencies should also cooperate with foreign and international statistical agenciesto exchange information on both data and methods and to develop appropriate common classifications and procedures to promote internationalcomparability of information.such cooperative activities as integrating data compiled by differentstatistical agencies invariably require effort to overcome differences inagency missions and operations. but the rewards are data more relevant topolicy concerns and a stronger statistical system as a whole. for thesereasons, statistical agencies must act as partners to one another, not only inthe development of data, but also for the entire panoply of statisticalactivities, including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analyticaltools, professional practice, dissemination modes, means to protect the confidentiality of responses, and ways to advance the effective use of statisticalinformation.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.13this section comments on most of the topics in the principles andpractices; the comments are offered to explain, illustrate, or further definethe statement of principle in part i.definition of a federal statistical agencya federal statistical agency is a unit of the federal governmentwhose principal function is the compilation and analysis of dataand the dissemination of information for statistical purposes.a statistical agency may be labeled a bureau, center, division, or officeor similar title, so long as it is recognized as a distinct entity. statisticalagencies have been established for several reasons: (1) to develop new information for an area of public concern (e.g., the bureau of labor statistics,the national center for health statistics); (2) to conduct large statisticalcollection and dissemination operations specified by law (e.g., the u.s.census bureau); (3) to compile and analyze statistics from sets of administrative records for policy purposes and public use (e.g., the statistics ofincome division in the internal revenue service); and (4) to develop broadand consistent estimates from a variety of statistical and administrativesources in accordance with a prespecified conceptual framework (e.g., thebureau of economic analysis in the u.s. department of commerce). oncepart iicommentaryprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyestablished, many statistical agencies engage in all of these functions tovarying degrees.this definition of a federal statistical agency does not include manystatistical activities of the federal government because they are not performed by distinct units, or because they do not result in the disseminationof statistics to othersñfor example, statistics compiled by the u.s. postalservice to set rates or by the u.s. department of defense to test weapons(see national research council, 1998b, 2002b, 2003b, on statistics andtesting for defense acquisition). nor does it include agencies whose primaryfunctions are the conduct or support of problemoriented research,although their research may be based on information gathered by statisticalmeans, and they may also sponsor important surveys, as do, for example,the national institutes of health, the agency for healthcare research andquality, and other agencies in the u.s. department of health and humanservices.finally, this definition of a statistical agency does not usually includeagencies whose primary function is policy analysis and planning (e.g., theoffice of tax analysis in the u.s. department of the treasury, the office ofthe assistant secretary for planning and evaluation in the u.s. department of health and human services). such agencies may collect andanalyze statistical information, and statistical agencies, in turn, may performsome policyrelated analysis (e.g., produce reports on trends in aftertaxincome or child care arrangements of families). however, to maintaincredibility as an objective source of accurate, useful information, statisticalagencies must be separate from units that are involved in developing policyand assessing policy alternatives.the work of federal statistical agencies is coordinated through theinteragency council on statistical policy (icsp), created by the u.s. officeof management and budget (omb) in the 1980s and authorized in statutein the 1995 reauthorization of the paperwork reduction act. the icsp ischaired by omb and currently includes representation from 10 principalstatistical agencies and from the statistical units in the environmentalprotection agency, the social security administration, the national science foundation, and the internal revenue service (see box 1).throughout the federal government, omb recognizes more than 70units and agencies that are not statistical agencies but that have annualbudgets of $500,000 or more for statistical activities (u.s. office ofmanagement and budget, 2004c:47). the principles for federal statisticalagencies presented here should apply to other federal agencies that carryprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary15out statistical activities, and they may find many of the detailed practicespertinent as well. similarly, the principles and practices may be relevant tostatistical units in state and local government agencies, and internationalaudiences may also find them useful.establishment of a federal statistical agencyone of the most important reasons for establishing a statistical agencyis to provide information that will allow for an informed citizenry. ademocracy depends on an informed electorate. a citizen has a right toinformation that comes from a trustworthy, credible source and is relevant,accurate, and timely. timely information of high quality is also critical tobox 1federal agencies represented on the interagencycouncil on statistical policy as of 2005office of management and budget (omb), chairbureau of economic analysis (bea), u.s. department of commercebureau of justice statistics (bjs), u.s. department of justicebureau of labor statistics (bls), u.s. department of laborbureau of transportation statistics (bts), u.s. department oftransportationcensus bureau, u.s. department of commerceeconomic research service (ers), u.s. department of agricultureenergy information administration (eia), u.s. department of energynational agricultural statistics service (nass), u.s. department ofagriculturenational center for education statistics (nces), u.s. departmentof educationnational center for health statistics (nchs), u.s. department ofhealth and human servicesoffice of environmental information, environmental protectionagency (epa)office of research, evaluation, and statistics, social securityadministration (ssa)science resources statistics division, national science foundation(nsf)statistics of income division (soi), internal revenue service, u.s.department of the treasuryprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16principles and practices for a federal statistical agencypolicy analysts and decision makers in both the public and private sectors.(for more information on the purposes of official statistics, see the fundamental principles of official statistics of the united nations statisticalcommission in appendix a; see also united nations economic commission for europe, 2003; united nations statistical commission, 2003.)federal statistical agencies serve the key functions of providing a broadarray of information to the public and policy makers and of ensuring thenecessary quality and credibility of the data.commercial, nonprofit, and academic organizations in the privatesector also provide useful statistical information, including data they collectthemselves and data they acquire from government agencies and other datasources to which they add value. however, because the benefits of statisticalinformation are shared widely throughout society and because it is oftendifficult to collect payments for these benefits, private markets are not likelyto provide all of the data that are needed for public and private decisionmaking or to make data as widely available as needed for important publicpurposes. government statistical agencies are established to ensure that abroad range of information is publicly available. (see national researchcouncil, 1999b, for a discussion of the governmental role in providingpublic goods, or near public goods, such as research and data.)the united states government collected and published statistics longbefore any distinct federal statistical agency was formed (see duncan andshelton, 1978; norwood, 1995). the u.s. constitution mandated theconduct of a decennial census of population beginning in 1790, and thecensus enumeration was originally conducted by u.s. marshals as one oftheir many duties. legislation providing for the compilation of statistics onagriculture, education, and income was enacted by congress in the 1860s.the bureau of labor (forerunner of the bureau of labor statistics) wasestablished by law in 1884 as a separate agency with a general mandate torespond to widespread public demand for information on the conditions ofindustrial workers. the census bureau was established as a permanent agencyin 1902 to conduct the decennial census and related statistical activities.many federal statistical agencies that can trace their roots back to the19th or early 20th century, such as the national center for educationstatistics and the national center for health statistics, were organized intheir current form following world war ii. several relatively new agencieshave since been established, including the energy information administration, the bureau of justice statistics, and, most recently (in 1991), thebureau of transportation statistics. in every case, the agency itself, inprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary17consultation with users of its information, has major responsibility fordetermining its specific statistical programs and for setting priorities.initially, many of these agencies also had responsibilities for certain policyanalysis functions for their department heads. more recently, policy analysishas generally been located in separate units that are not themselves considered to be statistical agencies, a separation that helps establish andmaintain the credibility of statistical agencies as providers of data andanalyses that are not designed for particular policy alternatives.a statistical agency has at least two roles: (1) provider of the statisticalinformation and analysis needed to inform policy making and programassessment by its own department and (2) source of national statistics forthe public in its area of concern. it is sometimes difficult to keep these tworoles distinct on policyrelevant statistics. an effective statistical agency,nevertheless, will frequently play a creative, not just reactive, role in thedevelopment of data needed for policy analysis. sometimes federal statistical agencies play additional roles, such as monitor and consultant on statistical matters to other units within the same department (see e.g., nationalresearch council, 1985a) and collector of data on a reimbursable basis forother agencies.there is no set rule or guideline for when it is appropriate to establish aseparate federal statistical agency, carry on statistical activities within theoperating units of departments and independent agencies, or contract forstatistical services from existing federal statistical agencies or other organizations. establishment of a federal statistical agency should be consideredwhen one or more of the following conditions prevails:1¥there is a need for information on an ongoing basis beyond thecapacity of existing operating units, possibly involving other departmentsand agencies. such needs may require coordinating data from varioussources, initiating new data collection programs to fill gaps, or developingregularly updated time series of estimates.¥there is a need, as a matter of credibility, to ensure that major dataseries are independent of policy makersõ control.1national research council (2001b:ch.6) cited a number of these reasons in recommending the establishment or identification of a statistical unit in the u.s. department ofhealth and human services to be assigned responsibility and authority for carrying outstatistical functions and data collection for social welfare programs and the populations theyserve; see also national research council and institute of medicine (2004).principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18principles and practices for a federal statistical agency¥there is a need to establish the functional separation of statisticaldata that are collected for statistical purposes from identifiable data thatmay be used for administrative, regulatory, or law enforcement uses. suchseparation, recommended by the privacy protection study commission(1977), bolsters a culture and practice of respect for privacy and protectionof confidentiality. functional separation is easier to maintain when thestatistical data are compiled by a unit that is separate from operating units.the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of2002 (cipsea) extended legal confidentiality protection to every statisticaldata collection by a federal agency, whether a statistical agency or othertype of agency (see appendix b). nonetheless, functional separation ofstatistical data from other kinds of data is important because it makespromises of confidentiality protection more credible.¥there is a need to emphasize the principles and practices of aneffective statistical agency, for example, professional practice, opennessabout the data provided, and wide dissemination of data.¥there is a need to encourage research and development of a broadrange of statistics in a particular area of public interest or of governmentactivity or responsibility.¥there is a need to consolidate compilation, analysis, and dissemination of statistics in one unit to encourage highquality performance,eliminate duplication, and streamline operations.principles for a federal statistical agencyprinciple 1: a federal statistical agency must be in a position toprovide information relevant to issues of public policy.a statistical agency supplies information not only for the use ofmanagers and policy makers in the executive branch and for legislativedesigners and overseers in congress, but also for all those who require statistical information on public issues, whether the information is needed forpurposes of production, trade, consumption, or participation in civic affairs.just as a free enterprise economic system depends on the availability ofeconomic information to all participants, a democratic political systemdepends onñand has a fundamental duty to provideñwide access toinformation on education, health, transportation, the economy, theenvironment, criminal justice, and other social concerns.federal statistical agencies are responsible for providing statistics onprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary19conditions in a variety of areas. the resulting information is used bothinside and outside the government not only to delineate problems andsometimes to suggest courses of action, but also to evaluate the results ofgovernment activity or lack of activity. the statistics provide much of thebasis on which the government itself is judged. this role places a heavyresponsibility on federal statistical agencies for impartiality and objectivity.in order to provide information that is relevant to public issues,statistical agencies need to reach out to users of the data. federal statisticalagencies usually are in touch with the primary users in their own departments. considerable energy and initiative are required to open avenues ofcommunication more broadly to other current and potential users,including analysts and policy makers in other federal departments, stateand local government agencies, academic researchers, privatesector organizations, organized constituent groups, the media, and congress. advisorycommittees are recommended as a means to obtain the views of users, aswell as people with relevant technical expertise (see, e.g., national researchcouncil, 1993a). many agencies have traditionally had such committees toadvise themñexamples include the american statistical associationõs committee on energy for the energy information administration, the board ofscientific counselors for the national center for health statistics, and thecensus advisory committee of professional associations for the censusbureau. the federal economic statistics advisory committee (fesac),chartered in november 1999, provides substantive and technical advice tothree agenciesñthe bureau of economic analysis, the bureau of laborstatistics, and the census bureauñthereby providing an important crosscutting perspective on major economic statistics programs (bureau of labor statistics, 2005a).one frequently recommended method for alerting statistical agenciesto emerging statistical information needs is for the agencyõs own staff toengage in analysis of its data (martin, 1981; norwood, 1975; triplett,1991). for example, relevant analysis may use the agencyõs data to examinecorrelates of key social or economic phenomena or to study the statisticalerror properties of the data. such inhouse analysis can lead to improvements in the quality of the statistics, to identification of new needs, to areordering of priorities, and to closer cooperation and mutual understanding with policy analysis units. in its work for a policy analysis unit, a statistical agency describes conditions and possibly measures progress towardsome previously identified goal, but it refrains from making policy recommendations. the distinction between statistical analysis and policy analysisprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyis not always clear, and a statistical agency will need to consider carefullythe extent of policyrelated activities that are appropriate for it to undertake.principle 2: a federal statistical agency must have credibility basedon a relationship of mutual respect and trust with those who use itsdata and information.users of a statistical agencyõs data must be able to trust that the datawere collected and analyzed in an objective, impartial manner and that theyare as reliable as the agency can make them. an agency should make everyeffort to provide accurate and credible statistics that will permit policydebates to be concerned about policy, not about the credibility of the data.credibility is enhanced when an agency fully informs users of the strengthsand weaknesses of the data, makes data available widely, and consults withusers about priorities for data collection and analysis.principle 3: a federal statistical agency must have a relationship ofmutual respect and trust with respondents who provide data andall data subjects whose information it obtains.the statistics programs of the federal government rely in large part oninformation supplied by individuals and by organizations outside the federalgovernment, such as state and local governments, businesses, and otherorganizations. some of this information is required by law or regulation(such as employersõ wage reports), some of it is related to administration ofgovernment programs (such as information provided by benefit recipients),but much of it is obtained through the voluntary cooperation of respondents in statistical surveys. even when response is mandatory, the cooperation of respondents reduces costs and likely promotes accuracy (see nationalresearch council, 1995b, 2004e). important elements in encouraging suchcooperation are that respondents believe that the data requested are important and legitimate for the government to collect, that they are beingcollected in an impartial, competent manner, and that the confidentialityof their responses will be protected.in brief, trust in a statistical agency must be maintained. the agencymust not be perceived as being swayed by political considerations. it mustbe perceived as working in the national interest, not the interest of a particular administration, and as taking a long view, balancing new data needsagainst the need for consistency with past data (ryten, 1990). respondentprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary21trust also depends on providing respondents with realistic promises ofconfidentiality that the agency can reasonably expect to honor and thenscrupulously honoring those promises. finally, respondent trust dependson adopting practices that respect personal privacy, such as taking steps tominimize the intrusiveness of questions and the time and effort required toparticipate in a survey.practices for a federal statistical agencypractice 1: a clearly defined and wellaccepted missiona clear understanding of the mission of an agency, the scope of itsstatistical programs, and its authority and responsibilities is basic toplanning and evaluating its programs and to maintaining credibility andindependence from political control (national research council, 1986,1997b). some agency missions are clearly spelled out in legislation; otheragencies have only very general legislative authority. on occasion, veryspecific requirements may be set by legislation or regulation.agencies should communicate their mission clearly to others. the useof the internet is one means to publicize an agencyõs mission to a broadaudience and to provide related information, including enabling legislation,the scope of the agencyõs statistical program, confidentiality provisions,operating procedures, and data quality guidelines. an agencyõs missionshould focus on the compilation, evaluation, analysis, and dissemination ofstatistical information. in addition, considerable and formal attention mustbe paid to setting statistical priorities (national research council, 1976).advice from outside groups should be sought on the agencyõs statisticalprogram, on setting statistical priorities, on the statistical methods used,and on data products. such advice may be sought in a variety of formal andinformal ways, but it should be obtained from data users and providers aswell as professional or technical experts in the subjectmatter area and instatistical methods and procedures. a strong research program in theagencyõs subjectmatter field can assist in setting priorities and identifyingways to improve an agencyõs statistical programs (triplett, 1991).practice 2: a strong position of independencea statistical agency must be able to provide credible information thatmay be used to evaluate the program and policies of its own department orprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22principles and practices for a federal statistical agencythe government as a whole. more broadly, a statistical agency must be atrustworthy source of objective, reliable information for decision makers,analysts, and others inside and outside the government who want to usestatistics to understand present conditions, draw comparisons with the past,and help guide plans for the future. for these purposes, a strong position ofindependence for a statistical agency is essential. (see the fundamental principles of official statistics of the united nations statistical commission inappendix a.)statistical agency independence must be exercised in a broader framework. legislative authority usually gives ultimate responsibility to thedepartment rather than the statistical agency head. in addition, an agencyis subject to the normal budgetary processes and to various coordinatingand review functions of omb, as well as the legislative mandates, oversight, and informal guidance of congress.within this broader framework, a statistical agency must work to maintain its credibility as an impartial purveyor of information. in the long run,the effectiveness of an agency depends on its maintaining a reputation forimpartiality; thus, an agency must be continually alert to possible infringements on its credibility and be prepared to argue strenuously against suchinfringements.independence of an agency head can be strengthened by the headõsbeing appointed for a fixed term by the president, with approval by thesenate, as is the case with the bureau of labor statistics and the nationalcenter for education statistics. the heads of the bureau of justice statistics,the census bureau, and the energy information administration are presidential appointees, but their terms are not fixed and usually end with achange of administration. in the case of a fixed term, it is desirable that itnot coincide with the presidential term so that incumbents need not endtheir leadership with changes of administration and professional considerations may more easily predominate over political aims in the appointmentprocess.it is also desirable that a statistical agency head have direct access to thesecretary of the department or the head of the independent agency in whichthe statistical agency is located. such access allows the head to inform newsecretaries about the appropriate role of a statistical agency and present thecase for new statistical initiatives to the secretary directly. among the agencyheads with presidential appointments, such direct access currently is provided by legislation only for the bureau of labor statistics.it is desirable for a statistical agency to have its own funding appropriaprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary23tion from congress and not be dependent on allocations from budgets ofother agencies that may be subject to reallocation.these organizational aspectsñappointment of the agency head by thepresident with approval by the senate for a fixed term not coincident withthat of the administration, direct access to the secretary of the agencyõsdepartment, and separate budgetary authorityñare neither necessary norsufficient for a strong position of independence for a statistical agency, butthey facilitate such independence.2control over personnel actions, especially the selection and appointment of qualified professional staff, including senior executive career staff,is another aspect of independence. agency staff reporting directly to theagency head should have formal education and deep experience in the substantive, methodological, operational, or management issues facing theagency as appropriate for their positions. in addition, professional qualifications are of the utmost importance for statistical agency heads, whetherthe profession is that of statistician or the subjectmatter field of the statistical agency (national research council, 1997b). relevant professionalassociations can be a source of valuable input on suitable candidates.the authority to ensure that information technology systems fulfill thespecialized needs of the statistical agency is also an aspect of independence.a statistical agency must be able to vouch for the integrity, confidentiality,and impartiality of the information collected and maintained under itsauthority so that it retains the trust of its data providers and data users.such trust is fostered when a statistical agency has control over its information technology resources, and there is no opportunity or perception thatpolicy, program, or regulatory agencies could gain access to records ofindividual respondents. a statistical agency also needs control over itsinformation technology resources to support timely and accurate release ofofficial statistics, which are often produced under stringent deadlines.authority to decide the scope and specific content of the data collectedor compiled is yet another important element of independence. most2legislation and administrative actions have removed some of these organizational features for some statistical agencies. (for example, legislation signed on november 30, 2004, aspart of reorganizing the u.s. department of transportation, changed the head of the bureauof transportation statistics (bts) from a presidential appointee to a career position andspecified that the bts director is to report to the administrator of the new research andinnovative technology administration, not to the secretary.)principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24principles and practices for a federal statistical agencystatistical agencies have broad authority, limited by budgetary constraints,departmental interests, omb review, and congressional mandates. inaddition, the courts sometimes become involved in interpreting laws andregulations that affect statistical agencies, as in a number of issues concerning data confidentiality and freedom of information act requests and inthe issue of the use of sampling in the population census. congressfrequently specifies particular data that it wishes to be collected (e.g., by thenational agricultural statistics service in the u.s. department of agriculture, the national center for health statistics in the u.s. department ofhealth and human services) and, in the case of the decennial census,requires an opportunity to review the proposed questions before the formsare printed. the omb office of information and regulatory affairs, underthe paperwork reduction act (and under the preceding federal reportsact), has the responsibility for designating a single data collection instrument for information wanted by two or more agencies. it also has theresponsibility under the same act for reviewing all questionnaires and otherinstruments for the collection of data from 10 or more respondents.the budgetary constraints on statistical agencies and omb review ofdata collections are ongoing; the other pressures depend, in part at least, onthe relations between a statistical agency and those who have supervisory oroversight functions. agencies need to develop skills in communicating tooversight groups the need for statistical series and credibility in assessingthe costs of statistical work. in turn, although it is standard practice for thesecretary of a department or the head of an independent agency to haveultimate responsibility for all matters within the department or agency, thehead of a statistical agency, for credibility, should be allowed full authorityin professional and technical matters. for example, decisions to revise themethodology for calculating the consumer price index (cpi) or the grossdomestic product (gdp) have been and are properly made by the relevantstatistical agency heads.other aspects of independence that underscore a statistical agencyõscredibility are important as well. authority to release statistical informationand accompanying materials (including press releases) without prior clearance by department policy officials is important so that there is noopportunity for or perception of political manipulation of any of the information. authority for the statistical agency head and qualified staff to speakabout the agencyõs statistics before congress, with congressional staff, andbefore public bodies is also important to bolster the agencyõs standing.when a statistical agency releases information publicly, a clear distincprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary25tion should be made between the statistical information and any policyinterpretations of such. not even the appearance of manipulation forpolitical purposes should be allowed. this is one reason that statisticalagencies are required by omb statistical policy directive number 3 to adhereto predetermined schedules for the public release of key economic indicators and take steps to ensure that no person outside the agency can gainaccess to such indicators before the official release time (see u.s. office ofmanagement and budget, 1985). predetermined schedules for the publicrelease of other important social and economic indicators can also contribute to independence. when an agency modifies a customary releaseschedule for statistical purposes, it should announce and explain the changeas far in advance as possible.practice 3: continual development of more useful datafederal statistical agencies cannot be static. to provide information ofcontinued relevance for public and policy use, they must continuallyanticipate data needs for future policy considerations and look for ways todevelop data systems that can serve broad purposes. to improve the qualityand timeliness of their information, they must keep abreast of methodological and technological advances and be prepared to implement newprocedures in a timely manner. they must also continually seek ways tomake their operations more efficient. preparing for the future requires thatagencies reevaluate existing data series, plan new data series as required, andbe innovative and open in their consideration of ways to improve theirprograms. because of the decentralized nature of the federal statisticalsystem, innovation often requires crossagency collaboration. innovationalso implies a willingness to implement different kinds of data collectionefforts to answer different needs.integration of data sourcesone way to increase the usefulness of survey data is to integrate themwith data from other surveys or with data from administrative records, suchas social program records. such integration typically requires that severalagencies work together.for example, in the area of health care provider statistics, a study by apanel of the committee on national statistics (cnstat) concluded thatno single survey was likely ever to meet all the criteria, address all the techprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26principles and practices for a federal statistical agencynical problems, or meet all usersõ needs for data. in order to provideadequate information on the availability, financing, and quality of healthcare, a coordinated and integrated system of data collection activitiesinvolving several organizational entities was required (national researchcouncil and institute of medicine, 1992).similarly, a cnstat study on retirement income statistics concludedthat some of the information that is essential for analysis of savings andretirement decisions and the effect of medical care use and expenditures onretirement income security is most efficiently and accurately obtained fromexisting administrative records (national research council, 1997a). to beuseful for estimation, this information (e.g., social security earningshistories, medicare and medicaid benefits) must be linked to individualdata that are available from such panel surveys as the health and retirement study sponsored by the national institute on aging, the nationallongitudinal surveys of labor market experience sponsored by the bureauof labor statistics, and the census bureauõs survey of program dynamicsand survey of income and program participation. similarly, linkage ofemployer survey data with administrative records could provide enhancedanalysis and modeling capability at low marginal cost. in both instances,careful attention must be paid to the means by which the confidentiality ofthe linked data can be protected while allowing access for research use.sharing of microdataanother way to improve data quality and develop new kinds of information is for statistical agencies that collect similar information to sharemicrodata records. for example, the sharing of business data would make itpossible to evaluate reporting errors and the completeness of coverage ofbusiness firms in different surveys. such sharing would also make it possibleto develop more useful and accurate statistics on the nationõs economy whiledecreasing the reporting burden on business data providers. the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002 (cipsea),subtitle b, for the first time in the nationõs history authorizes the sharing ofbusiness data among the three principal statistical agencies that producethe nationõs key economic statisticsñthe bureau of economic analysis(bea), the bureau of labor statistics (bls), and the u.s. census bureau.june 2003 saw the first formal proposal for data sharing under cipsea,which involved matching data from beaõs international investment surveyswith data from the census bureauõs survey of industrial research and deprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary27velopment conducted for the national science foundation. the resultshelped bea improve its survey sample frames and enabled the census bureau to identify companies that were not previously known to engage inresearch and development activities (u.s. office of management and budget, 2004c:4445).longitudinal datathe need to understand temporal changes in important social oreconomic events may call for the development of longitudinal surveys thattrack people, institutions, or firms over time. developing longitudinal data(and general purpose crosssectional data, as well) usually requires muchcoordination with policy research agencies, other statistical agencies, andacademic researchers. longitudinal data generally require more sophisticated methods for collection and analysis than data from repeated or onetime crosssectional surveys. in addition, considerable time may be neededto produce useful data products for analyzing transitions and other dynamiccharacteristics of longitudinal samples (although production of useful crosssectional products from longitudinal surveys need not take long). yet datafrom longitudinal surveys are potentially very usefulñsometimes they arethe only means to answer important policy questions (see, e.g., nationalresearch council, 1997a, on data needs to inform retirement incomepolicy, and national research council, 2001b, on data needs to evaluatewelfare reform in an era of transition).historically, because statistical agencies are oriented toward the missionof their particular department, the longitudinal surveys they developed (andcrosssectional data activities as well) typically focused on subject matterand population groups (or other entities) that the department serves. forexample, separate data sets are available on health characteristics of infantsand children (and other age groups), educational characteristics for children and teenagers, and work force characteristics for adults. yet surveysthat follow individuals across such key transitions as from early childhoodto school and from school to the labor force are important to consider(national research council, 1998a; national research council and institute of medicine, 2004). examples of surveys that are designed for analysisof some kinds of transitions include the early childhood longitudinalstudy (ecls), sponsored by the national center for education statisticsin collaboration with other agencies, and the national longitudinal surveysof youth (nlsy79, nlsy97), sponsored by the bureau of labor statisprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28principles and practices for a federal statistical agencytics. the ecls includes two cohorts of children, one of kindergartners in1998 who will be followed through twelfth grade and another of babiesborn in 2001 who will be followed through first grade (national center foreducation statistics, 2005). the nlsy includes two cohorts of youngpeople, one of people aged 1422 in 1979, who are being interviewed everyother year, and the other of people aged 1217 in 1997, who are beinginterviewed annually (bureau of labor statistics, 2005b).operational methodsanother area in which it is important for statistical agencies to beinnovative concerns the methods used for data collection, processing,estimation, analysis, and dissemination. agencies need to investigate newor modified methods that have the potential to improve the accuracy andtimeliness of their data and the efficiency of their operations. careful evaluation of new methods is required to assess their benefits and costs incomparison with current methods and to determine effective implementation strategies, including the development of methods for bridging timeseries before and after a change in procedures.for example, experience with the use of computerassisted interviewing techniques, which many agencies have adopted for data collection, hasidentified benefits. it has also identified challenges for the timely provisionof data and documentation that require continued research to developsolutions that maximize the gains from these techniques (see nationalresearch council, 2003e).similarly, agencies need to carefully evaluate their growing use of theinternet, which has become a standard vehicle for data dissemination and isincreasingly being used for data collection. internet dissemination facilitates the timely availability of data to a broad audience and provides avaluable tool for users to learn of related data sets from other agencies.however, it poses challenges in several areas, such as how best to provideinformation on data quality and appropriate use of the data to an audiencethat spans a wide range of analytical skills and understanding. internet datacollection poses challenges in such areas as sample design, questionnairedesign, and protecting data confidentiality. it also requires careful evaluationof the effects on the quality of responses in comparison with traditionaldata collection modes (telephone, mail, personal interview).principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary29practice 4: openness about sources andlimitations of the data providedan important means to instill credibility and trust among data usersand data providers is for an agency to operate in an open manner withregard to the sources and the limitations of its data. openness requires thatan agency provide a full description of its data with acknowledgment of anyuncertainty and a description of the methods used and assumptions made.agencies should provide to users reliable indications of the kinds andamounts of statistical error to which the data are subject (see brackstone,1999; federal committee on statistical methodology, 2001a; see alsopresidentõs commission on federal statistics, 1971). some statisticalagencies have developed detailed quality profiles for some of their majorseries, such as those developed for the american housing survey(chakrabarty, 1996), the residential energy consumption survey (energyinformation administration, 1996), the schools and staffing survey(kalton et al., 2000), and the survey of income and program participation(u.s. census bureau, 1998). earlier, the federal committee on statisticalmethodology (1978c) developed a quality profile for employment asmeasured in the current population survey. these profiles have provedhelpful to experienced users and agency personnel responsible for the designand operation of major surveys and data series (see national researchcouncil, 1993a).openness about data limitations requires much more than providingestimates of sampling error. in addition to a discussion of aspects thatstatisticians recognize as nonsampling errors, such as coverage errors,nonresponse, measurement errors, and processing errors, a description ofthe concepts used and how they relate to the major uses of the data isdesirable. descriptions of the shortcomings of and problems with the datashould be provided in sufficient detail to permit the user to take them intoaccount in the analysis and interpretation of the data.openness means that a statistical agency should describe how decisionson methods and procedures were made for a data collection program. it isimportant to be open about research conducted on methods and data andother factors that were weighed in a decision.openness also means when mistakes are discovered after a statistic isreleased, the agency has an obligation to issue a correction publicly and in atimely manner. it should not only use the same dissemination vehicles toannounce corrections that it used to release the original statistic, but alsoprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyuse additional vehicles, as appropriate, to alert the widest possible audienceof current and potential users.in summary, agencies should make an effort to provide information onthe quality, limitations, and appropriate use of their data that is as frankand complete as possible. such information, which is sometimes termedòmetadata,ó should be made available in ways that are easy for users toaccess and understand, recognizing that users differ in their level of understanding of statistical data (see national research council, 1993a, 1997b).agencies need to work to educate users that all data contain some uncertainty and error, which does not mean that the data are wrong but that theymust be used with care.the information quality act of 2000 (see appendix b) stimulated allfederal agencies to develop written guidelines for maintaining and documenting the quality of their information programs and activities. using aframework developed collaboratively by the members of the interagencycouncil on statistical policy, individual statistical agencies have developedguidelines for their own data collection programs, which are available onthe internet (see appendix b).practice 5: wide dissemination of dataa statistical agency must have vigorous and wellplanned disseminationprograms to get information into the hands of users who need it on atimely basis. planning should be undertaken from the viewpoint that thepublic has contributed the data elements, has paid for the data collectionand processing, and should in return have the information accessible inways that make it as useful as possible to the largest number of users.a good dissemination program provides data to users in forms that aresuited to their needs. data release may take the form of regularly updatedtime series, crosstabulations of aggregate characteristics of respondents,and analytical reports that are made available in printed publications, oncomputerreadable media (e.g., cdrom), and on the internet. (seeappendix c for a number of federal statistical agency web sites, which areaccessible from a single source: http://www.fedstats.gov.)yet another form of dissemination involves access to microdata files,which make it possible to conduct indepth research in ways that are notpossible with aggregate data. publicuse microdata files may be developedfor general release. such files contain data for individual respondents thathave been processed to protect confidentiality by deleting, aggregating, orprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary31modifying any information that might permit individual identification.alternatively, an agency may provide a facility on the internet to allowusers to aggregate individual microdata to suit their purposes, with safeguards so that the data cannot be retabulated in ways that could identifyindividual respondents. another alternative is to grant a license toresearchers to analyze restricted microdata (that is, data that have not beenprocessed for general release) at their own sites by agreeing to follow strictprocedures for protecting confidentiality and accepting liability for penaltiesif confidentiality is breached. a third alternative is to allow researchers toanalyze restricted microdata at secure sites maintained by a statistical agency,such as one of the census bureauõs research data centers located at severaluniversities and research organizations around the country or the nationalcenter for health statisticsõ research data center at its headquarters (seedoyle et al., 2001). agencies should consider all forms of dissemination inorder to gain the most use of their data consistent with protecting theconfidentiality of responses.the stunning improvements over the past two decades in computingspeed, power, and storage capacity, the growing availability of informationfrom a wide range of public and private sources on the internet, and theincreasing richness of statistical agency data collections have increased therisks that individually identifiable information can be obtained (seenational research council, 2003d:ch.5). statistical agencies must be vigilant in their efforts to protect against the increased threats to disclosurefrom their summary data and microdata products while honoring theirobligation to be proactive in seeking ways to provide data to users. whenstatistical data are not disseminated in useful forms, there is a loss to thepublic, not only of wasted taxpayer dollars but also of research findingsthat could have informed public policy and served other important societal purposes.a good dissemination program for statistical data uses a variety ofchannels to inform the broadest possible audience of potential users aboutavailable data products and how to obtain them. such channels may includeproviding direct access to data on the internet, depositing data products inlibraries, establishing a network of data centers (such as the census bureauõsstate data centers), holding exhibits and making presentations at conferences, and maintaining lists of individuals and organizations to notify ofnew data. agencies should also arrange for archiving of data with thenational archives and records administration and other data archives, asappropriate, so that data are available for historical research in future years.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyan effective dissemination program provides not only the data, butalso information about the strengths and weaknesses of the data in waysthat can be comprehended by diverse audiences. information about thelimitations of the data should be included in every form of data release,whether in a printed report, on a computerreadable data file, or on theinternet.on occasion, the objective of presenting the most accurate data possiblemay require more time than is consistent with the needs of users for theinformation. the tension between frequency and promptness of release onone hand and accuracy on the other should be explicitly considered. whenconcerns for timeliness prompt the release of preliminary estimates (as insome economic indicators), consideration should be given to the frequencyof revisions and the mode of presentation of revised figures from the pointof view of the users as well as the issuers of the data. agencies that releasepreliminary estimates must educate the public about differences amongpreliminary, revised, and final estimates.practice 6: cooperation with data usersusers of federal statistical data span a broad spectrum of interests andneeds. they include policy makers, planners, administrators, and researchersin federal agencies, state and local governments, the business sector, andacademia. they also include activists, citizens, students, and media representatives. an effective statistical agency endeavors to learn about its datausers and to obtain input from them on the agencyõs statistical programs.the needs of users can be explored by forming advisory committees,holding focus groups, analyzing requests and internet activity, or undertaking formal surveys of users. the task requires continual alertness to thechanging composition and needs of users and the existence of potentialusers. an agency should cooperate with professional associations, institutes,universities, and scholars in the relevant fields to determine the needs of theresearch community and obtain their insight on potential uses. an agencyshould also work with relevant associations and other organizations todetermine the needs of business and industry for its data.within the limitations of its confidentiality procedures as noted above,an agency should seek to provide maximum access to its data, includingmaking the data available to external researchers for secondary analysis(national research council, 1985b). having data accessible for a widerange of analyses increases the return on the investment in data collectionprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary33and provides support for an agencyõs program. once statistical data aremade public, they may be used in numerous ways not originally envisaged.an agency should attempt to monitor the major uses of its data as part ofits efforts to keep abreast of user needs. in 2002, omb introduced requirements for performance assessment of federal agencies: for statisticalagencies, the requirements emphasize assessment of how well the agencyunderstands and serves its users (see appendix b).researchers and other users of data frequently request data from statistical agencies for specific purposes. the agency should have procedures inplace for referring users to professionals within the agency who can comprehend the userõs purposes and needs and who have a thorough knowledgeof the agencyõs data. statistical agencies should view these services as a partof their dissemination activities.ensuring equal access requires avoiding release of data to selected individuals, organizations, or news media in advance of other users. agenciesthat prepare special tabulations of their data on request for external groupsmust be alert to the proposed uses. if the data are to be used in court cases,administrative proceedings, or collective bargaining negotiations, it is wiseto have a known policy ensuring that all sides may receive the special tabulations, regardless of which side requested them or paid the cost of thetabulation.practice 7: fair treatment of data providersclear policies and effective procedures for protecting data confidentiality, respecting the privacy of respondents, and, more broadly, protectingthe rights of human research participants are critical to maintaining thequality and comprehensiveness of the data that federal statistical agenciesprovide to policy makers and the public. part of the challenge for statisticalagencies is to develop effective means of communicating not only theagencyõs protection procedures and policies, but also the importance of thedata being collected for the public good.protecting confidentialitydata providers must believe that the data they give to a statisticalagency will not be used by the agency to harm them. for statistical datacollection programs, protecting the confidentiality of individual responsesis considered essential to encourage high response rates and accuracy ofprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyresponse. (for reviews of research on the relationship of concerns aboutconfidentiality protection to response rates, see national research council,2004e:ch.4; nie et al., in press.) furthermore, if participants have beenassured of confidentiality, then under federal policy for the protection ofhuman subjects, disclosure of identifiable information about them wouldviolate the principle of respect for persons even if the information is notsensitive and would not result in any social, economic, legal, or other harm(national research council, 2003d:ch.5).historically, some agencies had legislative mandates supportingpromises of confidentiality (e.g., for the u.s. census bureau, title 13 ofthe u.s. code, first enacted in 1929); other agencies (e.g., the bureau oflabor statistics) relied on strong statements of policy, legal precedents incourt cases, or custom (see gates, 2000; norwood, 1995). the latteragencies risked having their policies overturned by judicial interpretationsof legislation or executive decisions that might have required the agency todisclose identifiable data collected under a pledge of confidentiality (for anexample involving the energy information administration, see nationalresearch council, 1993b:185186).to give additional weight and stature to policies that statistical agencieshad pursued for decades, omb issued a federal statistical confidentialityorder on june 27, 1997. this order assured respondents who providedstatistical information to specified agencies that their responses would beheld in confidence and would not be used against them in any governmentaction, òunless otherwise compelled by lawó (u.s. office of managementand budget, 1997).in 2002, congress passed the egovernment act of 2002, which wassigned into law on december 17. title v, the confidential informationprotection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea), subtitle a, provides astatutory basis for protecting the confidentiality of all federal data collectedfor statistical purposes under a confidentiality pledge, including but notlimited to data collected by statistical agencies (see appendix b). subtitle aplaces strict limits on the disclosure of individually identified informationcollected with a pledge of confidentiality: such disclosure to persons otherthan the employees or agents of the agency collecting the data can occuronly with the informed consent of the respondent and the authorization ofthe agency head and only when the disclosure is not prohibited by anyother law (e.g., title 13). it also provides penalties for employees or agentswho knowingly or willfully disclose statistical information (up to 5 years inprison, up to $250,000 in fines, or both).principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary35although confidentiality protection for statistical data is now on amuch firmer legal footing across the federal government than prior tocipsea, there is an exception for some data from the national center foreducation statistics (nces) that could have an adverse effect on surveyresponse. the usa patriot act of 2001, section 508, amended the nationalcenter for education statistics act of 1994 by allowing the u.s. attorneygeneral (or an assistant attorney general) to apply to a court to obtain anyòreports, records, and information (including individually identifiableinformation) in the possessionó of nces that are considered relevant to anauthorized investigation or prosecution of domestic or international terrorism. section 508 also removed the penalties for nces employees whofurnish individual records under this section.statistical agencies continually strive to avoid inadvertent disclosure ofconfidential information in disseminating data. recently, the widespreaddissemination of statistical data via the internet has heightened attentionby agencies to ensuring that effective safeguards to protect confidential information are in place. risks are increased when data for small groups aretabulated, when the same data are tabulated in a variety of ways, or whenpublicuse microdata files (samples of records for unidentified individualsor units) are released with highly detailed content. longitudinal surveys,for example, particularly newer ones, typically have richly detailed contentfor multiple domains (e.g., health, education, labor force participation) ormultiple respondents (e.g., parents, students, teachers) or both. risks mayalso be increased when surveys include linked administrative data or collectbiomarkers from blood samples or other physiological measures (nationalresearch council, 2001a).because of the disclosure risks associated with detailed tabulations andrich publicuse microdata files, there is always a tension between the desireto safeguard confidentiality and the desire to provide public access to data.this dilemma is an important one to federal statistical agencies, and it hasstimulated ongoing efforts to develop new statistical and administrativeprocedures to safeguard confidentiality while permitting more extensiveaccess. an effective federal statistical agency will exercise judgment indetermining which of these procedures are best suited to its requirementsto serve data users while protecting confidentiality. (several committee onnational statisticsõ study panels have discussed these issues and alternativeprocedures for providing data access while maintaining confidentiality protection; see national research council, 1993b, 2000, 2003d.)principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyrespecting privacyto promote trust and encourage accurate response, it is important thatstatistical agencies respect the privacy of respondents. when data providersare asked to participate in a survey, they should be told whether the surveyis mandatory or voluntary, how the data will be used, and who will haveaccess to the data. in the case of voluntary surveys, information on thesematters is necessary in order for data providers to give their informedconsent to participate.respondents invest time and effort in replying to surveys. the amountof effort or burden varies considerably from survey to survey, depending onsuch factors as the complexity of the information that is requested.statistical agencies should attempt to minimize such effort, to the extentpossible, by using concepts and definitions that fit respondentsõ commonunderstanding; by simplifying questionnaires; by allowing alternativemodes of response (e.g., via the internet) when appropriate; and by usingadministrative records or other data sources if they are sufficiently complete and accurate to provide some or all of the needed information. insurveys of businesses or other institutions, agencies should seek innovativeways to obtain information from the institutionõs records and minimize theneed for respondents to reprocess and reclassify information. it is also theresponsibility of agencies to use qualified, welltrained interviewers.respondents should be informed of the likely duration of a survey interview and, if the survey involves more than one interview, how many timesthey will be contacted over the life of the survey. this information is particularly important when respondents are asked to cooperate in extensiveinterviews, search for records, or participate in longitudinal surveys.ways in which participation in surveys can be made easier for respondents and result in more accurate data can be explored by such means asfocus group discussions or surveys. many agencies apply the principles ofcognitive psychology to questionnaire design, not only to make the resultingdata more accurate, but also to make the time and effort of respondentsmore efficient (national research council, 1984). some agencies thankrespondents for their cooperation by providing them with brief summariesof the information after the survey is compiled.increasing privacy concerns may contribute to observed declines insurvey response rates. in a time when individuals are inundated withrequests for information from public and private sources, when there aredocumented instances of identity theft and other abuses of confidentialprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary37information on the internet, and when individual information is beingused for terrorismrelated investigatory or law enforcement purposes, itmay not be surprising that individuals decline to respond to censuses andsurveys, even when the questions appear noninvasive and the data are collected for statistical purposes under a pledge of confidentiality.the egovernment act of 2002 requires agencies to develop privacyimpact assessments (pias) whenever ò. . . initiating a new collection ofinformation . . . in an identifiable form . . . .ó (see appendix b; see also u.s.office of management and budget, 2003). the purpose of a privacy impactassessment is to ensure that there is no collection, storage, access, use, ordissemination of identifiable information that is not both needed andpermitted. in response, statistical agencies have begun conducting andreleasing pias for statistical programs (see, e.g., u.s. census bureau, 2003),and, in the process, rethinking how to respect individual privacy in order tomaintain trust with data providers.statistical agencies should devote resources to understanding the privacy and confidentiality concerns of individuals (and organizations). theyshould also devote resources to devising effective strategies for communicating privacy and confidentiality policies and practices to respondents.such strategies appear to be more necessaryñand more challengingñthanever before.finally, a reason that respondents reply to statistical surveys is that theybelieve that their answers will be useful to the government or to societygenerally. statistical agencies should respect this contribution by compilingthe data and making them accessible to users in convenient forms. astatistical agency has an obligation to publish statistical information fromthe data it has collected unless it finds the results invalid.protecting human research participantscollecting data from individuals as part of a research study or astatistical information program is a form of research involving humanparticipants, for which the federal government has developed regulations,principles, and best practices over a period of 50 years (national researchcouncil, 2003d). the pertinent regulations, which have been adopted byten departments and seven agencies, are known as the òcommon ruleó(title 45 code of federal regulations, section 46). the common rule regulations require that researchers protect the privacy of human participantsand maintain the confidentiality of data collected from them, minimize theprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyrisks to participants from the data collection and analysis, select participants equitably with regard to the benefits and risks of the research, andseek informed consent from participants. under the regulations, mostfederally funded research involving human participants must be reviewedby an independent institutional review board (irb) to determine that thedesign meets the ethical requirements for protection. (see office for human research protections [2005] for information about the common ruleand procedures for the certification of irbs by the office for human research protections in the u.s. department of health and human services.)data collections of federal statistical agencies are subject to irb reviewwithin some departments. the census bureau, citing title 13, has maintained an exemption from irb review for its data collection programs under section 46.101(b.3), which permits exemption if òfederal statute(s)require(s) without exception that the confidentiality of the personallyidentifiable information will be maintained throughout the research andthereafter.ówhether or not a statistical agency is subject to formal irb review, itshould strive to incorporate the spirit of the common rule regulations inthe design and operation of its data collection programs. an agency that isrequired to obtain irb approval for data collection should work proactivelywith the irb to determine how best to apply the regulations in ways thatdo not unnecessarily inhibit response. for example, signed written consentis not necessary for mail surveys and is hardly ever necessary for telephonesurveys of the general population: such documentation does not provideany added protection to the respondent, and it is likely to reduce participation. as noted above, an effective statistical agency will seek waysñsuch assending an advance letterñto furnish information to potential respondentsthat will help them make an informed decision about whether to participate. such information should include the planned uses of the data and thebenefits to individuals and the public.practice 8: commitment to quality andprofessional standards of practicethe best guarantee of highquality data is a strong professional staffthat includes experts in the subjectmatter fields covered by the agencyõsprogram, experts in statistical methods and techniques, and experts in datacollection, processing, and other operations. a major function of an agencyõsmanagers is to strike a balance among these groups and promote workingprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary39relationships that make the agencyõs program as productive as possible, witheach group of experts contributing to the work of the others.an effective statistical agency devotes resources to developing, implementing, and inculcating standards for data quality and professionalpractice. although a longstanding culture of data quality contributes toprofessional practice, an agency should also seek to develop and documentstandards through an explicit process. the information quality act of 2000requires agencies to develop and publicize quality guidelines of a fairlygeneral nature (see appendix b).3 in addition, it is in an agencyõs interest todevelop detailed guidelines for use by its staff, contractors, and even outside researchers. the existence of explicit standards and guidelines, regularlyreviewed and updated, facilitates training of new inhouse staff andcontractorsõ staffs.an effective statistical agency keeps up to date on developments intheory and practice that may be relevant to its program, such as new techniques for imputing missing data (see, for example, national researchcouncil, 2004e:app. f). an effective agency is also alert to changes in theeconomy or in society that may call for changes in the concepts or methodsused in particular data sets (see, for example, national research council,1995a, on concepts of poverty, and national research council, 2002a, oncostofliving concepts). often the need for change conflicts with the needfor comparability with past data series, and this issue can easily dominateconsideration of proposals for change. agencies have the responsibility tomanage this conflict by initiating more relevant data series or revising existing series to improve quality while providing information to compare oldand new series, such as was done when the bureau of labor statistics revisedthe treatment of owneroccupied housing in the consumer price index.to ensure the quality of its data collection programs and reports, aneffective statistical agency has mechanisms and processes for obtaining bothinside and outside review of such aspects as the soundness of the datacollection and estimation methods and the completeness of the documentation of the methods used and the error properties of the data. at aprogram or agencywide level, mechanisms for outside review include standing advisory committees of technical experts and periodic assessments by3see also data quality guidelines of statistical agencies in other countries, includingcanada (statistical reference centre, 2005), and great britain (office for national statistics, 2005).principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyad hoc committees (see, e.g., national research council, 1985a, 1986,1993a, 1997b, 2003c, 2004c, 2004d). for individual publications and reports, formal processes are needed that incorporate review by agency technical experts and, as appropriate, by technical experts in other agencies andoutside the government. (see appendix b for a description of recent ombguidelines for peer review of scientific information.)practice 9: an active research programsubstantive research and analysisthere are strong arguments for a statistical agency to have staff whoseresponsibility is to conduct objective substantive analyses of the data thatthe agency compiles, such as analyses that assess trends over time or comparepopulation groups:¥agency analysts are in a position to understand the need for andpurposes of the data and know how the statistics will be used. such information must be available to the agency and understood thoroughly if thesurvey design is to produce the data required.¥those involved in analysis can best articulate the concepts thatshould form the basic framework of a statistical series. agency analysts arewell situated to understand and transmit the views of external users andresearchers; at the same time, close working relationships between analystsand data producers are needed for the translation of the conceptual framework into the design and operation of the survey.¥agency analysts have access to the complete microdata and so are ina better position than analysts outside the agency to understand anddescribe the limitations of the data for analysis purposes and to identify errors or shortcomings in the data that can lead to subsequentimprovements.¥substantive research by analysts on an agencyõs staff will havecredibility because of the agencyõs commitment to openness about the dataprovided and maintaining independence from political control.¥substantive research by analysts on an agencyõs staff can assist informulating the agencyõs data program, suggesting changes in priorities,concepts, and needs for new data or discontinuance of outmoded or littleused series.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary41as with descriptive analyses provided by the agency, substantiveanalyses must be designed to be relevant to policy but not take positions onpolicy options or be designed with any particular policy agenda in mind.these issues are discussed in martin (1981), norwood (1975), and triplett(1991).research on methodology and operationsfor statistical agencies to be innovative in methods for data collection,analysis, and dissemination, research on methodology and operational procedures must be ongoing. methodological research may be directed towardimproving survey design, measuring error and, when possible, reducing itfrom such sources as nonresponse and reporting errors, reducing the timeand effort asked of respondents, developing new and improved summarymeasures and estimation techniques, and developing innovative statisticalmethods for confidentiality protection. research on operational proceduresmay be directed toward facilitating data collection in the field, improvingthe efficiency and reproducibility of data capture and processing, andenhancing the usability of internetbased data dissemination systems.much of current practice in statistical agencies was developed throughresearch they conducted or obtained from other agencies. federal statisticalagencies, frequently in partnership with academic researchers, pioneeredthe applications of statistical probability sampling, the national economicaccounts, inputoutput models, and other analytic methods. the u.s.census bureau pioneered the use of computers for processing the census,and research on data collection, processing, and dissemination operationscontinues to lead to creative uses of automated procedures and equipmentin these areas. several federal statistical agencies sponsor research usingacademic principles of cognitive psychology to improve the design ofquestionnaires, the clarity of data presentation, and the ease of use ofelectronic data collection and dissemination tools such as the internet. thehistory of the statistical agencies has shown repeatedly that methodologicaland operations research can lead to large productivity gains in statisticalactivities at relatively low cost.an effective statistical agency actively partners with the academiccommunity for methodological research. it also seeks out academic andindustry expertise for improving data collection, processing, and dissemination operations. for example, a statistical agency can learn techniques andprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42principles and practices for a federal statistical agencybest practices for improving software development processes from computerscientists (see national research council, 2003e, 2004d).research on policy usesmuch more needs to be known about how statistics are actually usedin the policymaking process, both inside and outside the government.research about how the information produced by a statistical agency isused in practice can contribute to future improvements in design, concepts,and format of data products. for example, publicuse files of statisticalmicrodata were developed in response to the growing analytic needs ofgovernment and academic researchers.gaining an understanding of the variety of uses and users of an agencyõsdata is only a first step. more indepth research on the policy uses of anagencyõs information might, for example, explore the use of data inmicrosimulation or other economic models, or go further to examine howthe information from such models and other sources is used in decisionmaking (see national research council, 1991a, 1991b, 1997a, 2001b, 2003a).practice 10: professional advancement of staffan effective federal statistical agency has personnel policies thatencourage the development and retention of a strong professional staff whoare committed to the highest standards of quality work. there are severalkey elements of such a policy:¥the required levels of technical and professional qualifications forpositions in the agency are identified, and the agency adheres to theserequirements in recruitment and professional development of staff. position requirements take account of the different kinds of technical and otherskills, such as supervisory skills, that are necessary for an agency to have afull range of qualified staff, including not only statisticians, but also expertsin relevant subjectmatter areas, data collection, processing, disseminationprocesses, and management of complex, technical operations.¥continuing technical education and training of staff, appropriate tothe needs of their positions, is provided by sponsoring inhouse trainingprograms and providing opportunities for external education and training.¥professional activities, such as publication in refereed journals andpresentations at conferences, are encouraged and recognized, includingprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary43presentations of technical work in progress with appropriate disclaimers.participation in relevant statistical and other scientific associations isencouraged to promote interactions with academic researchers and otherdata users. such participation is also a mechanism for openness about thedata provided.¥interaction with other professionals is increased through technicaladvisory committees, supervision of contract research and research consultants, fellowship programs of visiting researchers, exchange of staff withrelevant statistical, policy, or research organizations, and opportunities fornew assignments within the agency.¥accomplishment is rewarded by appropriate recognition and byaffording opportunity for further professional development. the prestigeand credibility of a statistical agency is enhanced by the professionalvisibility of its staff, which may include establishing highlevel nonmanagement positions for highly qualified technical experts.an effective statistical agency considers carefully the costs andbenefitsñmonetary and nonmonetaryñof using contractor organizations,not only for data collection as most agencies do, but also to supplement inhouse staff in other areas.4 outsourcing of functions can have benefits,such as providing experts in areas in which the agency is unlikely to be ableto attract highly qualified inhouse staff (e.g., some information technologyfunctions), enabling an agency to handle an increase in its workload that isexpected to be temporary or that requires specialized skills, and allowing anagency to learn from best industry practices. however, outsourcing can alsohave costs, including that agency staff become primarily contract managersand less qualified as technical experts and leaders in their fields. an effective statistical agency maintains and develops a sufficiently large number ofinhouse staff, including mathematical statisticians, who are qualified toanalyze the agencyõs data and to plan, design, carry out, and evaluate itscore operations so that the agency maintains the integrity of its data and itscredibility in planning and fulfilling its mission. statistical agencies shouldalso maintain and develop staff with the expertise necessary for effectivemanagement of contractor resources.4only the bureau of labor statistics, the census bureau, and the national agriculturalstatistics service maintain their own interviewing staff.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyan effective statistical agency has policies and practices to instill thehighest possible commitment to professional ethics among its staff, as wellas procedures for monitoring contractor compliance with ethical standards.when an agency comes under pressure to act against its principlesñforexample, if it is asked to disclose confidential information for an enforcement purpose or to support an inaccurate interpretation of its datañitmust be able to rely on its staff to resist such actions as contrary to theethical principles of their profession. an effective agency refers its staff tosuch statements of professional practice as the guidelines published by theamerican statistical association (2005) and the international statisticalinstitute (2005), as well as to the agencyõs own statements about protectionof confidentiality, respect for privacy, standards for data quality, and similarmatters. it endeavors in other ways to ensure that its staff are fully cognizant of the ethics that must guide their actions in order for the agency tomaintain its credibility as a source of objective, reliable information for useby all.practice 11: coordination and cooperation withother statistical agenciesthe u.s. federal statistical system consists of many agencies in different departments, each with its own mission. nonetheless, statistical agenciesdo not and should not conduct their activities in isolation. an effectivestatistical agency actively explores ways to work with other agencies to meetcurrent information needs, for example, by seeking ways to integrate thedesigns of existing data systems to provide new or more useful data than asingle system can provide. an effective agency is also alert for occasionswhen it can provide technical assistance to other agenciesñincluding notonly other statistical agencies, but also program agencies in its departmentñas well as occasions when it can receive such assistance in turn.efforts to standardize concepts and definitions, such as those for industriesand occupations, further contribute to effective coordination of statisticalagency endeavors, as does the development of broad macro models, such asthe system of national accounts (see, e.g., national research council,2004a). initiatives for sharing data among statistical agencies (includingindividual data and address lists when permitted by law and when sharingdoes not violate confidentiality promises) can be helpful for such purposesas achieving greater efficiency in drawing samples, evaluating completenessprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary45of population coverage, and reducing duplication among statistical programs, as well as reducing respondent burden.the responsibility for coordinating statistical work in the federalgovernment is specifically assigned to the office of information and regulatory affairs (oira) in the omb by the paperwork reduction act (previously, by the federal reports act and the budget and accounting procedures act). the statistical and science policy office in oira, oftenworking with the assistance of interagency committees, reviews concepts ofinterest to more than one agency; issues standard classification systems (ofindustries, metropolitan areas, etc.) and oversees their periodic revision;consults with other parts of omb on statistical budgets; and, by reviewingthe statistical program of the government as a whole, identifies gaps instatistical data, programs that may be duplicative, and areas in which interagency cooperation might lead to greater efficiency and added utility ofdata. the statistical and science policy office also is responsible for coordinating u.s. participation in international statistical activities.5the statistical and science policy office encourages the use of administrative data for statistical purposes, when feasible, and works to establishcommon goals and norms on major statistical issues such as confidentiality.it sponsors and heads the interagency federal committee on statisticalmethodology (fcsm), which issues guidelines and recommendations onstatistical issues common to a number of agencies (see federal committeeon statistical methodology, 1978a2004; see also http://www.fcsm.gov). itencourages the committee on national statistics at the national academiesto serve as an independent adviser and reviewer of federal statistical activities. the 1995 reauthorization of the paperwork reduction act created astatutory basis for the interagency council on statistical policy (icsp),formalizing an arrangement whereby statistical agency heads participatewith omb in activities to coordinate federal statistical activities. (see box 1for a list of agencies represented on the icsp.)there are many forms of interagency cooperation and coordination.some efforts are multilateral, some bilateral. many result from commoninterests in specific subject areas, such as economic statistics, statistics on5the statistical and science policy office, previously the statistical policy office, wasrenamed to reflect added responsibilities with respect to the information quality act standards and guidelines, ombõs guidance on peer review planning and implementation, andevaluations of science underlying proposed regulatory actions.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46principles and practices for a federal statistical agencypeople with disabilities, or statistics on children or the elderly. (see u.s.office of management and budget, 2004c:ch.3, for a description of severalinteragency collaborative efforts, such as joint support for research thatfosters new and innovative approaches to surveys, expansion and improvement of fedstats coverage and features, and development of the americancommunity survey.)a common type of bilateral arrangement is the agreement of a programagency to provide administrative data to a statistical agency to be used as asampling frame, a source of classification information, or a summarycompilation to check (and possibly revise) preliminary sample results. thebureau of labor statistics, for example, benchmarks its monthly establishment employment reports to data supplied by state employment securityagencies. such practices improve statistical estimates, reduce costs, andeliminate duplicate requests for information from the same respondents. inother cases, federal statistical agencies engage in cooperative data collectionwith state counterparts to let one collection system satisfy the needs ofboth. a number of such joint systems have been developed, notably by thebureau of labor statistics, the national agricultural statistics service, thenational center for education statistics, and the national center forhealth statistics.another example of a joint arrangement is the case in which one statistical agency contracts with another to conduct a survey, compile specialtabulations, or develop models. such arrangements make use of the specialskills of the supplying agency and facilitate use of common concepts andmethods. the census bureau conducts many surveys for other agencies, asdo the national center for health statistics and the national agriculturalstatistics service (see u.s. office of management and budget, 2004c:app. a).the major federal statistics agencies are also concerned with international comparability of statistics. under the leadership of ombõsstatistical and science policy office, they contribute to the deliberations ofthe united nations statistical commission, the organization for economiccooperation and development, and other international organizations;participate in the development of international standard classifications andsystems; and support educational activities that promote improved statisticsin developing countries. statistical agencies also learn from and contributeto the work of established statistical agencies in other countries in suchareas as survey methodology, record linkage, confidentiality protectiontechniques, and data quality standards. several statistical agencies runeducational programs for government statisticians in developing countries.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part ii: commentary47some statistical agencies have longterm cooperative relationships withinternational groups, for example, the bureau of labor statistics with theinternational labor organization, the national agricultural statisticsservice with the food and agriculture organization, and the nationalcenter for health statistics with the world health organization.to be of most value, the efforts of statistical agencies to cooperate aspartners with one another should involve the full range of their activities,including definitions, concepts, measurement methods, analytical tools,dissemination modes, and disclosure limitation techniques. such effortsshould also extend to policies and professional practices so that agenciescan respond effectively and with a coordinated voice to such governmentwide initiatives as data quality guidelines, privacy impact assessments,performance rating criteria, institutional review board requirements, andothers.finally, coordination efforts should encompass the development ofdata, especially for emerging policy issues (national research council,1999a). in some cases, it may be not only more efficient, but also productive of needed new data for agencies to fully integrate the designs of existingdata systems, such as when one survey provides the sampling frame for arelated survey. in other instances, cooperative efforts may identify ways foragencies to improve their individual data systems so that they are moreuseful for a wide range of purposes. two of the more effective continuing cooperative efforts in this regardhave been the federal interagency forum on agingrelated statistics andthe federal interagency forum on child and family statistics. the formerwas established in the mid1980s by the national institute on aging, incooperation with the national center for health statistics and the censusbureau. the forumõs goals include coordinating the development and useof statistical databases among federal agencies, identifying information gapsand data inconsistencies, and encouraging crossnational research and datacollection for the aging population. the forum was reorganized in 1998 toinclude six new member agencies, and the reconfigured forum decided atits first meeting in march 1999 to focus on developing a periodic indicatorschart book, which was first published the following year (the latest publication is federal interagency forum on agingrelated statistics, 2004).the federal interagency forum on child and family statistics wasformalized in a 1994 executive order to foster coordination and collaboration in the collection and reporting of federal data on children and families.it includes many relevant statistical and program agencies. its reports (e.g.,principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyfederal interagency forum on child and family statistics, 2003, 2004)describe the condition of americaõs children, including changing population and family characteristics, the environment in which children areliving, and indicators of wellbeing in the areas of economic security, health,behavior, social environment, and education.no single agency, whether a statistical or program agency, could haveproduced the forum reports alone. working together in this way, federalstatistical agencies contribute to presenting data in a form that is morerelevant to policy concerns and to a stronger statistical system overall.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.49referencesamerican statistical association (2005). ethical guidelines for statistical practice. alexandria,va: american statistical association. available: http://www.amstat.org/profession/index.cfm?fuseaction=main [accessed march 2005].brackstone, gordon (1999). managing data quality in a statistical agency. survey methodology 25(2):139149.bureau of labor statistics (2005a). federal economic statistics advisory committee. washington, dc: u.s. department of labor. available: http://www.bls.gov/bls/fesac.htm [accessed march 2005].(2005b). national longitudinal surveys. washington, dc: u.s. department of labor. available: http://bls.gov/nls/home.htm [accessed march 2005].chakrabarty, rameswar, assisted by georgina torres (1996). the american housing surveyña quality profile. (current housing reports, h121/951. office of policy development and research, u.s. department of housing and urban development, and u.s.census bureau.) washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.doyle, pat, julia i. lane, jules j.m. theeuwes, and laura v. zayatz, eds. (2001).confidentiality, disclosure, and data access: theory and practical applications forstatistical agencies. amsterdam: elsevier northholland.duncan, joseph w., and william c. shelton (1978). revolution in united states governmentstatistics, 19261976. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce, office offederal statistical policy and standards.energy information administration (1996). residential energy consumption survey qualityprofile. (prepared by thomas b. jabine.) washington, dc: u.s. department of energy.federal committee on statistical methodology (1978a). report on statistics for allocation offunds. (statistical policy working paper 1, ntis pb86211521/as.) washington, dc:u.s. department of commerce.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50principles and practices for a federal statistical agency(1978b). report on statistical disclosure and disclosureavoidance techniques. (statistical policy working paper 2, ntis pb86211539/as.) washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.(1978c). an error profile: employment as measured by the current population survey.(statistical policy working paper 3, ntis pb86214269/as.) washington, dc: u.s.department of commerce.(1978d). glossary of nonsampling error terms: an illustration of a semantic problemin statistics. (statistical policy working paper 4, ntis pb86211547/as.) washington,dc: u.s. department of commerce.(1980a). report on exact and statistical matching techniques. (statistical policyworking paper 5, ntis pb86215829/as.) washington, dc: u.s. department ofcommerce.(1980b). report on statistical uses of administrative records. (statistical policyworking paper 6, ntis pb86214285/as.) washington, dc: u.s. department ofcommerce.(1982a). an interagency review of timeseries revision policies. (statistical policyworking paper 7, ntis pb86232451/as.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1982b). statistical interagency agreements. (statistical policy working paper 8, ntispb86230570/as.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1983a). contracting for surveys. (statistical policy working paper 9, ntis pb83233148.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1983b). approaches to developing questionnaires. (statistical policy working paper10, ntis pb84105055.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1984a). a review of industry coding systems. (statistical policy working paper 11,ntis pb84135276.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1984b). the role of telephone data collection in federal statistics. (statistical policyworking paper 12, ntis pb85105971.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1986). federal longitudinal surveys. (statistical policy working paper 13, ntispb86139730.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1987). workshop on statistical uses of microcomputers in federal agencies. (statisticalpolicy working paper 14, ntis pb87166393.) washington, dc: u.s. office ofmanagement and budget.(1988). quality in establishment surveys. (statistical policy working paper 15, ntispb88232921.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1990a). a comparative study of reporting units in selected employer data systems.(statistical policy working paper 16, ntis pb90205238.) washington, dc: u.s.office of management and budget.(1990b). survey coverage. (statistical policy working paper 17, ntis pb90205246.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1990c). data editing in federal statistical agencies. (statistical policy working paper18, ntis pb90205253.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1990d). computer assisted survey information. (statistical policy working paper19, ntis pb90205261.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references51(1991). seminar on quality of federal data. (statistical policy working paper 20,ntis pb91142414.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1993). indirect estimators in federal programs. (statistical policy working paper 21,ntis pb93209294.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1994). report on statistical disclosure limitation methodology. (statistical policyworking paper 22, ntis pb94165305.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1995a). seminar on new directions in statistical methodology. (statistical policyworking paper 23, ntis pb95182978.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1995b). electronic dissemination of statistical data. (statistical policy workingpaper 24, ntis pb96121629.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management andbudget.(1996). data editing workshop and exposition. (statistical policy working paper 25,ntis pb97104624.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1997). seminar on statistical methodology in the public service. (statistical policyworking paper 26, ntis pb97162580.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1998). training for the future: addressing tomorrowõs survey tasks. (statistical policyworking paper 27, ntis pb99102576.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1999a). seminar on interagency coordination and cooperation. (statistical policyworking paper 28, ntis pb99132029.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1999b). federal committee on statistical methodology research conference,conference papers. (statistical policy working paper 29, ntis pb99166795.)washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(1999c). 1999 federal committee on statistical methodology research conference:complete proceedings. (statistical policy working paper 30, ntis pb2000105886.)washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(2001a). measuring and reporting sources of error in surveys. (statistical policy working paper 31, ntis pb2001104329.) washington, dc: u.s. office of managementand budget.(2001b). seminar on integrating federal statistical information and processes. (statistical policy working paper 32, ntis pb2001104626.) washington, dc: u.s. officeof management and budget.(2001c). seminar on the funding opportunity in survey research. (statistical policyworking paper 33, ntis pb2001108851.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(2001d). federal committee on statistical methodology research conference. (statisticalpolicy working paper 34, ntis pb2002100103.) washington, dc: u.s. office ofmanagement and budget.(2002). seminar on challenges to the federal statistical system in fostering access tostatistics. (statistical policy working paper 35.) washington, dc: u.s. office ofmanagement and budget.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52principles and practices for a federal statistical agency(2003a). seminar on the funding opportunity in survey research. (statistical policyworking paper 36.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(2003b). federal committee on statistical methodology research conference. (statisticalpolicy working paper 37.) washington, dc: u.s. office of management and budget.(2004). summary report of the fcsmgss workshop on webbased data collection.(statistical policy working paper 38.) washington, dc: u.s. office of managementand budget.federal interagency forum on agingrelated statistics (2004). older americans: key indicators of wellbeing, 2004. available: http://www.agingstats.gov [accessed january 2005]).federal interagency forum on child and family statistics (2003). americaõs children: keynational indicators of wellbeing, 2003. washington, dc: u.s. government printingoffice. available: http://www.childstats.gov [accessed january 2005].(2004). americaõs children in brief: key national indicators of wellbeing, 2004.washington, dc: u.s. government printing office. available: http://www.childstats.gov[accessed january 2005].gates, gerald w. (2000). confidentiality. pp. 8083 in margo j. anderson (ed.), encyclopediaof the u.s. census. washington, dc: cq press.international statistical institute (2005). international statistical institute home page.voorburg, the netherlands: international statistical institute. available: http://www.cbs.nl/isi/ [accessed march 2005].kalton, graham, marianne winglee, sheila krawchuk, and daniel levine (2000). qualityprofile for sass rounds 13: 19871995, aspects of the quality of data in the schools andstaffing surveys (sass). washington, dc: u.s. department of education nationalcenter for education statistics.martin, margaret e. (1981). statistical practice in bureaucracies. journal of the americanstatistical association 76(373):18.national center for education statistics (2005). early childhood longitudinal study. washington, dc: u.s. department of education. available: http://nces.ed.gov/ecls/ [accessed march 2005].national research council (1976). setting statistical priorities. report of the panel on methodology for statistical priorities of the committee on national statistics, commissionon behavioral and social sciences and education. assembly of mathematical and physical sciences. washington, dc: national academy press.(1984). cognitive aspects of survey methodology: building a bridge between disciplines. report of the advanced research seminar on cognitive aspects of surveymethodology, thomas b. jabine, miron l. straf, judith m. tanur, and rogertourangeau, eds. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral andsocial sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.(1985a). immigration statistics: a story of neglect. panel on immigration statistics,daniel b. levine, kenneth hill, and robert warren, eds. committee on nationalstatistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington,dc: national academy press.(1985b). sharing research data. stephen e. fienberg, margaret e. martin, andmiron l. straf, eds. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral andsocial sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references53(1986). creating a center for education statistics: a time for action. panel to evaluate the national center for education statistics, daniel b. levine, ed. committee onnational statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: national academy press.(1991a). improving information for social policy decisions: the uses of microsimulation modeling, volume i: review and recommendations. panel to evaluatemicrosimulation models for social welfare programs, constance f. citro and eric a.hanushek, eds. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral andsocial sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.(1991b). improving information for social policy decisions: the uses of microsimulation modeling, volume ii: technical papers. panel to evaluate microsimulationmodels for social welfare programs, constance f. citro and eric a. hanushek, eds.committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, dc: national academy press.(1992). principles and practices for a federal statistical agency. margaret e. martinand miron l. straf, eds. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioraland social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.(1993a). the future of the survey of income and program participation. panel toevaluate the survey of income and program participation, constance f. citro andgraham kalton, eds. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioraland social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.(1993b). private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. panel on confidentiality and data access, george t. duncan, thomasb. jabine, and virginia a. de wolf, eds. committee on national statistics, commissionon behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academypress.(1995a). measuring povertyña new approach. panel on poverty and familyassistance, constance f. citro and robert t. michael, eds. committee on nationalstatistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington,dc: national academy press.(1995b). modernizing the u.s. census. panel on census requirements in the year2000 and beyond. barry edmonston and charles schultze, eds. committee onnational statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: national academy press.(1997a). assessing policies for retirement income: needs for data, research, and models.panel on retirement income modeling, constance f. citro and eric a. hanushek, eds.committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, dc: national academy press.(1997b). the bureau of transportation statistics: priorities for the future. panel onstatistical programs and practices of the bureau of transportation statistics, constancef. citro and janet l. norwood, eds. committee on national statistics and transportation research board. washington, dc: national academy press.(1998a). longitudinal surveys of children. committee on national statistics andboard on children, youth, and families, kirsten k. west, robert m. hauser, and terrim. scanlan, eds., commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54principles and practices for a federal statistical agency(1998b). statistics, testing, and defense acquisition: new approaches and methodological improvements. panel on statistical methods for testing and evaluating defensesystems, michael l. cohen, john e. rolph, and duane l. steffey, eds. committee onnational statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: national academy press.(1999a). health performance measurement in the public sector: principles and policiesfor implementing an information network. panel on performance measures and data forpublic health performance partnership grants, edward b. perrin, jane s. durch, andsusan m. skillman, eds. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioraland social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.(1999b). sowing seeds of change: informing public policy in the economic researchservice of usda. panel to study the research program of the economic researchservice, john f. geweke, james t. bonnen, andrew a. white, and jeffrey j. koshel,eds. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciencesand education. washington, dc: national academy press.(2000). improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshop.christopher mackie and norman bradburn, eds. committee on national statistics,commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc:national academy press.(2001a). cells and surveys: should biological measures be included in social scienceresearch? caleb e. finch, james w. vaupel, and kevin kinsella, eds. committee onpopulation, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.(2001b). evaluating welfare reform in an era of transition. panel on data andmethods for measuring the effects of changes in social welfare programs, robert a.moffitt and michele ver ploeg, eds. committee on national statistics, commission onbehavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academypress.(2001c). principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: second edition.margaret e. martin, miron l. straf, and constance f. citro, eds. committee onnational statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: national academy press.(2002a). at what price?: conceptualizing and measuring costofliving and priceindexes. panel on conceptual, measurement, and other statistical issues in developingcostofliving indexes, charles schultze and christopher mackie, eds. committee onnational statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: national academy press.(2002b). reliability issues for dod systems: report of a workshop. francisco samaniegoand michael l. cohen, eds. committee on national statistics, division of behavioraland social sciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.(2003a). estimating eligibility and participation for the wic program: final report.panel to evaluate the usdaõs methodology for estimating eligibility and participationfor the wic program, michele ver ploeg and david m. betson, eds. committee onnational statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: the national academies press.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references55(2003b). innovations in software engineering for defense systems. oversight committee for the workshop on statistical methods in software engineering for defensesystems, siddhartha r. dalal, jesse h. poore, and michael l. cohen, eds. committeeon national statistics and division on engineering and physical sciences. washington,dc: the national academies press.(2003c). measuring personal travel and goods movement: a review of the bureau oftransportation statisticsõ surveysñspecial report 277. committee to review the bureauof transportation statisticsõ survey programs. committee on national statistics andtransportation research board. washington, dc: the national academies press.(2003d). protecting participants and facilitating social and behavioral sciencesresearch. panel on institutional review boards, surveys, and social science research,constance f. citro, daniel r. ilgen, and cora b. marrett, eds. committee on nationalstatistics and board on behavioral, cognitive, and sensory sciences. washington, dc:the national academies press.(2003e). survey automation: report and workshop proceedings. oversight committeefor the workshop on survey automation, daniel l. cork, michael l. cohen, robertgroves, and william kalsbeek, eds. committee on national statistics, division ofbehavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: the nationalacademies press.(2004a). beyond the market: designing nonmarket accounts for the united states.panel to study the design of nonmarket accounts, katharine g. abraham andchristopher mackie, eds. committee on national statistics, division of behavioraland social sciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.(2004b). eliminating health disparities: measurement and data needs. panel ondhhs collection of race and ethnic data, michele ver ploeg and edward perrin,eds. committee on national statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, dc: the national academies press.(2004c). measuring research and development expenditures in the u.s. economy.panel on research and development statistics at the national science foundation,lawrence d. brown, thomas j. plewes, and marisa a. gerstein, eds. committee onnational statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.(2004d). reengineering the 2010 census: risks and challenges. panel on research onfuture census methods, daniel l. cork, michael l. cohen, and benjamin f. king,eds. committee on national statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, dc: the national academies press.(2004e). the 2000 census: counting under adversity. panel to review the 2000census, constance f. citro, daniel l. cork, and janet l. norwood, eds. committeeon national statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: the national academies press.national research council and institute of medicine (1992). toward a national health caresurvey: a data system for the 21st century. panel on the national health care survey,gooloo s. wunderlich, ed. committee on national statistics and division of healthcare services. washington, dc: national academy press.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56principles and practices for a federal statistical agency(2004). childrenõs health, the nationõs wealth: assessing and improving childrenõshealth. committee on evaluation of childrenõs health, board on children, youth, andfamilies, division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc:the national academies press.nie, norman, kenneth prewitt, d. sunshine hillygus, and h. pals (in press). taking a censusunder adversity. new york: russell sage foundation.norwood, janet l. (1975). should those who produce statistics analyze them? how far shouldanalysis go? an american view. bulletin of the international statistical institute,proceedings of the 40th session 46:420432.(1995). organizing to count: change in the federal statistical system. washington,dc: the urban institute press.office for human research protections (2005). office for human research protections homepage. washington, dc: u.s. department of health and human services. available:http://hhs.gov/ohrp/ [accessed march 2005].office for national statistics (2005). national statistics online. london, england: office fornational statistics. available: http://www.statistics.gov.uk/ [accessed march 2005].presidentõs commission on federal statistics (1971). federal statistics. volume i. washington,dc: u.s. government printing office.privacy protection study commission (1977). personal privacy in an information society.washington, d.c: u.s. government printing office.ryten, jacob (1990). statistical organization criteria for intercountry comparisons and theirapplication to canada. journal of official statistics 6(3):319332.statistical reference centre (2005). statistics canada. ottawa: statistical reference centre.available: http://www.statcan.ca/ [accessed march 2005].triplett, jack (1991). the federal statistical systemõs response to emerging data needs. journalof economic and social measurement 17(3, 4):155201.united nations economic commission for europe (2003). eceworld bank seminar onthe application of the fundamental principles of official statistics, april 2829, almaty,kazakhstan.united nations statistical commission (1994). fundamental principles of official statistics.official records of the economic and social council, 1994, supplement no. 9. newyork: united nations statistical commission.(2003). implementation of the fundamental principles of official statistics. report ofthe secretarygeneral. new york: united nations statistical commission.united nations statistical commission and economic commission for europe (1991).resolution on fundamental principles of official statistics in the economic commissionfor europe (draft). report of the thirtyninth plenary session, june 1721.u.s. census bureau (1998). survey of income and program participation quality profile 1998,third edition. (prepared by westat, graham kalton, project director.) washington,dc: u.s. department of commerce. also available: http://www.bls.census.gov/sipp/workpapr/230.pdf [accessed january 2005].(2003). u.s. census bureau data stewardship/privacy impact assessmentñdemographic surveys program. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.u.s. general accounting office (1995). statistical agencies: adherence to guidelines andcoordination of budgets. washington, dc: u.s. general accounting office.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references57u.s. office of management and budget (1985). statistical policy directive on compilation,release, and evaluation of principal federal economic indicators. federal register50(186):932934.(1997). order providing for the confidentiality of statistical information. federalregister 62(124):3504435050.(2003). omb guidance for implementing the privacy provisions of the egovernment act of 2002. memorandum for heads of executive departments andagencies from joshua b. bolten, director. washington, dc. available: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/m0322.html [accessed january 2005].(2004a). budget of the united states government, fiscal year 2005, analyticalperspectives. washington, dc: u.s. government printing office.(2004b). issuance of ombõs òfinal information quality bulletin for peer review.ómemorandum from joshua b. bolten, director, for heads of departments and agencies.u.s. office of management and budget (december 16).(2004c). statistical programs of the united states government, fiscal year 2005.statistical and science policy office, office of information and regulatory affairs,u.s. office of management and budget. washington, dc: u.s. government printingoffice.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.59appendix afundamental principles ofofficial statistics of the united nationsstatistical commission[excerpted from the report of the statistical commission on its specialsession, held in new york 1115 april 1994. official records of the economic and social council, 1994, supplement no. 9.]action taken by the commission59. the commission adopted the fundamental principles of official statistics as set out in ece decision c (47), but incorporating a revised preamble. the preamble and principles, as adopted, are set out below:fundamental principles of official statisticsthe statistical commission,bearing in mind that official statistical information is an essential basisfor development in the economic, demographic, social and environmental fields and for mutual knowledge and trade among the statesand peoples of the world,bearing in mind that the essential trust of the public in official statistical information depends to a large extent on respect for the fundamental values and principles which are the basis of any society which seeksto understand itself and to respect the rights of its members,principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60principles and practices for a federal statistical agencybearing in mind that the quality of official statistics, and thus the quality of the information available to the government, the economy andthe public depends largely on the cooperation of citizens, enterprises,and other respondents in providing appropriate and reliable dataneeded for necessary statistical compilations and on the cooperationbetween users and producers of statistics in order to meet usersõ needs,recalling the efforts of governmental and nongovernmental organizations active in statistics to establish standards and concepts to allowcomparisons among countries,recalling also the international statistical institute declaration of professional ethics,having expressed the opinion that resolution c (47), adopted by theeconomic commission for europe on 15 april 1992, is of universalsignificance,noting that, at its eighth session, held at bangkok in november 1993,the working group of statistical experts, assigned by the committeeon statistics of the economic and social commission for asia and thepacific to examine the fundamental principles, had agreed in principleto the ece version and had emphasized that those principles wereapplicable to all nations,noting also that, at its eighth session, held at addis ababa in march1994, the joint conference of african planners, statisticians and demographers, considered that the fundamental principles of officialstatistics are of universal significance,adopts the present principles of official statistics:1. official statistics provide an indispensable element in the information system of a democratic society, serving the government, theeconomy and the public with data about the economic, demographic,social and environmental situation. to this end, official statistics thatmeet the test of practical utility are to be compiled and made availableon an impartial basis by official statistical agencies to honour citizensõentitlement to public information.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a612. to retain trust in official statistics, the statistical agencies need todecide according to strictly professional considerations, including scientific principles and professional ethics, on the methods and procedures for the collection, processing, storage and presentation of statistical data.3. to facilitate a correct interpretation of the data, the statistical agencies are to present information according to scientific standards on thesources, methods and procedures of the statistics.4. the statistical agencies are entitled to comment on erroneous interpretation and misuse of statistics.5. data for statistical purposes may be drawn from all types of sources,be they statistical surveys or administrative records. statistical agenciesare to choose the source with regard to quality, timeliness, costs andthe burden on respondents.6. individual data collected by statistical agencies for statistical compilation, whether they refer to natural or legal persons, are to be strictlyconfidential and used exclusively for statistical purposes.7. the laws, regulations and measures under which the statistical systems operate are to be made public.8. coordination among statistical agencies within countries is essential to achieve consistency and efficiency in the statistical system.9. the use by statistical agencies in each country of international concepts, classifications and methods promotes the consistency and efficiency of statistical systems at all official levels.10. bilateral and multilateral cooperation in statistics contributes tothe improvement of systems of official statistics in all countries.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62appendix brelevant legislation and guidelinesadopted since 2001this appendix summarizes relevant congressional legislation and u.s.office of management and budget (omb) guidance since publication ofthe second edition of principles and practices for a federal statistical agency(national research council, 2001c). it covers the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea); section 208 of theegovernment act, which requires privacy impact assessments for federaldata collections; the information quality act of 2000; omb guidance onpeer review; and omb provisions for rating the performance of federalprograms using the program assessment rating tool (part).confidential information protection andstatistical efficiency actthe confidential information protection and statistical efficiency actwas passed as title v of the egovernment act of 2002 (p.l. 107347).enactment of cipsea culminated more than 30 years of efforts to standardize and strengthen legal protections for data collected for statisticalpurposes by federal agencies while permitting limited sharing of individually identifiable business information among three statistical agencies forefficiency and quality improvement.title v has two subtitles. subtitle a, confidential information protection, strengthens and extends confidentiality protection for all statisticaldata collections of the u.s. government. for all data furnished by indiprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b63viduals or organizations to an agency under a pledge of confidentiality forexclusively statistical purposes, it provides that the data will be used onlyfor statistical purposes and will not be disclosed in identifiable form toanyone not authorized by the title. it makes knowing and willful disclosureof confidential statistical data a class e felony with fines up to $250,000and imprisonment for up to 5 years.subtitle a pertains not only to surveys, but also to collections by afederal agency for statistical purposes from administrative records (e.g., stategovernment agency records). data covered under subtitle a are not subjectto release under a freedom of information act request. guidance fromomb, which is charged to oversee and coordinate the implementation ofcipsea, is under development. it is intended to cover such topics as thesteps that agencies must take to protect confidential information; wordingof confidentiality pledges in materials that are provided to respondents;steps that agencies must take to distinguish any data or information theycollect for nonstatistical purposes and to provide proper notice to the publicof such data; and ways in which agents (e.g., contractors, researchers) maybe designated to use individually identifiable information for analysis andother statistical purposes and be held legally responsible for protecting theconfidentiality of that information.subtitle b of cipsea, statistical efficiency, permits the bureau ofeconomic analysis (bea), the bureau of labor statistics (bls), and thecensus bureau to share individually identifiable business data for statisticalpurposes. the intent of the subtitle is to reduce respondent burden onbusinesses; improve the comparability and accuracy of federal economicstatistics by permitting these three agencies to reconcile differences amongsampling frames, business classifications, and business reporting; andincrease understanding of the u.s. economy and improve the accuracy ofkey national indicators, such as the national income and product accounts.section 208, egovernment actsection 208 of the egovernment act of 2002 requires federal agenciesto conduct a privacy impact assessment (pia) whenever the agency developsor obtains information technology that handles individually identifiableinformation or whenever the agency initiates a new collection of individually identifiable information. the pia is to be made publicly available andcover such topics as what information is being collected and why, withwhom the information will be shared, what provisions will be made forprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyinformed consent regarding data sharing, and how the information will besecured. typically, pias cover not only privacy issues, but also confidentiality,integrity, and availability issues (see, e.g., u.s. census bureau, 2003). ombis required to issue guidance for development of pias, which was done in amemorandum from the omb director to the heads of executive agenciesand departments on september 26, 2003 (u.s. office of management andbudget, 2003).information quality act of 2000the information quality act (iqa), two sentences in an appropriations bill for fiscal 2001 (p.l. 106554, section 515a), requires federal agencies to develop predissemination procedures that will ensure the quality ofinformation they disseminate and to develop an administrative mechanismwhereby affected parties can request that agencies correct lowquality information. the act directs omb to issue guidelines òensuring and maximizingthe quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information . . . disseminated by federal agencies.óomb published proposed governmentwide iqa guidelines in thefederal register on june 28, 2001 (66 federal register 34489) and finalguidelines (with a request for further comments on certain points) onseptember 28, 2001 (66 federal register 49718). omb later republishedthe guidelines (after incorporating changes pursuant to public comments)on february 22, 2002 (67 federal register 84528460; see also http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/iqg 2002.pdf [january 2005]).in june 2002, 13 statistical agencies issued a federal register notice (67federal register 3846738470, june 4) outlining a common approach tothe development and provision of guidelines for ensuring and maximizingthe quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of disseminated information.the notice directed people to the web sites of each agency for more information and to learn how to comment on draft guidelines. each agencythen finalized its own guidelines (see, for example, http://www.census.gov/qdocs/www/qualityguidelines.htm [january 2005]).omb guidance on peer reviewunder the authority of the information quality act, omb issued adraft peer review bulletin for public comment on september 15, 2003. itissued a revised information quality bulletin for peer review on april 15,principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b652004, which incorporated comments from agencies, the national academies,and others. the final information quality bulletin for peer review wasissued on december 16, 2004; it requires federal agencies to conduct a peerreview of òinfluential scientific informationó before the information isreleased to the public. òinfluential scientific informationó is defined asòscientific information the agency reasonably can determine will have ordoes have a clear and substantial impact on important public policies orprivate sector decisionsó (u.s. office of management and budget,2004b:10). the bulletin grants agencies discretion to select the type of peerreview process for a particular information product. the bulletin excludesfrom the guidelines òroutine statistical information released by federalstatistical agencies (e.g., periodic demographic and economic statistics) andthe analysis of these data to compute standard indicators and trends (e.g.,unemployment and poverty rates)ó (u.s. office of management andbudget, 2004b:40).performance assessment rating toolthe office of management and budget began a major initiative in2002 to develop a tool for assessing the performance of federal agencies andprograms that would identify effective and ineffective programs and provideinformation that could be used in making budgetary decisions. the tool isthe performance assessment rating tool (part), which is a questionnairethat has sets of questions or measures on program design and purpose,program goals, agency management of programs, and results that agenciescan report with accuracy and consistency. (there are several versions ofpart for use by different kinds of programs, such as research and development programs, competitive grant programs, or direct federal programs.)answers to the questions in each section produce a numeric score for thatsection from 0 to 100; the section scores are then combined to achieve anoverall qualitative rating: effective, moderately effective, adequate, orineffective (for more information, see http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/part/2004faq.html [january 2005]).the statistical agencies and units on the interagency council on statistical policy collaborated to develop an initial set of common performancestandards for use in completing part and in developing strategic plansrequired by the government performance and results act of 1993 (gpra).the agencies agreed on two general areas of focusñproduct quality andprogram performanceñand on three dimensions of each focus area. forprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyproduct quality, the dimensions are relevance, accuracy, and timeliness; forprogram performance, the dimensions are cost, dissemination, and missionachievement. example indicators were developed for each dimension, suchas measures of customer satisfaction as an indicator of mission achievement(see u.s. office of management and budget, 2004a:4146).principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.67executive office of the presidentfederal statistics briefing roomseconomic statistics (esbr): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/esbr.htmlsocial statistics (ssbr): www.whitehouse.gov/fsbr/ssbr.htmloffice of management and budget (omb): www.whitehouse.gov/ombfederal committee on statistical methodology: www.fcsm.govfederal interagency council on statistical policy, federal statistics:www.fedstats.govfederal interagency forum on agingrelated statistics:www.agingstats.govfederal interagency forum on child and family statistics:www.childstats.govconsumer product safety commission (cpsc): www.cpsc.govdepartment of agriculture (usda): www.usda.govagricultural research service (ars): www.ars.usda.govnote: this list is adapted from a listing in u.s. office of management and budget(2004c) and includes federal statistical agencies, as well as other federal agencies that producestatistical information.appendix cselected federal statistical world wideweb sites, january 2005principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68principles and practices for a federal statistical agencyeconomic research service (ers): www.ers.usda.govfood and nutrition service (fns): www.fns.usda.govforeign agricultural service (fas): www.fas.usda.govforest service (fs): www.fs.fed.usnational agricultural statistics service (nass): www.usda.gov/nassnatural resources conservation service (nrcs): www.nrcs.usda.govdepartment of commerce: www.doc.govbureau of economic analysis (bea): www.bea.govcensus bureau: www.census.goveconomics and statistics administration (esa): www.esa.doc.govinternational trade administration (ita): www.ita.doc.govnational marine fisheries service (nmfs): www.nmfs.noaa.govnational oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa):www.noaa.govdepartment of defense: www.dod.govarmy corps of engineers (corps): www.usace.army.mildefense manpower data center (dmdc): www.dmdc.osd.mildirectorate for information operations and reports (dior):www.dior.whs.mildepartment of education: www.ed.govinstitute of education sciences (ies):www. ed.gov/about/offices/list/iesnational center for education statistics (nces): www.nces.ed.govdepartment of energy: www.doe.govenergy information administration (eia): www.eia.doe.govoffice of environment, safety and health (eh): www.eh.doe.govdepartment of health and human services: www.dhhs.govadministration for children and families (acf): www.acf.hhs.govagency for healthcare research and quality (ahrq):www.ahrq.govagency for toxic substances and disease registry (atsdr):www.atsdr.cdc.govcenters for disease control and prevention (cdc): www.cdc.govprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c69centers for medicare and medicaid services (cms):www.cms.hhs.govhealth resources and services administration (hrsa):www.hrsa.govindian health service (ihs): www.ihs.govnational center for health statistics (nchs): www.cdc.gov/nchsnational institute on aging (nia): www.nia.nih.govnational institutes of health (nih): www.nih.govoffice of population affairs (opa): www.opa.osophs.dhhs.govoffice of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation (aspe):www.aspe.hhs.govsubstance abuse and mental health services administration(samhsa): www.samhsa.govdepartment of homeland security: www.dhs.govoffice of immigration statistics (ois):www.uscis.gov/graphics/shared/aboutus/statisticstransportation security administration (tsa): www.tsa.govu.s. customs and border protection (cbp): www.cbp.govdepartment of housing and urban development: www.hud.govoffice of the assistant secretary for policy development andresearch (pd&r): www.huduser.orgdepartment of the interior: www.doi.govbureau of reclamation: www.usbr.govminerals management service (mms): www.mms.govnational park service (nps): www.nps.govu.s. fish and wildlife service (fws): www.fws.govu.s. geological survey (usgs): www.usgs.govdepartment of justice: www.usdoj.govbureau of justice statistics (bjs): www.ojp.usdoj.gov/bjsbureau of prisons (bop): www.bop.govdrug enforcement administration (dea): www.usdoj.gov/deafederal bureau of investigation (fbi): www.fbi.govprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70principles and practices for a federal statistical agencydepartment of labor: www.dol.govbureau of labor statistics (bls): www.bls.govemployee benefits security administration (ebsa):www.dol.gov/ebsaemployment and training administration (eta): www.doleta.govmine safety and health administration (msha): www.msha.govoccupational safety and health administration (osha):www.osha.govoffice of the assistant secretary for policy (oasp): www.dol.gov/aspdepartment of state: www.state.govagency for international development (aid): www.usaid.govdepartment of transportation: www.dot.govbureau of transportation statistics (bts): www.bts.govfederal aviation administration (faa): www.faa.govfederal highway administration (fhwa): www.fhwa.dot.govfederal railroad administration (fra): www.fra.dot.govfederal transit administration (fta): www.fta.dot.govmaritime administration (marad): www.marad.dot.govnational highway traffic safety administration (nhtsa):www.nhtsa.dot.gov/research and innovative technology administration (rita):www.rita.dot.govdepartment of the treasury: www.ustreas.govinternal revenue service (irs): www.irs.govstatistics of income division (soi): www.irs.gov/taxstatsdepartment of veterans affairs (va): www.va.gov/vetdata/environmental protection agency (epa): www.epa.govoffice of environmental information (oei): www.epa.gov/oeifederal emergency management agency (fema): www.fema.govnational aeronautics and space administration (nasa): www.nasa.govprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c71national science foundation: www.nsf.govdirectorate for social, behavioral, and economic sciences (sbe):www.nsf.gov/dir/index.isp?org=sbescience resources statistics division (srs): www.nsf.gov/statisticssmall business administration (sba): www.sba.gov/advo/researchsocial security administration (ssa): www.socialsecurity.govoffice of research, evaluation, and statistics: www.socialsecurity.gov/policyindex of federal statistical sites listedadministration for children and familiesñsee department of healthand human servicesagency for healthcare research and qualityñsee department of healthand human servicesagency for international developmentñsee department of stateagency for toxic substances and disease registryñsee department ofhealth and human servicesagricultural research serviceñsee department of agriculturearmy corps of engineersñsee department of defensebureau of economic analysisñsee department of commercebureau of justice statisticsñsee department of justicebureau of labor statisticsñsee department of laborbureau of prisonsñsee department of justicebureau of reclamationñsee department of the interiorbureau of transportation statisticsñsee department of transportationcensus bureauñsee department of commercecenters for disease control and preventionñsee department of healthand human servicescenters for medicare and medicaid servicesñsee department of healthand human servicesconsumer product safety commissionñsee consumer product safetycommissiondefense manpower data centerñsee department of defensedirectorate for information operations and reportsñsee department ofdefenseprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72principles and practices for a federal statistical agencydirectorate for social, behavioral, and economic sciencesñsee nationalscience foundationdrug enforcement administrationñsee department of justiceeconomic research serviceñsee department of agricultureeconomic statistics briefing roomñsee executive office of thepresident, federal statistics briefing roomseconomics and statistics administrationñsee department of commerceemployee benefits security administrationñsee department of laboremployment and training administrationñsee department of laborenergy information administrationñsee department of energyenvironmental protection agencyñsee environmental protectionagencyfederal aviation administrationñsee department of transportationfederal bureau of investigationñsee department of justicefederal committee on statistical methodologyñsee executive office ofthe president, office of management and budgetfederal emergency management agencyñsee federal emergencymanagement agencyfederal highway administrationñsee department of transportationfederal interagency council on statistical policy, federal statisticsñseeexecutive office of the president, office of management and budgetfederal interagency forum on agingrelated statisticsñsee executiveoffice of the president, office of management and budgetfederal interagency forum on child and family statisticsñsee executiveoffice of the president, office of management and budgetfederal railroad administrationñsee department of transportationfederal statistics briefing roomsñsee executive office of the presidentfederal transit administrationñsee department of transportationfood and nutrition serviceñsee department of agricultureforeign agricultural serviceñsee department of agricultureforest serviceñsee department of agriculturehealth resources and services administrationñsee department ofhealth and human servicesindian health serviceñsee department of health and human servicesinstitute of education sciencesñsee department of educationinternal revenue serviceñsee department of the treasuryinternational trade administrationñsee department of commercemaritime administrationñsee department of transportationmine safety and health administrationñsee department of laborprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c73minerals management serviceñsee department of the interiornational aeronautics and space administrationñsee nationalaeronautics and space administrationnational agricultural statistics serviceñsee department of agriculturenational center for education statisticsñsee department of educationnational center for health statisticsñsee department of health andhuman servicesnational highway traffic safety administrationñsee department oftransportationnational institute on agingñsee department of health and humanservicesnational institutes of healthñsee department of health and humanservicesnational marine fisheries serviceñsee department of commercenational oceanic and atmospheric administrationñsee department ofcommercenational park serviceñsee department of the interiornational science foundationñsee national science foundationnatural resources conservation serviceñsee department of agricultureoccupational safety and health administrationñsee department oflaboroffice of environmental informationñsee environmental protectionagencyoffice of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluationñseedepartment of health and human servicesoffice of the assistant secretary for policyñsee department of laboroffice of the assistant secretary for policy development and researchñsee department of housing and urban developmentoffice of environment, safety and healthñsee department of energyoffice of immigration statisticsñsee department of homeland securityoffice of management and budgetñsee executive office of the presidentoffice of population affairsñsee department of health and humanservicesoffice of research, evaluation, and statisticsñsee social securityadministrationresearch and innovative technology administrationñsee department oftransportationscience resources statistics divisionñsee national science foundation,directorate for social, behavioral, and economic sciencesprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74principles and practices for a federal statistical agencysmall business administrationñsee small business administrationsocial security administrationñsee social security administrationsocial statistics briefing roomñsee executive office of the president,federal statistics briefing roomsstatistics of income divisionñsee department of the treasurysubstance abuse and mental health services administrationñseedepartment of health and human servicestransportation security administrationñsee department of homelandsecurityu.s. customs and border protectionñsee department of homelandsecurityu.s. fish and wildlife serviceñsee department of the interioru.s. geological surveyñsee department of the interiorprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on national statisticsthe committee on national statistics (cnstat) was established in 1972to improve the statistical methods and information on which public policydecisions are based. the committee carries out studies, workshops, andother activities to foster better measures and fuller understanding of theeconomy, the environment, public health, crime, education, immigration,poverty, welfare, and other public policy issues. it also evaluates ongoingstatistical programs and tracks the statistical policy and coordinatingactivities of the federal government, serving a unique role at the intersectionof statistics and public policy. the committeeõs work is supported by aconsortium of federal agencies through a national science foundationgrant.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency: third editioncopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.