detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11434expanding access to research data: reconciling risks andopportunities132 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309100120 | doi 10.17226/11434panel on data access for research purposes; committee on national statistics;division of behavioral and social sciences and education; national researchcouncilexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.panel on data access for research purposescommittee on national statisticsdivision of behavioral and social sciences and educationexpandingaccess toresearch datareconciling risks and opportunitiesexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsiblefor the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract no. no1od42149 between the nationalacademy of sciences and the national institute on aging. support of the work ofthe committee on national statistics is also provided by a consortium of federalagencies through grant no. sbr0112521 from the national science foundation.any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of theorganizations or agencies that provided support for the project.library of congress cataloginginpublication dataexpanding access to research data : reconciling risks and opportunities.ñ 1st ed. p. cm. includes bibliographical references. isbn 0309100127 (pbk.) ñ isbn 0309653401 (pdf) 1. privacy, right ofñunited states. 2. public recordsñaccess controlñunited states. 3. freedom ofinformationñunited states. 4. researchñinformation services. i. national academies press (u.s.) jk468.s4e96 2005 323.44õ830973ñdc22 2005030054additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press,500 fifth street, nw, lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202)3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.eduprinted in the united states of americacopyright 2005 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.suggested citation: national research council. (2005). expanding access to researchdata: reconciling risks and opportunities. panel on data access for research purposes, committee on national statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a.wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon itsown initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by theacademy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the instituteof medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.panel on data access for research purposeseleanor singer (chair), survey research center, institute for socialresearch, university of michiganjohn m. abowd, school of industrial and labor relations, cornelluniversityjoe s. cecil, division of research, federal judicial center,washington, dcgeorge t. duncan, heinz school of public policy and management,carnegie mellon universityv. joseph hotz, department of economics, university of californiaat los angelesmichael hurd, rand corporation, santa monica, cadiane lambert, bell labs, lucent technologies, murray hill, njkenneth prewitt, school of international and public affairs,columbia universityrichard rockwell, the roper center for public opinion research,university of connecticuteugenia grohman, study directorchristopher mackie, study director (through october 2004)marisa gerstein, research associateagnes gaskin, senior program assistantallison shoup, senior program assistant (through november 2004)vexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on national statistics20042005william f. eddy (chair), department of statistics, carnegie mellonuniversitykatharine abraham, department of economics, university ofmaryland, and joint program in survey methodologyrobert bell, at&t research laboratories, florham park, njlawrence d. brown, department of statistics, wharton school,university of pennsylvaniarobert m. groves, survey research center, institute for socialresearch, university of michigan, and joint program in surveymethodologyjohn haltiwanger, department of economics, university ofmarylandpaul w. holland, educational testing service, princeton, njjoel l. horowitz, department of economics, northwesternuniversitydouglas massey, department of sociology, princeton universityvijay nair, department of statistics and department of industrial andoperations engineering, university of michigandaryl pregibon, google, inc., new yorkkenneth prewitt, school of international and public affairs,columbia universitylouise ryan, department of biostatistics, harvard universitynora cate schaeffer, department of sociology, university ofwisconsinðmadisonconstance f. citro, directorviexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.neither the issue of access to research data nor that of privacy andconfidentiality is new; it is not even new to the national researchcouncil, which has considered one topic or the other, or the twoin conjunction, on numerous occasions in the past. why, then, this reconsideration?chapters 1 and 2 offer several answers to this question, based on whathas changed in the external environment, especially since the 1993 publication of private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility ofgovernment statistics. but perhaps the most immediate cause is discontenton the part of researchers with the speed and scope of access to the veryrich research data that have been collected by federal statistical and research agencies.juxtaposed against researchersõ demands for increased access areheightened concerns on the part of the agencies and their grantees andcontractors about maintaining the confidentiality of their data files. theseconcerns arise in part from convictions, borne out by research, that perceived risks to privacy and confidentiality reduce survey participation.in this report, the panel on data access for research purposes hastried to reconcile the risks and opportunities arising from increased accessby urging a variety of rational solutions: making data available throughmultiple modes, tailored to the needs of different types of users; undertaking research to improve both the utility and the confidentiality protections of some newer access modes; and measuring the level of researchdata use as well as the frequency with which confidentiality breaches occur, for example.prefaceviiexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacegiven the panelõs relatively narrow charge and limited resources,however, the report does not address certain less obvious, but not necessarily less important, contributors to the problem. one of these is the lackof resources and structural incentives for making data more readily available. at present, outside researchers appear to gain more than agenciesdo from the prompt and generous release of confidential data, andthey stand to lose less than agencies do if such releases lead to documented breaches of confidentiality. nor does the report examine the reward structures within the statistical agencies, though we suspectthat those structures favor data collection over data dissemination. inshort, the report proposes solutions that do not require an indepth lookat, and perhaps change of, the motivational structures that undergird thecurrent system of data collection and dissemination.nor does the report attempt to decide how much disclosure risk isacceptable in order to achieve the benefits of greater access to researchdata. such a decision involves weighing the potential harm posed by disclosure against the benefits potentially foregone. the panel believes thatthis decision appropriately belongs to the wider community of those potentially affected by itñusers, data collectors, and the people who provide the data.in framing the response to its charge, the panel drew heavily on existing reports and supplemented these reports by commissioning a series ofpapers on outstanding issues, written by experts and presented at a workshop open to the public. the workshop was held in october 2003 at thenational academies. a summary of the papers presented, together with alist of participants, is included as appendix a to our report, which wetried to keep quite brief.even brief reports, however, make substantial demands on panelmembers and staff. the panel thanks christopher mackie, who served asstudy director for much of the panelõs life, for his critical role in guidingthe discussions during its four meetings, for organizing the workshop andwriting the summary of the presentations, and for his initial drafting ofchapter 3 of the report. we also thank eugenia grohman, associate executive director of the division of social and behavioral sciences and education (dbasse), who was the study director for the final stages of thepanelõs work and without whose skill, experience, and patience the finalreport could not have been written. connie citro, director of the committee on national statistics, provided invaluable guidance and help duringthe entire process. we are especially indebted to her for incisive contributions to chapters 2 and 5. we also appreciate the interest and support ofmichael feuer, executive director of dbasse, and miron straf, its deputydirector.much appreciation is due to the many people who wrote and preexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixsented papers at the workshop on access to research data: assessingrisks and opportunities. their work contributed substantially to our formulation of both the problems and the proposed solutions, as is evidentfrom the citations to their work throughout the report. we are also appreciative of a letter from the task force on confidentiality of the association of public data users (march 17, 2004) that raised important issues ofmethods for protecting confidentiality that facilitate data access.richard suzman, associate director of behavioral and social researchat the national institute on aging, commissioned this study in order tostimulate more creative approaches to the dissemination of research data.we gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the national instituteon aging.finally, i thank the members of the panel on data access for researchpurposes, themselves an extraordinarily knowledgeable, engaged, andvocal group. together, they represent many disciplines intimately involved in the use and production of research datañeconomics, politicalscience, statistics, sociology, survey methodology, and law. they represent, as well, differing perspectives, with some being more concernedabout expanding access, others about maintaining confidentiality. thepanelõs discussions reflected these differing experiences and perspectives,and the report tries to balance the competing demands. i appreciate thecontributions of all the panel members to this report, but three, in particular, generously contributed to its writing: i thank joe cecil, georgeduncan, and kenneth prewitt for their substantial and indispensable help.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the report review committee of the national research council. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making thepublished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to thestudy charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of this report: martin david, the urban institute; gerald w. gates,policy office, u.s. census bureau; douglas massey, woodrow wilsonschool of public and international affairs, princeton university; trivelloreraghunathan, department of biostatistics and institute for social research, university of michigan; and avi c. singh, methodology research,statistics canada, ottawa, ontario.although the reviewers listed above provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of the reportexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefacebefore its release. the review of this report was overseen by richard a.kulka, center for demographic studies, duke university. appointed bythe national research council, he was responsible for making certain thatan independent examination of this report was carried out in accordancewith institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of this report restsentirely with the authoring panel and the institution.eleanor singer, chairpanel on data access for research purposesexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11introduction 7scope and structure of report, 8private lives and public policies: a decade later, 112the changed landscape15increasing public concern, 15societyõs increased need for data, 17changes in information technology, 20changes in the legal environment, 22developments in limiting data identifiability, 25developments in methods and procedures forrestricted data access, 28meeting the challenges, 343benefits of access36data collection and research, 36data access and the scientific process, 38microdata for policyrelevant research, 40longitudinal microdata, 43linking survey and administrative data, 45access and data quality, 48contentsxiexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4risks of access: potential confidentialitybreaches and their consequences50confidentiality concerns and nonresponse incensuses and surveys, 52why confidentiality breaches might occur, 555reconciling the benefits and risks of expandeddata access63documenting use, 64access through multiple modes, 66publicuse data, 69facilitating access to research data centers, 74expanding and improving remote access, 77licensing agreements, 78informing respondents of data use, 80safeguarding confidentiality: training, monitoring, andeducation, 81references85appendixesaworkshop summary95bbiographical sketches of panelmembers and staff116xiicontentsexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarypolicy makers need information about the state of the nationñfromthe national economy to household use of medicareñin order toevaluate existing programs and to develop new ones. that information often comes from research based on data collected by statisticalagencies or others under a pledge of confidentiality. the most critical dataare microdatañdata about individual people, households, and businessesand other organizations.the benefits of providing wider access to microdata for researchersand policy analysts are better informed public policies. the risk of providing increased access to microdata is increased risk of breaching theconfidentiality of the data.both data collection and research are decentralized activities in theunited states. many federal agencies collect datañfrom the decennial census to statistics on traffic patternsñand some sponsor data collectionthrough universities and other nongovernment institutions. althoughsome agencies have inhouse staffs of policy analysts and researchers,most researchers are based at universities and other nongovernment institutions. the value of this decentralized system is to ensure a variety ofperspectives and approaches to both data collection and research. thechallenge is to safeguard the confidentiality of the data while making themavailable to researchers and analysts in a wide variety of settings. oneconsequence of the decentralized system is a frequent lack of understanding about how data could and will be used and of planning for those uses.the charge to the panel on data access for research purposes was òtoexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2expanding access to research dataassess competing approaches to promoting exploitation of the researchpotential of microdatañparticularly linked longitudinal microdatañwhile preserving respondent confidentiality.ó the panel was asked to consider the tradeoffs between the benefits and risks of data access and tomake recommendations about òhow microdata should optimally (from asocietal standpoint) be made available to researchers.óthe panel concludes that no one way is optimal for all data users orall purposes. to meet societyõs needs for highquality research and statistics, the nationõs statistical and research agencies must provide both unrestricted access to anonymized publicuse files and restricted access to detailed, individually identifiable confidential data for researchers undercarefully specified conditions.research using detailed confidential data is needed not only for wellinformed policy making but also to improve the quality of publicusefiles, which are the most widely used microdata products made availableby statistical and other data collection agencies. in turn, wide access topublicuse data leads to new analyses and conclusions that must be testedon the more detailed confidential data available only through restrictedaccess.highquality publicuse files require continuing research into methods of assuring the inferential validity of the data while safeguarding theirconfidentiality. a great deal of promising work has been done on thistopic, but more is clearly needed.at the same time, the continuing need for restricted access to moredetailed microdata means that the conditions for obtaining such accessneed improvement on a continuing basis. the use of licensing agreements,as a mechanism for granting wider access to confidential microdata,should be expanded. especially important is easier access to research datacenters, such as those maintained at universities and other host institutions by the u.s. census bureau. such centers, which several other agencies maintain at their headquarters, are currently the only place whereresearchers have access to key microdata that provide the level of detail(e.g., small geographic areas) needed for many important analyses. research to facilitate secure remote access to these data centers is also neededin order to remove the burden on researchers of traveling to a distant site.we believe that the changes we recommend will result in wider access to highquality anonymized publicuse files as well as to potentiallyidentifiable microdata. but such expanded access requires expanded procedural and legal protections. the panel believes that users, like agencies,should be held accountable for safeguarding the confidentiality of microdata files to which they are granted access. we recommend that statisticalagencies set up procedures for monitoring any breaches of confidentialitythat may occur, as well as their causes and consequences. we recommendexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3that agencies require auditing of license holders and penalties for violations of the license. we also recommend that agencies institute confidentiality agreements for publicuse data files and meaningful penalties for alldata users who willfully violate such agreements.however, laws, enforcement, and penalties are not enough to safeguard the confidentiality of research records. what is needed in additionto the legal sanctions is a system of norms and values concerning theethical use of such data. everyone working with confidential researchrecordsñinterviewers, data entry clerks, statistical analysts, and socialand behavioral scientistsñrequires education and training in these ethical principles and practices. the statistical system of the united statesultimately depends on the willingness of the public to provide the information on which research data are based. to ensure such willingness,there must be scrupulous attention to assuring the informed consent ofdata providers, as well as continuing research into public attitudes relevant to data collection, privacy, and confidentiality.the panelõs recommendations should be read in the context of themany existing reports that have addressed similar issues of data accessand confidentiality protection in the past. in particular, we have drawnheavily on private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibilityof government statistics, published in 1993, though we have not attemptedto make recommendations in all of the areas considered in that report.rather, our recommendations focus on the needs highlighted by legal,social, and technological changes during the last decade.the panel offers four recommendations on basic issues of documentation and access:¥maintenance of bibliographies of research and policy analysispublications by government and nongovernment data collection agenciesin order to provide tangible evidence of the benefits of making data widelyavailable for analysis;¥use of a variety of modes for data access, including restricted access to confidential data and unrestricted access to appropriately alteredpublicuse data, in order to meet research needs for highquality data withdifferent levels of detail and precision;¥research to guide more efficient allocation of resources amongdifferent data access modes; and¥greater involvement of users in planning modes of access to agenciesõ data in order to better accommodate their needs.the panel offers four recommendations focused specifically onpublicuse data. the first two are intended to increase access to data,expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4expanding access to research datawhile the third and fourth try to balance increased access with increasedsafeguards against misuse:¥research on techniques for providing useful, innovative publicuse data sets that increase informational utility without increasing disclosure risk;¥a new system of access to publicuse microdata through existingand new data archives (following recommendations in protecting participants and facilitating social and behavioral science research), intended tospeed researchersõ access to such files;¥a warning on all publicuse data that the data are provided forstatistical purposes only and a requirement that all users attest to havingread the warning; and¥restriction of access to publicuse data to those who agree to abideby the confidentiality protections governing such data and the institutionof meaningful penalties for willful misuse of those data.looking more closely at restricted access to confidential data, thepanel offers five recommendations on research data centers, remote access, and licensing agreements:¥for the census bureau, broadening interpretation of the criteriafor access to data, maintaining a continuous cycle for reviewing researchproposals, and taking account of prior scientific review of those proposalsin order to facilitate and speed researcher access;¥research by statistical and other agencies that sponsor data collection on costeffective means of providing secure access through remotedata access mechanisms, with the aim of increasing the availability of remote access to confidential data;¥the use of licensing agreements by statistical and other agencies(that do not now have them) for access to confidential data, and expanding the data files for which a license may be obtained;¥development of flexible, consistent standards for licensing agreements and implementation procedures by statistical agencies, with theinvolvement of data users; and¥ inclusion of auditing procedures and appropriate legal penaltiesin licensing agreements, for the willful misuse of confidential data, in order to balance expanded access with appropriate confidentiality safeguards.peopleõs perceptions of benefits and trust that they will not be harmedas a result of the information they provide are crucial to their cooperationexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5with data collection efforts. the panel offers two recommendations onthis topic:¥provision by data collection agencies of basic information aboutconfidentiality and data access to everyone asked to participate in statistical surveys; and¥continuing research on the views of data providers and the publicabout research benefits and risks. because the panel believes that laws and enforcement alone are inadequate for protecting confidential data, it offers four recommendations ontraining, monitoring, and education to complement legal, administrative,and technical protections. the first two are directed to data collectionagencies:¥providing employees with continually updated written guidelines for confidentiality protection of individually identifiable data andtraining in confidentiality practices and data management; and¥ongoing research into violations of confidentiality protection procedures and breaches of confidentiality that may occur, as well as thecauses and consequences of those breaches.the second two are directed at educational and professional organizations, which are an important source for the development of professionalnorms and ethical standards:¥training in ethical issues related to research for all those involvedin the design, collection, analysis, and distribution of data obtained underpledges of confidentiality; and¥development of strong codes of ethical conduct to protect the confidentiality of personal data and education about those codes.the panel is confident that, taken together, these recommendationscan improve access to and use of data for research and so improve thequality and relevance of those data for social science research and publicpolicy, while providing appropriate protection for the confidentiality ofidentifiable data.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71introductionthe united states at present has the most extensive array of datacollection programs undertaken by federal statistical, research, andadministrative agencies in its history. collectively, these data yielda detailed portrait of population groups and of organizations that affectpeopleõs lives (employers, educators, health care providers, and others).when made available in the form of microdata, particularly linked, longitudinal microdata, federal data collections provide an unparalleled resource for policy analysis and research on important social issues.1 theinterest in such data is exemplified by a trend toward studies with greatrichness and detailed information, such as the proposed nationalchildrenõs study on environmental and genetic effects on health and development (see www.nationalchildrensstudy.gov).yet this very trend has increased the risk of violating the confidentiality of those who provide the information. recent innovations in information technology, such as the widespread availability of data about individuals on the internet, have also increased that risk. in response, manydata collection agencies have reduced the amount of detail in publiclyavailable microdata sets, although they have also worked with researchers to develop new methods and arrangements for data access that protect confidentiality and respect privacy.1microdata, in contrast to summary, aggregated data, provide individuallevel information. linked microdata usually refer to individual survey data that are linked to individualinformation from administrative records or to other survey data.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8expanding access to research dataprivacy has many dimensions. the emphasis in this report is on informational privacy, which encompasses an individualõs freedom to choosethe extent and circumstances under which personal information will beshared with others, and how it will be used. confidentiality refers broadlyto an obligation not to transmit identifiable informationñfor an individualor a businessñto an unauthorized party. more specifically, this report isconcerned with the explicit or implicit promises made to respondents regarding how their data will be used and the extent to which they will beprotected against the risk that the data they provide may allow others toidentify them (see national research council, 1993:22).the nation needs to use its statistical data, especially properly protected microdata, for credible, detailed analyses of current and proposedgovernment programs and policies in such areas as education, health care,and taxation. these data are also needed for basic research in the social,behavioral, and economic sciences that can advance the quality and scopeof policy analyses. much basic and policy research will be undertakenoutside the federal government, in universities and other research centers. thus, there are questions about how to provide researchersñinsideand outside governmentñaccess to data that can both inform publicpolicy and protect the privacy of respondents and the confidential natureof the information they provide.scope and structure of reportin response to those questions, the panel on data access for researchpurposes undertook a study to understand and propose ways to resolvethe tension between the goal of facilitating researchersõ access to federaldata collections, particularly detailed microdata sets, and that of maintaining confidentiality. the panel was convened by the national academiesõ committee on national statistics (cnstat) at the request of thenational institute on aging, which supports the collection of microdataand funds research that depends on the availability of those data for analysis. the panel began its work early in 2003, building on earlier efforts bycnstat. those efforts included a major comprehensive review of theissues more than a decade ago, which produced private lives and publicpolicies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics (nationalresearch council, 1993) and a workshop held in 1999 (national researchcouncil, 2000). a cnstat report from two decades ago on the benefits ofsharing research data is also still relevant (national research council,1985).the panel was given the following specific charge for its work:this study will assess competing approaches to promoting exploitation of the research potential of microdatañparticularly linked longituexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction9dinal microdatañwhile preserving respondent confidentiality. the ultimate goal is for the panel to make recommendations about how microdata should optimally (from a societal standpoint) be made available toresearchers. this will require, among other things, thinking about howto measure the value of the research good made possible by data production and access, as well as the risk (and associated cost) of disclosures.such measures are needed in order to assess the tradeoff between thebenefits derived from increased protection of data versus those derivedfrom fuller data access.the panel may also focus on (1) technical, legal and statistical ingredients needed to promote arrangements within and between agencies, andalso between government and private sector data producers; (2) enforcement of legal protections for data subjects and appropriate penalties formisuse, and how breakdowns in security are detected, assuming theyare, and traced to responsible parties.the panel will also consider the relative advantages associated withvarious approaches to data protection and form recommendations about(1) alternative, less burdensome systems (e.g., internet, remote access,etc.) of providing researchers with access to restricted data and (2) cuttingedge statistical techniques for manipulating data in ways that claimto preserve important statistical properties and allow for broader generaldata release.in undertaking its work, the panel quickly discovered that the rangeof issues, as well as developments since the earlier major cnstat report,precluded detailed consideration of the optional elements in our charge.we took as our task a broad overview of the basic issues; we did notexplore in detail all data that are or might be available and all ways toprotect them. for example, we did not consider the resources and structure of data collection agencies, although we recognize that agenciesõ histories, priorities, stakeholders, and incentives are factors that affect dataaccess. in addition, although we acknowledge efforts in other countries todevelop innovative, workable methods for research access to microdata(notably, the work of the luxembourg income study and the germansocioeconomic panel study), we limited our study to the united statesbecause of the differences in this countryõs laws, organizational structures,and public attitudes. and we touch only briefly on the role of nongovernment survey organizations.yet the basic responsibilities and techniques for protecting privacyand confidentiality while promoting data access for research are applicable across all kinds of data, including administrative data on individuals and businesses linked to microdata and individualsõ biological datacollected in surveys. for example, many kinds of biological informationñsuch as blood pressure, weight, or cholesterolñcan be released publiclyafter some alteration, just as data on income or hours of work can, becauseexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10expanding access to research datathe information is not unique. in contrast, genetic data (such as a dnasample) and data from geographic information systems (gis) are unique,as are social security numbers, and pose much more difficult issues ofprotection (see national research council, 2001a).this report is intended to take stock of the present situation; it shouldbe seen as one in a line of periodic assessments that will be required overtime. it does not pretend to have all the answers nor, given constrainedresources, to represent a detailed investigation of alternative data accessmethods and arrangements. it provides a broad view of the issues, notingwhy imaginative data access methods are required to satisfy the publicneed for sophisticated policy analysis and basic social science research.in addition to regular meetings, the panel held a workshop in fall2003 to obtain a wide range of views on how issues of data access andconfidentiality protection have changed over the past decade since privatelives and public policies was published (see appendix a for a summary ofthe workshop). the rest of the panelõs work was carried out through intense discussions and sharing of draft materials at its meetings.the rest of this chapter and chapter 2 provide context for the panelõswork. we begin in this chapter with a brief overview of private lives andpublic policies (national research council, 1993). our report draws on theconceptual framework presented there though it does not revisit in detailthe issues or recommendations covered in that study (some of which havenot yet been implemented). rather, our focus is on changes in key areas inthe past decade, detailed in chapter 2: increased public concerns aboutprivacy and confidentiality; societyõs increased need for data for policyanalysis and evaluation and, consequently, for basic social science research; changes in information technology; changes in laws and regulations; and developments in methods for providing access to data for research.chapter 3 discusses the benefits to society from the research use ofdata collected by federal agencies, especially from rich microdata for individuals, organizations, and businesses. chapter 4 discusses the potential costs to data providers in terms of possible breaches of confidentiality. chapter 5 proposes ways to reconcile the tensions between thebenefits and risks with recommendations for improved access to data forresearch purposes while protecting the dataõs confidentiality.appendix a is a summary of our workshop, for which we commissioned papers on a range of topics relevant to the panelõs task: the economics of data confidentiality (abowd and lane, 2003); the role of dataaccess in scientific replication (bailar, 2003); balancing individual rightsand societal benefits from data collection and analysis (barquin andnorthouse, 2003); the role of longitudinal microdata in research and policyexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction11(brown, 2003); the census bureauõs research data center network(hildreth, 2003); recent legislation relevant to privacy, confidentiality, anddata sharing (mcmillen, 2003); protecting confidentiality of research datathrough legal means (perritt, 2003); evaluating inferences from syntheticdata (raghunathan, 2003); estimating probabilities of identification formicrodata (reiter, 2003); monitored remote microdata access systems(rowland, 2003); licensing and enforcement mechanisms for promotingdata access and protecting confidentiality (seastrom, wright, andmelnicki, 2003), and the historical record of disclosure and risk (seltzerand anderson, 2003). in addition, michael larsen gave a talk on technical,legal, and organizational barriers to data linking.private lives and public policies: a decade laterjust over 10 years ago, the panel on confidentiality and data accessproduced the report, private lives and public policies: confidentiality andaccessibility of government statistics (national research council, 1993).commissioned by the committee on national statistics in collaborationwith the social science research council, the report emphasized the inherent tension between protecting the privacy of individuals and obtaining and disseminating accurate, detailed data to inform public policies.society affirms to individuals the value of assuring their information privacy and confidentiality, but this affirmation must be balanced with theneed of the community for data about individuals and organizations. thefirst two paragraphs (national research council, 1993:15) establish thecompeting forces:private lives are requisite for a free society. to an extent unparalleledin the nationõs history, however, private lives are being encroached on byorganizations seeking and disseminating information. in their stewardship of data collection and data dissemination, federal statistical agencies have had a longstanding concern for the privacy rights of the dataproviders, but they now face mounting demands for privacy . . .in a free society, public policies come through the actions of thepeople. those public policies influence individual lives at every stageñfinancing of prenatal care, state aid to school districts, job training andplacement, law enforcement, and determining retirement benefits. dataprovided by federal statistical agencies . . . are the factual base needed forinformed public discussion about the direction and implementation ofthose policies. further, public policies encompass not only governmentprograms but all those activities that influence the general welfare,whether initiated by government, business, labor, or notforprofit organizations. thus, the effective functioning of a free society requires broaddissemination of statistical information.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12expanding access to research datathe reportõs thorough analysis stressed that government data collection operations must reflect both the obligation to supply the informationthat is needed to inform the countryõs democratic and free society and thesometimes competing obligation to respect the individual (or organization) who provides the often highly personal responses on which thosedata are based. most importantly, the report laid out a series of recommendations for helping to resolve the tension between these two fundamental mandates. today, many of these recommendations have beenimplemented and have led to better information practices. why, then, lookto this issue again?at root, the tension between the concern for the data provider manifest in the phrase, òprivate lives,ó and societyõs need for data, signaled byòpublic policies,ó is structural and can never be fully resolved, no matterhow enlightened the practices of a statistical or other data collectionagency may be. however, changing conditions can increase (or reduce)the level of tension. as brokers between the data provider and the datauser, statistical and research agencies need to continually examine changing conditions and attempt to resolve the resulting tension as best theycan.there is no doubt that these early years in the 21st century challengestatistical and other data collection agencies with a sharply increased levelof tension between the two mandates, which, in turn, calls for reexamination of information practices. several key changes since private lives andpublic policies thus motivated our study:¥there is evidence of increased public concern about personal privacy and distrust of government assurances of confidentiality; such concern is predictive of reduced cooperation with censuses and surveys (see,e.g., singer, mathiowetz, and couper; 1993; singer, van hoewyk, andneugebauer, 2003; national research council, 2004b; hillygus et al.,2006).¥there is also evidence of considerable public unease over the burgeoning capability of businesses and private organizations (such as creditrating firms) to gather personal information about millions of individuals(see, e.g., dash and zeller, 2005). in early 2001, large percentages of americans expressed concern about online credit card theft (87 percent),internet fraud (80 percent), hacking of government computers (78 percent), and hacking of business computers (76 percent) (fox and lewis,2001:2). more recently, there have been widely publicized instances ofunauthorized release of personal records maintained by large data warehouse firms and credit card companies.¥assessment of complex public policies requires increasingly deexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction13tailed data, and researchers increasingly have the ability to carry out awide range of causal analyses.¥statistical and research agencies have successfully carried outmajor data collections, including longitudinal surveys, that can answerimportant policy questions for which aggregate, crosssectional datawould be inadequate. there is an obligation to ensure that this substantialinvestment of public monies yields factual evidence that can inform debate in public policy areas.¥new kinds of individually identifiable data, such as unique genetic information and increasingly precise geospatial detail, can be collected and disseminated.¥statistical agencies, which conduct substantial methodologicalresearch on data collection and estimation, often do not have either theinternal resources or the political mandate to carry out the causal analysesneeded for policy formulation and the advancement of scientific knowledge relevant to policy; this capability is more readily found in the research and policy analysis community.¥advances in information technology have raised both fears of privacy intrusion and expectations about access to information. two key factors increasing the risk of disclosure are the existence of comprehensivedatabases with individual identifiers and the development of sophisticated recordlinkage and datamining methodologies, many of which arereadily available on the internet.¥the legal framework that guides the information process haschanged in important ways, notably with the enactment of the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002 (cipsea)and the fact that medical records, including those used for research, aresubject to new confidentiality regulations under the health insuranceportability and accountability act of 1996 (hipaa). at the same time, theusa patriot2 act of 2001 overturned the protection previously accordededucation records gathered and maintained by the national center foreducation statistics (see national research council, 2005:35).¥new techniques have been developed for producing restricteddata products that can be made publicly available because the data havebeen altered to minimize the risk of individual identification. techniqueshave also been developed for analyzing the effects of different alterationmethods on disclosure risk and data utility.¥agencies and researchers now have some experience with restricted data access procedures put in place during the last decade that2the name is an acronym for uniting and strengthening america by providing appropriate tools required to intercept and obstruct terrorism.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14expanding access to research datapermit authorized researchers to use confidential data that are not publicly available. those procedures include protected enclaves, commonlyknown as research data centers; licensing arrangements; and methods forsecure, monitored online access to data.the next three chapters explore these issues in more depth.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152the changed landscapethis chapter details significant changes in the past decade that affectresearchersõ access to government microdata: increasing publicconcern about issues of privacy and confidentiality; societyõs increased need for data; changes in information technology; changes in thelegal environment; developments in limiting data identifiability; and developments in methods and procedures for restricted access, includingresearch data centers, monitored remote access, and licensing. we end thechapter with a brief comment on the potential for devising new approaches to data access while taking account of these changes.increasing public concernprivate lives and public policies noted public concerns about privacyand confidentiality, but did not describe them in any detail. this report,more so than its predecessor, takes account of changing public attitudesabout privacy and confidentiality issues as they bear on principles of datacollection and data access.from recent analyses of data on public attitudes (see chapter 4), twocentral findings emerge. first, levels of public concern about the intrusiveness of government inquiries and about whether there is or might beunauthorized disclosure of individual data appear to have increased inrecent decades. second, people who are worried about privacy and confidentiality issues are less likely to cooperate with government surveys.response to the 2000 census strongly confirmed this second finding, asexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16expanding access to research datasummarized in chapter 4 and elsewhere (see national research council,2004b; hillygus et al., 2006). in addition, there is survey evidence thatmany members of the public do not believe the governmentõs pledge thatdata will be kept confidential. in one survey, less than half of the publicsaid that the promise of census confidentiality could be trusted. also,nearly as many americans agree as disagree that census answers can beused against them (hillygus et al., 2006).a vivid expression of public concern about the privacy and confidentiality of government statistics emerged in spring 2000, when talk showhosts, editorial pages, latenight comics, and even political leaders attacked the 2000 census long form on grounds that it was too intrusive.responding to a public outcry, president george w. bush, then a presidential candidate, said he understood òwhy people donõt want to giveover that information to the government. if i had the long form, iõm not sosure i would do it eitheró (prewitt, 2004:1452). the u.s. senate passed anonbinding resolution urging that òno american be prosecuted, fined, orin any way harassed by the federal governmentó for not answering certain questions on the census long form, in effect telling the public it wasacceptable to break the law (prewitt, 2004). many more census respondents in 2000 than in 1990 answered longform questions only selectively,leading to unprecedented levels of imputed values for missing responses(national research council, 2004b:283285).relevant research does not draw a clear distinction between the effects of privacy concerns and confidentiality concerns on survey response.however, the longform controversy suggests that it will be useful in future research to determine when respondents are resisting òunwarrantedintrusivenessó simply because they do not like particular questions (a privacy concern) and when they are uncooperative because of fears aboutòunauthorized disclosureó (a confidentiality concern).the census bureau recognized the importance of this distinctionwhen, in its statement of privacy principles for the general public, firstdeveloped in 2000, it acknowledged the importance of balancing the needfor statistical information with a respect for individual privacy. the census bureau now offers a principle, titled òrespectful treatment of respondents,ó under which it offers two promises (for voluntary surveys): òwepromise to respect your right to refuse to answer any specific questionsor participate in the surveyó and òwe promise to set reasonable limits onour efforts to obtain completed questionnaires and will restrict the number of followup contacts we conductó (www.census.gov/privacy/files/dataprotection/002822.html).this newly articulated principle on the part of the census bureau isindicative of how much has changed in the few years since private livesand public policies was issued. few people would have suggested in 1993expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape17that the census bureau, which has built its reputation on persistence ingetting complete answers from nearly 100 percent of its sample respondents, would only a decade later offer a principle that seems to contradictlongestablished practices.societyõs increased need for datapublic policies very often focus on population groups defined in termsof one or more characteristics: lowincome families, veterans, medicarepatients, preschool children, software engineers, drug addicts, homeowners, to name a few from a long list. policy design proceeds on thebasis of knowing how many people are in these groups, how they aregeographically distributed, and how they differ in characteristics. otherpublic policies focus on establishments: small businesses, public schools,military bases, banks, hospitals, prisons, insurance firms, and so onñallentities that are subject to statistical measurement and for which detailedinformation is required in order to inform policy choices.complex policymaking requires multivariate causal thinking aboutpolicy alternatives, which, in turn, requires complex, multivariate, oftenlongitudinal data. for example, how will changing the age of eligibilityfor social security affect retirement decisions across different occupationsand regions of the country? over what timeframe (if at all) does headstart close the educational gap between children from disadvantagedfamilies and children from betteroff families? at what levels of state andlocal unemployment will single mothers in welfaretowork programsfind secure jobs, and what will be the consequences for their children?as the economy grows more complex and the population becomesmore diverse, increasingly detailed data and data analyses are requiredfor policies to match well with economic and demographic realities. thisis true not only for policy making, but also for policy assessment andevaluation.1 a nation learns how well policies are working by comparingtheir intended effects with the actual outcomes. these comparisons drawon statistical information. one example makes this obvious point. congress recently debated whether undocumented collegeage students whohave lived in the country for at least 5 years and performed well in secondary schools should be eligible for instate tuition if they enroll in apublic university in their state of residence (american association of statecolleges and universities, 2003). on one side of the debate are people1for examples, see national research council (1997), which assesses data requirementsfor the analysis of retirement income policies, and national research council (2001b), whichdoes the same for welfare reform policies.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18expanding access to research datawho assert that rewarding undocumented people in this fashion will bean incentive for increased illegal immigration. on the other side are peoplewho assert that there will be longterm economic contributions to societyif this group attends colleges and universities. either, neither, or both ofthese assertions could turn out to be correct. evaluating these alternativeassertions appropriately requires an exercise in databased policy analysis.in addition to federal, state, and local government policy uses of statistical information, commentators on american democracyñstartingwith george washington and thomas jeffersonñhave repeatedlystressed that an uninformed public is incompatible with preserving democratic principles and practices. just as statistical data are used by politicalleaders to design policy, they are used by the electorate to assess how wellthose policies have worked and thus to rate the effectiveness of the government, especially when data are available on trends. what are oftenreferred to as social and economic indicators play an important role indemocratic accountability, as the public gauges the quality of public lifeby taking note of what is trending up and what is trending down. crimerates, air quality, access to health care, charitable giving, education levels,homeownership, outofwedlock births, voter participation, and unemployment are illustrative of features of our society that are given publicvisibility in the nationõs official statistics. this public visibility strengthens democratic practice.the private sector is no less in need of detailed information on theamerican population. citing only data from the decennial census, a recent national research council report (2004b:66) observed:retail establishments and restaurants, banks and other financial institutions, media and advertising firms, insurance companies, utility companies, health care providers, and many other segments of the businessworld use census longformsample data, as do nonprofit organizations.an entire industry developed after the 1970 census to repackage censusdata, use the data to develop lifestyle cluster systems (neighborhoodtypes that correlate with consumer behavior and provide a convenientway of condensing and applying census data), and supply address coding and computer mapping services to make the data more useful.the most important source of the information used for policy designand evaluation and the other purposes described above are the more than70 federal agencies that carry out statistical activities of at least $500,000per year (u.s. office of management and budget, 2004). these agenciesinclude statistical agencies, such as the bureau of labor statistics (bls),the national centers for education and health statistics (nces andnchs), and the u.s. census bureau. they also include research fundingand analysis agencies, such as the agency for healthcare quality and reexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape19search, the national institutes on aging and child health and humandevelopment, and the national science foundation (nsf). in fiscal 2004these agencies were authorized to spend an estimated $4.8 billion for statistical programs to serve the nationõs information needs (u.s. office ofmanagement and budget, 2004).over a 10year period, the 2000 census alone cost more than $6.5 billion. this seemingly very high cost pales in comparison with the value ofthe many uses to which census data are put. the constitution requiresthat seats in the u.s. house of representatives be allocated in proportionto population, for which it mandates an enumeration of the populationevery 10 years. two other major uses are redistricting and fund allocations. congressional and state and local legislative districts are drawn onthe basis of census counts for small geographic areas. currently, federalagencies allocate more than $200 billion of federal dollars to states andother areas by formulas that, directly or indirectly, depend on census data(national research council, 2004b:ch. 2). across the decade, about $2 trillion in federal funds depend on census data, so that the investment in thecensus represents only 0.0035 percent of the federal funding based on census results. and this calculation does not take into account state and localexpenditures, or the huge business investments in marketing, labor practices, and manufacturing and retail location decisions that rely on censusdata.similarly, other statistical programs provide data that serve manypurposes and are collected at a fraction of the dollars at stake in the decisions made on the basis of analyses with those data. for example, thenational assessment of educational progress (naep), conducted by thences, has made and continues to make major contributions to analysisand evaluation of the effectiveness of the nationõs elementary and secondary education policies at the federal, state, and local levels (seences.ed.gov/nationsreportcard).societyõs increased needs for data and their intelligent analysis havebeen matched by a significant expansion of the analytic capacity found inthe nationõs universities, policy organizations, corporations, and advocacygroups. the government frequently turns to this privatesectorbased analytic capacityñespecially to university researchers and analysts in specialized private research institutionsñto carry out policy analyses andbasic research using governmentcollected data, particularly microdataon individual units. this behavior is recognition that federal research andevaluation agencies are not funded to take full advantage of the publicinvestment in the collection of the original data on their own. in the caseof statistical agencies, they may avoid policyoriented data analysis so asnot to impair credibility, which is based in part on the publicõs perceptionof their objectivity (national research council, 2005).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20expanding access to research dataan effective publicprivate partnership between data collection agencies and the research community is a critical element in bringing analysesof complex data, particularly microdata, to bear on policy design and assessment. the partnership is strengthened by continuous improvementsin data access, both through publicuse data sets and through restricteddata access modalities (see below and chapter 5).changes in information technology the information world now functions through extraordinarily complex networks of humans and computers, capturing enormous numbersof records of personal and organizational information, storing them indata warehouses with capacities in petabytes, analyzing them throughsophisticated statistical and data mining tools, and disseminating the results through ever more capable communications media. this explosionin the capability of information technology is evident at each stage of theprocess of data capture, storage, integration, and dissemination by publicand private entities (duncan, 2004).as recently as 1993, when private lives and public policies was published, easy access to complex computerized databases produced by federal statistical and other data collection agencies was only a design goal.now the web provides access to vast arrays of information from a desktop. for example, through www.census.gov, there is ready access to tablesand maps of 2000 census data for all geographies to the block level, aswell as access to complex microdata sets through extraction and downloading tools. other statistical and research agencies also offer web accessto detailed aggregate and microdata.2one useful measure of the extent of this enhanced information technology is reduced cost. in each of the four stages of the process of datacapture, storage, integration, and dissemination, advances in information technology have pushed costs lower. although the picture is complicated by demographic and social factors that drive costs up (such asthe declining willingness of the public to respond to telephone surveys),in many ways the cost of obtaining data is much less today than it was 10years ago. electronic data capture techniquesñsuch as scanning andcomputerassisted interviewing, surveillance by video cameras in buildings and on streets, and satellite imagingñhave become commonplaceand readily available at moderate cost. similarly, terabytes of data storage can be purchased for little. by scanning, one terabyte of storage can2the web address for access to all statistical agencies is fedstats.gov.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape21hold the contents of 2,000 file cabinets of documents. ten years ago, suchstorage would have cost $1 million; about 5 years later the cost was lessthan $800 (gilheany, 2000). more recently, hayes (2002:fig. 4) estimatedthe cost of a megabyte at a few tenths of a cent, and rhea and his colleagues (2003) estimated that the cost of a terabyte will be $100 in 2006.data integrationñthat is, consolidating information from heterogeneousdatabasesñis no longer a horrendously complex task, but one that is facilitated by data standards (such as xml), the growth of the web, andfast and inexpensive data transmission capability. correspondingly, datadissemination through the web and electronic mail is now free for allpractical purposes.lowered cost at each stage of the data process provides benefits toresearchers. with lowered costs, researchers and policy analysts can enjoy the prospect of being able to work with new data sources, to use historical records that are maintained indefinitely in userfriendly formats,to create rich contextual databases with relevant attributes, and to disseminate their results quickly throughout the world.3lowered cost also provides opportunities for òdata snoopers,ó bywhich we mean individuals or organizations that attempt to identify respondents for purposes that range from curiosity to marketing to pinpointing individuals who may have committed a crime or who may constitute a terrorism risk. in contrast, researchers are not interested inindividuals as such, but only in the answers to research or policy questions that can be obtained by analyzing aggregations of individualsõ attributes.yet the data that are most useful to legitimate researchers typicallyhave characteristics that pose substantial risk of disclosure. some datacharacteristics that create vulnerability include:¥detailed geographic information;¥repeated data collection from the same subjects;¥outliers, such as people with very high incomes;¥many attribute variables; and¥complete census data rather than a survey of a small sample ofthe population.data with geographic detail, such as census block data, may easily be3one such historical source is the integrated public use microdata series (ipums), whichcontains individual records from the u.s. censuses from 1850 through 2000 (see ruggles,2000). ipums is available online at the university of minnesota (www.ipums.umn.edu)with funding from the nsf and the national institutes of health.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22expanding access to research datalinked to known characteristics of respondents, unless steps are taken toalter or mask the data. longitudinal data obtained in panel surveys, whichtrack entities over time, pose substantial disclosure riskñboth becauseidentifiers must be retained by the collection agency in order to recontactrespondents and because longitudinal data typically include many moreattributes than do onetime surveys. in general, data files containing manyattribute variables permit easier linkage with known attributes of identified entities. this problem is magnified when social survey data are linkedto unique identifiers, such as genetic data. furthermore, data from a census or near census pose more disclosure risk for some kinds of data snooping than data from a survey having a small sampling fraction: there islittle likelihood, for example, that a record from a small sample surveythat has some attributes in common with an identified record from anadministrative source is actually unique in the population.the risk of disclosure has been significantly increased because of theready availability to data snoopers of external databases on the web (seesweeney, 2001). these databases identify persons or other entities byname and location and share with statistical data certain attribute variables that may permit matching the anonymized statistical data with identified data (as with marketing databases). moreover, software for matching is widely available and easily used. thus, wouldbe data snoopersnow have a treasure trove of potential methods of infringing on the privacy and confidentiality of subjects of statistical surveys by matching information across databases (winkler, 1998).changes in the legal environmentfor the reasons outlined above, statistical agencies face increased tension as they try to respond to public policy and research needs for datawhile protecting the confidentiality of the underlying information. in addition, they are expected to maintain both a high quality of the data theyproduce and their role at the forefront of scientific data collection (seegroves and lepkowski, 1985). at their disposal they have an array of legal as well as technical solutions. this legal environment has changed inimportant ways during the last decade.recently, federal statistical data have received broad new statutoryprotections against traditional threats to confidentiality, but they may beincreasingly vulnerable to new threats from statutes intended to enhancenational security and government accountability (see national researchcouncil, 2005:35, app. b). in 2002, subpart a of the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea) established minimum standards for protection of information gathered by a federal agencyfor a statistical research purpose under a promise of confidentiality. suchexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape23information may not be disclosed in identifiable form for nonresearch purposes without the consent of the respondent: nonresearch purposes include administrative determinations, law enforcement investigations, andadjudicatory proceedings. cipsea thereby provides statutory protectionto the many statistical agencies that previously had only custom or othernonstatutory authority to back up pledges of confidentiality. the obligation to protect research data extends beyond federal agency personnel toinclude those who contract with the agency to provide statistical researchservices, such as conducting survey interviews or preparing data products. the u.s. office of management and budget (omb) is developingguidance for the implementation of subtitle a of cipsea, but such guidance has not yet been issued for public comment.subpart b of cipsea permits identifiable business records to beshared for òstatisticaló purposes by the u.s. census bureau, bureau ofeconomic analysis (bea), and bureau of labor statistics (bls), subject towritten agreements that specify the nature of the records, the statisticalpurposes, and the procedures governing access and security. such datasharing, which fully maintains confidentiality protection, can support significant improvements in the nationõs ability to obtain highquality dataon business formation, internationalization of employment, and othercritically important issues for economic policy. a key element in the census bureauõs data is its business register, which is constructed with datafrom the internal revenue service (irs). however, without new legislation (to amend title 26 of the u.s. code, which governs access to irs taxdata), the business register and associated data cannot be shared withbea and bls.medical records, including those used for research, are subject to newconfidentiality regulations under the health insurance portability andaccountability act (hipaa) of 1996 (p.l. 104191). researchers who relyon information collected by health care providers must comply with strictrequirements governing the use and disclosure of health care information(see national research council, 2003b:117118). identifiable medical information may be disclosed for research purposes only with the writtenconsent of the person providing the information or in a limited set of circumstances in which an institutional review board determines that theidentifiable medical information is essential to the conduct of the researchand the disclosure presents minimal risk to the individual. the researchers must protect identifiable information from improper disclosure anddestroy the identifiers at the earliest opportunity consistent with the conduct of the research (45 c.f.r. ¤ 164.512).44there is anecdotal information that implementation of hipaa has caused some difficulties for researchers (see linet, 2003).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24expanding access to research dataat the same time, new challenges to confidentiality of research recordshave arisen. as noted in chapter 1, the usa patriot act of 2001 (p.l. 10756) overturned the strict confidentiality protection of education recordsgathered and maintained by the nces, a change in protection that waslater reflected in corresponding amendments to the statute governingnces. the usa patriot act allows the attorney general to petition a courtfor access to identifiable education records, including those from research,for use in the investigation and prosecution of terrorist activities.access to federal research information for nonresearch purposes isalso permitted by the shelby amendment to the omnibus consolidatedand emergency supplemental appropriations act for fiscal 1999 (p.l.105277), which requires the omb to set forth regulations to ensure thatall data that are supported by a federal grant to colleges, universities, hospitals and other nonprofit institutions òwill be made available to the public through procedures established under the freedom of informationact.ó the resulting omb guidelines restricted access to data under theshelby amendment to published or cited research that has been used bythe federal government to develop legally binding regulations and rulings, and noted the exemptions to access under the freedom of information act for information that would result in a òclearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, such as records that could be used to identify aparticular person in a research studyó (for a detailed discussion of thisissue, see national research council, 2003a). cipsea strengthens such aninterpretation by prohibiting disclosure of confidential information under the freedom of information act. the validity of the omb guidelinesand the effect of the cipsea restrictions are the subject of some disputeand have yet to be tested through litigation.federal statistical agencies also confront increased scrutiny about thequality of information that they disseminate to the public, even if the datahave not been used as part of the regulatory process. the informationquality act (also known as the data quality act, p.l. 106554, ¤ 515, whichwas enacted in 2000 as an amendment to an appropriation bill), directsomb to issue guidelines for òensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivity, utility, and integrity of information disseminated . . . by federalagenciesó to the public, and requires all federal agencies to establish administrative procedures to allow affected parties to obtain correction ofinformation disseminated by an agency that does not meet those standards. the resulting omb guidelines (u.s. office of management andbudget, 2005) define òscientific informationó to include òany communication or representation of knowledge such as facts or data, in any mediumor form.ó òdisseminationó is defined as òagency initiated or sponsoreddistribution of information to the public.ó taken together, these definitions would extend the regulations to include agency distribution ofexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape25publicuse and restricted use statistical data sets. agencies must meethigher information quality standards for distribution of òinfluential scientific information,ó which is defined as information reasonably expectedto òhave a clear and substantial impact on important public policies orimportant private sector decisions.ó agencies that disseminate influentialscientific information must conduct a peer review prior to disseminationand reveal the data and methods used to generate the scientific information to the extent necessary to facilitate independent reanalysis, while taking into account privacy, confidentiality and intellectual property rightsof those who are the focus of the data.5 the act has raised concern amongsome researchers that those opposed to certain agency policy initiativesmay challenge the findings and quality of research data as a means ofimpeding agency regulatory activities. in 2003, some 19 agencies receivedrequests for data correction under this act.6clearly, the courts can have difficulty in balancing individual privacy against a right to public access. for example, in a recent case (southern illinoisan v. dept. of publ. health, n.e.2d, 2004 wl 1303656 [ill. app.5dist. june 9, 2004]), a newspaper sought release under the state freedomof information act of cancer registry records for people with a rare formof childhood cancer. the state department of public health opposed release of the information, which included zip code of residence, pointingto another state statute that prohibits the public inspection or dissemination of any group of facts that tends to lead to the identity of any personwhose condition or treatment information is submitted to the registry.the agency then supported its claim that release would result in inadvertent disclosure of identifiable information by offering expert testimony in which the expert linked most of the records in a test sample toother data and identified the patients. the court dismissed this demonstration, responding that such identification by one expert was not proofthat the records could be readily identified, and ordered their release.developments in limiting data identifiabilitythe confidentiality of individual data may be protected either by restricting researcher access to such data (restricted access) or by variousalterations that limit the identifiability of the data and hence permit themto be made publicly available (restricted data). statistical agencies and5national academies workshop in 2003, òpeer review standards for regulatoryscience and technical information,ó also explored this issue; for a transcript, see www7.nationalacademies.org/stl [june 2005].6see www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/2005ch/draft2005cbreport.pdf [june 2005].expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26expanding access to research datatheir contractors currently use both methods (see cohen and hadden,2004).historically, beginning with the development of publicuse summaryfiles and microdata samples from the 1960 and 1970 censuses, restricteddata have represented the most widely used method for facilitating researcher access to complex data (see dunton, 2000; gaquin, 2000a, 2000b).restricted data products play an especially important role in providingresearch access to data because such products are available to all researchersñboth inside and outside the governmentñfor critical assessment andalternative analyses. restricted data may be in the form of microdata files,which contain transformed or imputed attribute values for a sample ofindividuals (such as age, sex, race, income, occupation, labor force history) or organizational entities. restricted data may also be in the form oftabular arrays, such as crossclassifications of income and education forgeographic areas.at present, a wide array of summary and microdata sets are availablein publicuse form. reflecting the advances in internet capabilities, accessto such data sets is increasingly provided online. examples include:¥the census bureauõs american factfinder for geographic areatabulations from the census and american community survey (at www.census.gov) (see hawala, zayatz, and rowland, 2004);¥the nsfõs online tabulation systems for data on science and engineering personnel and resources (www.nsf.gov. statistics.databases.cfm);¥the dataferrett system of the census bureau, which enables researchers to extract and analyze such complex publicuse microdata setsas the census bureauõs current population survey and survey of incomeand program participation, and microdata sets from the nchs, including the national health interview survey and the national health andnutrition examination survey (dataferrett. census.gov); and¥the online data analysis system of the national archive ofcriminal justice data, which uses software developed by the computerassisted survey methods program at the university of california, berkeley: the archive contains a wide range of federal, state, and local criminaljustice data sets and is maintained by the university of michigan interuniversity consortium for political and social research, with fundingfrom the bureau of justice statistics and the national institute of justice(www.icpsr.umich.edu/nacjd).although many types of restricted data continue to be available, statistical agencies (in response to the increased threats to confidentiality protection noted above) have curtailed the availability of some data that werepreviously included in publicuse files. for example, publicuse microdataexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape27samples (pums files) from the 2000 census were somewhat more restricted in data content than pums files from previous censuses, and, because of state laws, the nchs no longer makes publicly available linkedfiles of microdata from the national health and nutrition examinationsurvey and mortality records. (publicuse files of business microdata havenever been created because of the relative ease of identifying individualfirms.)restricted data are created through disclosure limitation techniques,which involve either the transformation of the original data, which iscalled masking, or through the use of the original data to guide the generation of synthetic or virtual data through a statistical technique of multipleimputation. initially, relatively simple data masking techniques, such astop coding income amounts (that is, assigning all income amounts abovea certain value to a single category), were used to generate restricted dataproducts. during the last decade the increasing risks of confidentialitybreaches have led researchers to develop increasingly sophisticated methodologies for restricted data products (see, e.g., doyle et al., 2001; singh,yu, and dunteman, 2003).as developed in duncan and pearson (1991), masking may involvecoarsening of the data through various forms of data recoding. attributesmay be deleted or combined, or attribute values may be grouped intocategories (or bins), such as broad intervals for asset values. masking mayalso involve perturbing the data, for example, by adding random noise orstochastically misclassifying certain entities in a table or by swapping selected data among individual records.the research triangle institute has developed a set of procedures as asophisticated approach to masking, called macroagglomeration with substitution, subsampling, and calibration (massc) (see, singh, yu, anddunteman, 2003). substitution refers to perturbation of data fields, andsubsampling refers to suppression of individual records. massc wasoriginally developed to create publicuse files for the national survey ofdrug use and health, sponsored by the u.s. substance abuse and mentalhealth administration. an important design goal was to protect againstbreaches of confidentiality by individuals who know someone in the surveyñsuch as a parent who provided consent for a child to participate.massc is able to provide measures of disclosure risk and informationloss for a particular application.the development of a methodology for generating synthetic or virtual data is a relatively recent activity (rubin, 1993). a key objective of themethod is to preserve faithful representations of the original data so thatinferences from the synthetic data are as consistent as possible with theinferences that would be drawn from the original data. the method isakin to creating multiple samples from the true population. estimatesexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28expanding access to research datafrom any one simulated data set are unlikely to equal those from the observed data, but by combining estimates from several such samples(hence, òmultiple imputationó), it is possible to estimate the true value, aswell as the amount of variation produced by three sources of error: sampling the collected data, sampling the synthetic units from the population, and generating values for those synthetic units (reiter, 2003;raghunathan, reiter, and rubin, 2003). the value and usefulness of synthetic data for inferential analysis, though promising, have not yet beenfully studied or determined.in developing restricted data, researchers are paying increasing attention to methods for systematically analyzing the joint impact of variousdisclosure limitation techniques on disclosure risk and data utility (e.g.,abowd and woodcock, 2001). a general framework for such an analysisis the riskutility (ru) confidentiality map (duncan, kellermcnulty, andstokes, 2003), which incorporates quantified measures of disclosure riskas well as measures of data utility (duncan and lambert, 1986, 1989; lambert, 1993; reiter, 2003). nonetheless, more research is clearly needed toassess the relative ability of different masking methods, and of syntheticdata, to reduce the risk of disclosure while preserving data utility.developments in methods and proceduresfor restricted accessjust as important developments have been under way since the early1990s in methods for producing restricted data products that can preserveboth data confidentiality and utility, so, too, has there been substantialexpansion in the repertoire of modes for facilitating restricted access toconfidential microdata. (confidential information refers to any identifiable information, regardless of whether direct identifiers, such as name oraddress, have been removed from the record.) all such restricted accessmethods are designed to provide the researcher with data not subjected tothe perturbationsñvariable suppression, top and bottom coding, rounding, swapping, random noise, etc.ñfound in microdata provided in publicuse files.for several decades, major statistical agencies, including bls, the science resources statistics division of nsf, and the census bureau, havesponsored fellowship programs through the american statistical association and the nsf for researchers to work with confidential data at theagencyõs site.7 these programs have been invaluable to the agencies in7the american statistical association also administers research fellowship programs forthe nchs and the bea.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape29obtaining significant commitments of researchersõ time to working withan agencyõs key data sets; however, they provide such access to only ahandful of researchers each year. the last decade has seen the development of distributed research data center programs, monitored remote access systems, and licensing to encourage many more researchers to workwith confidential data.research data centersstimulated by researchersõ interests in analyzing detailedwdata onbusiness organizations for which it is very difficult to create useful publicuse microdata products, the census bureauõs center for economic studies worked with researchers to set up two research data centers (rdcs) in1994. the census bureau currently sponsors eight rdcs, with a ninthscheduled to open in late 2005. these rdcs are operated and funded in avariety of ways: one is run by the census bureau itself at its washingtonarea headquarters; several are run by consortia of research institutionsthat include universities, notforprofit organizations, and governmentagencies; and several are run by a single university with financial assistance from other sponsors, including the census bureau (see www.ces.census.gov/ces.php/rdc).8 the nchs established an rdc at its headquarters in hyattsville, maryland, in 1998 (see www.cdc.gov/nchs/r&d/rdc.htm), and the agency for healthcare research and quality opened anrdc at its headquarters in rockville, maryland, in 2004 for analysis ofconfidential information from the medical expenditure panel survey (seemeps.ahrq.gov/datacenter.htm). bls maintains three separate rdcs atits headquarters in washington, d.c., for research using confidential datamaintained by the office of employment and unemployment, the officeof compensation and working conditions, and the office of prices andliving conditions (www.bls.gov/bls/blsresda.htm). the approval of thecensus bureau is required for access to some bls data sets for which thecensus bureau is the data collection agent.the census bureau states that the purpose of its rdcs is to increasethe utility and quality of census bureau data products by providing confidential microdata to qualified researchers under conditions that do notpose unacceptable disclosure risks. the nchs offers a similar rationale.to access data through an rdc, qualified researchers submit proposalsthat are reviewed for feasibility, scientific merit, consistency with theagencyõs mission, and conformity with confidentiality protection proto8an rdc that was started at carnegie mellon in 1996 has since closed.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30expanding access to research datacols. work is done on a secure site, with secured computers, and underthe supervision of agency staff. all outputs are subject to disclosure review. in addition, researchers using the nchs site sign a confidentialityprotocol. to use a census bureau site, researchers obtain a special swornstatus as a census bureau employee. violation of the terms of that statussubjects the researcher to the same legal penalties as census bureau employees: for disclosure of confidential data, a fine up to $250,000, imprisonment for up to 5 years, or both.the rules governing use of the research data centers are more constraining than those encountered in most research settings. many researchers are willing to accept those constraints because the rdcs provide unique research opportunities that require access to confidentialmicrodata records. at the census bureau sites, for example, researchershave access not only to microdata sets on business establishments, butalso to demographic microdata sets (including versions of the currentpopulation survey and the survey of income and program participation)with more geographic and socioeconomic detail than is made publiclyavailable and to linkages of population and economic census, survey, andadministrative records data (such as the data sets being assembled by thelongitudinal employerhousehold dynamics program). at the nchssite, researchers can merge that agencyõs data with their own data files.the development of the rdc conceptñparticularly the concept underlying the census bureauõs program of distributing rdcs around thecountryñis an important step in providing access to microdata sets thatpose particularly difficult challenges of data protection. hildreth (2003:5)claims that the census bureauõs òrdc network has . . . led to some of themost innovative social science research currently being undertaken.ó toestablish and operate an rdc, however, is costly for a statistical agencyand, in the case of a distributed rdc, for the host institution (see hildreth,2003). indeed, the rdc once located at carnegie mellon university wasclosed because the university was unwilling to continue the required levelof financial support.to recover their operating costs, rdcs must attract a sizable clientele.however, the experience to date with the census bureauõs rdc networkis that the long and arduous approval process may be deterring manyresearchers from applying, particularly graduate students and junior researchers who cannot afford to lose much time before beginning theirwork. the amount of time varies by project: an economics data project, forexample, takes an average of 7 months for approval, not including proposals that require revision and resubmission (hildreth, 2003:19). part ofthe delay for many projects is the necessity to obtain the approval of another agency, such as the internal revenue service (irs), for the censusexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape31bureauõs business establishment files (which include information from taxreturns).in addition, in response to a 1999 irs review of the census bureauõsprotocols for confidentiality protection, the census bureau specified thatthe predominant purpose of research using data sets that fall under title 13(which governs the census bureauõs operations) must be to benefit census bureau programs. this strict interpretation of title 13, which appliesto most of the demographic and economic data provided through the census bureauõs rdcs, may deter research that would use title 13 data inimportant ways but does not meet the strict criteria for approval.hildreth (2003) contends that the criteria and time for approval andthe direct costs to the researcher associated with use of an rdc have ledto their underutilization. he notes the common view among rdc directors and researchers that the use of restricted data sets, specifically thelongitudinal research database and other census bureau data, has declined. recognizing these issues, the census bureau has recently indicatedits intention to consider ways to streamline the rdc process and to explore the addition of data sets from other statistical agencies to its rdcnetwork, which would increase their attractiveness to researchers.9monitored remote accessmonitored remote access to confidential data is currently implemented in four federal statistical agencies:¥the nces, which permits access to a range of education files containing confidential data using the nces data access system(nces.edu.gov/das);¥the nchs, which permits access to almost all of the surveys sponsored by nchs, including geographic and other detail not contained inpublicuse data products, through remote access to its research data center;10¥the u.s. census bureau, which permits users to develop their owntabulations from the 2000 census basic records using the advanced dataquery system (advancedquery.census.gov); and¥the economic research service (ers) in the u.s. department ofagriculture, which recently inaugurated a remote system for statistical9this information is from comments by hermann habermann, deputy director of the u.s.census bureau, at a meeting of the committee on national statistics, may 6, 2005.10the nchs system is sometimes referred to as andreñfor analytical data research byemail.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32expanding access to research dataanalysis of microdata from the agricultural resource management survey (arms).11the pioneer of monitored remote access is the luxembourg incomestudy (lis) in belgium, which makes microdata from 66 household income surveys available to researchers from 25 participating countries. lisbegan in 1983; its software allows users to submit their own programsusing standard statistical software. output is monitored both electronically and manually to protect confidentiality. the lis software is also usedto provide access to the luxembourg employment study, the germansocioeconomic panel, and eurostat data (see rowland, 2003). as described by rowland (2003:4):remote access systems make it possible for users to analyze restrictedmicrodata without visiting an rdc. the systems used for remote accessto restricted microdata are monitored automatically and/or manuallyfor disclosure avoidance. they employ automated and manual filters thatblock certain kinds of queries and results. the files available are usuallyedited for disclosure avoidance using the same techniques as those usedfor public use files. they provide more detail to researchers than publicuse files, but less detail than is usually available in an rdc. the filesreside in the [federal statistical agencies] and extracts of microdata anddirect access to the records are not permitted.unlike the nces remote access system, the nchs system allows users to submit sas (statistical analysis system) programs by email to produce most kinds of output supported by sas. output is returned within afew hours of submission (during work hours). researchers must obtainapproval from nchs for the proposed analysis, sign an affidavit of confidentiality protection, and pay a minimum processing fee of $500 permonth, or they can pay $500 per year for selected files that have beendeveloped for repeat and multiple users (for the details of the nchspolicy, see www.cdc.gov/nchs/r&d/rdcfr.htm; institute of medicine,2005). the most used data file is the national survey of family growth,which contains geographic and other detail not available in the publicuseformat. the census bureauõs advanced data query system enables users todevelop their own tables from the full 2000 census complete count and11arms obtains information from farm households on income, assets, and selected croppractices. access to the remote system requires a memorandum of understanding for research purposes between ers and the research institution, an approved research projectagreement, and a confidentiality agreement with the national agricultural statistics service. the system software monitors data output for confidentiality protection (seearms.ers.usda.gov).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape33longform sample records. tables must be for standard census geographicareas: to protect confidentiality, data cannot be obtained for city blocks orblock groups, unlike the prespecified tables that are available from theamerican factfinder. users must register and log in with a user identification and password; there are no processing costs. as of 2003, more than500 users were registered to use the advanced query system; in comparison, the nchs remote access system had about 45 users in the period19982003 (rowland, 2003:15,20).monitored remote access has the advantage that a researcher does nothave to go to an rdc to make use of confidential data and, in the case ofthe nces and census bureau systems, output is returned quickly. however, output in those systems is limited to tables. the nchs system provides more output choices, but it has waiting periods to obtain output.with regard to the efficacy of the disclosure review systems, evaluation(see rowland, 2003) suggests that they protect well against direct disclosure but not against complementary disclosure (that is, disclosure of theinformation in a table cell by manipulating other cells).licensinglicensing, the third major mode for restricted data access, was firstestablished in 1989 by the nces. other agencies and archives that havelicensing procedures include the bureau of labor statistics, the divisionof science resources statistics of nsf, the health and retirement studydata archive (hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/rda), the university of michigannational archive of criminal justice data, and the wisconsin longitudinal study (see www.ssc.wisc.edu/wlsresearch).12the license allows researchers to use nonpublic microdata at their ownwork site, and thus is the most convenient of the three modalities thathave emerged over the last decade, although, to date, it is the least usedmode. applicants submit a research plan that includes justification for theuse of confidential data, identification of all persons who will have accessto the microdata, and a computer security plan. for successful applicants,a license is signed by an official with authority to bind the university,research corporation, or other government agency to the conditionsspelled out in the license. persons with access to the data also sign affidavits of nondisclosure and agree to unannounced inspections to monitor12for a list of all the federal agencies that offered licensing agreements for microdata setsas of 2000, see seastrom (2001:table 1); for a comparison of licensing arrangements in theunited states with those in other countries, see seastrom, wright, and melnicki (2003).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34expanding access to research datacompliance with security procedures. most license agreements includesevere criminal penalties for confidentiality violations.license agreements are not available in agencies with existing legislation that places more demanding restrictions on confidential data. thecensus bureau, for example, remains constrained by legislation that restricts access to individual records to sworn officers and employees. licensing conditions vary from agency to agency, as does the duration ofthe license agreements. penalties for violating license agreements are uniformly severe, but the procedures for monitoring the performance of licensees and detecting and taking appropriate action against violations areweak (seastrom, wright, and melnicki, 2003). audits of data protectionprotocols have found violations due largely to carelessness; they have notfound any actual breaches of confidentiality.meeting the challengesthe panelõs report points to a number of serious challenges at theinterface of confidentiality and data access. it places a high value on protecting confidentiality. it also takes seriously the responsibility to assurethat the nationõs robust research and policy analysis infrastructure hassufficient access to microdata so that it can provide intelligent analysis ofsocial and economic conditions and of the effect of policies designed toimprove them.although it is easy to agree with the jeffersonian principle that absent an informed public there is no democracy, it is equally easy to agreewith the late senator moynihan, who famously justified his vote rejecting robert bork for the supreme court: òi cannot vote for a jurist whosimply cannot find in the constitution a general right to privacy . . .ó butthe jeffersonian public that needs to be informed is the same public thatmust supply answers to questions sometimes viewed as infringing onprivacy and must be assured that answers given are confidential.the panel finds in history the warrant for asserting that there are waysto move forward without sacrifice to either the value the nation places onprivacy and confidentiality or the value it finds in a datarich democracy.statistical agencies, working closely with scholars, have for more than 40years simultaneously improved the technologies that protect confidentiality and the modalities that provide appropriate access to microdata.even as some methods are applied to decrease disclosure risk, others havebeen designed to improve access under carefully controlled conditions.in response to increased public concerns about privacy and confidentiality and developments in information technology and data availabilityin the past decade, the statistical and research communities respondedquickly with new methods for restricted access modes and restricted dataexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the changed landscape35products. the challenge at the present time is to evaluate how well thenew methods are working, forthrightly assess problematic areas, and determine ways in which alternative methods can be improved. nothing inthe past suggests that increasing access to research data without damageto privacy and confidentiality rights is beyond scientific reach. this reportoffers recommendations that, if implemented, will continue the pastrecord of simultaneous improvement along both dimensions. such improvement will require strong partnership between the research community and statistical and research agencies in the design of innovative research on disclosure avoidance techniques and data access modalities andin the implementation of the advances that result from such research.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.363benefits of accessthe united states, like all modern societies today, depends on complex data to develop legislation, design policies, and evaluate programs. although aggregate data are widely available from manyfederal agencies, especially the u.s. census bureau, data in that form donot permit indepth, multivariate analysis of the trends, antecedents, orpossible consequences of social and other phenomena of interest. suchanalyses require access to microdata, which permit the use of statisticalmodels to study specific questions. as noted in chapter 2, most of theseanalyses are done by outside researchers rather than the agencies. analysts also need access to microdata in order to evaluate data quality, although some of this work, too, is also done by some agencies themselves.thus, access to microdata by outside researchers is critical to both substantive and methodological work.this chapter discusses the role of data access in the scientific process,some of the specific ways access to research data have contributed topolicy making, and the role of access in addressing the question of dataquality. we begin with a brief consideration of individuals as the sourceof much data and the structure of the federal government as it relates toresearch and data collection.data collection and researchmuch of the data needed in a modern society comes from individuals.in many cases, people are willing to provide information because it results in direct financial or other benefit to them. in buying a home, forexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benefits of access37example, the detailed financial information from prospective buyers allows banks to determine what kind of mortgage they will offer, which, inturn, allows prospective buyers to know what they can afford. in this case,as in many others, highquality information reduces transaction and othercosts, which in turn results in lower prices for consumers. instant accessto personal financial data and streamlined creditreporting systems havenot only enhanced the ability of lenders to assess risk quickly, but alsoincreased competition among lending institutions with the result thatmortgage rates have been reduced significantlyñby some estimates, asmuch as 2 percentage pointsñsaving american consumers billions ofdollars a year (see mccullagh, 2004). in other sectors, mechanisms such asfrequent shopper cards and online credit applications have reduced theprices of groceries and internet purchases.in the market context, people seem generally willing to accept theunderlying rationale for surrendering a degree of privacy and confidentialityñand running the risk that their data will be misusedñbecause thefinancial and other benefits are personal, immediate, and clear. the benefits of data requested by governments are often less recognizable: theyaccrue to society as a whole, not just the data providers; they may takeyears to be realized in the form of new laws or programs; and they may beused in indirect and complex ways that are not obvious. the benefits ofsupplying information to a grocery store to save 50 cents on a can of tunafish are transparent; the benefits of supplying data to a statistical agencythat may contribute to improved research on retirement decisions thatcould, in turn, improve the functioning of pension or social security systems are not. the lack of transparency in the value of personal data forsocietal purposes has two consequences: people may be reluctant to support (through taxes) government data collection, and there is evidencethat people are increasingly reluctant to respond to government requestsfor information (see chapter 4).the united states has not only a decentralized federal statistical anddata collection system (see national research council, 2005), but also adecentralized, pluralistic structure for basic and applied social science research and policy analysis (as well as other kinds of research). most ofthat research, supported by federal grants and contracts, is carried out atuniversities, nonprofit research institutions, and forprofit research companies, although some federal agencies conduct considerable inhouseresearch. state and local governments, private foundations, and corporateand individual donations are also sources of social science research support at universities and private research organizations, including advocacy and public interest groups with a variety of policy preferences andperspectives.federal statistical and other data collection agencies also carry outexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38expanding access to research datasome research and analysis, but the largest share of their budgets is allocated to data collection and processing. inhouse research is generally limited to descriptive studies, such as analyses of trends and group comparisons, along with significant methodological research to improve dataquality and the effectiveness of data collection. statistical agencies do fewstudies that have specific policyrelated conclusions, although their workoften relates to policy questions. one reason underlying this approach isthat the agencies must avoid undercutting their credibility as a source ofhighquality, objective information. as a matter of principle, substantiveanalyses by statistical agency staff should be relevant to public understanding and policy issues but ònot take positions on policy options or bedesigned with any particular policy agenda in mindó (national researchcouncil, 2005:41). because the scope of research by statistical agencies isoften narrowly focused, data access by other researchers is necessary toensure that alternative methodologies and uses are fully explored to advance social science knowledge and the design and evaluation of publicpolicies. research access provides opportunities for disparate academicand policy communities to communicate and learn from one another; italso provides valuable information to statistical agencies about their data.data access and the scientific processempirical science includes not only data collection and use, but alsodata access and sharing. data access is especially central to the production of policyrelevant social science research in which microdata, whichcomprise detailed information about individual units (people, households, firms), and particularly longitudinal microdata, which compriserepeated observations on the same units, play an essential role. a largeportion of such data is collected in surveys conducted or funded by government agencies. many of the raw data produced from these surveyscontain individual and group identifiers along with sensitive information; the data are typically collected under a promise of confidentialityand are to be used only for research or statistical purposes.almost 20 years ago, a study by the committee on national statisticsdescribed the benefits of data sharingñsome of which apply to data access more generallyñand its essential role in science (national researchcouncil, 1985:916; see also sieber, 1991). data sharing promotes new research and allows for exploration of new questions without necessitatingnew data collection. economies of scale are also created. the samedatasets can be used for multiple purposes without substantial new investments: data gathered by researchers to answer one set of questionsmay be useful to others to answer another. finding new ways to useexisting data may also lessen the need for new collection efforts, which,expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benefits of access39in turn, reduces the burden on respondents. sharing data can also lead tofile linkages and the creation of new, more powerful datasets for examining public policy issues.when governmentfunded research is used for decision making, datasharing allows for analysis of problems by investigators with diverse perspectives. policy disputes related to interpretation are common, and, withwide dissemination of data to researchers, debate can be better informed.in contrast, much of the policyrelated research that is commissioned byprivate interests is never published, so it cannot be corroborated or extended to new work.when data are shared along with study results, the research community and data collection agencies can improve and hone their own datacollection methods and analytic capabilities. faulty techniques that mightnot otherwise have been acknowledged as such can be identified, andtechniques that are effective can be promoted (we return to this importantpoint below). researcher access also makes it more likely that additionalinformation about the statistical procedures that underlie the data, whichmight otherwise not be completely documented by agencies, is archived.perhaps most important, data sharing fosters an open research community and reinforces transparent scientific inquiry. data sharing allowsfor verification, refutation, or refinement of original results. in this way,data access safeguards the scientific enterprise by ensuring that other scientists can replicate important findings (see abowd and lane, 2003). although replication is not a common scientific activity in the social sciences, philosophers and historians of science (e.g., kuhn, 1962) agree thatit is an important one. òit is by means of wide and complete disclosure,and the skeptical efforts to replicate novel research findings, that scientific communities collectively build bodies of ôreliable knowledgeõó david(2001:2). moreover, there is a considerable amount of informal replication: when an investigator extends previous results, he or she may beginby trying to replicate the first finding. replication acts as an importantdisciplinary device for both academic researchers and government statisticians. in addition, as is evident from news stories of research fraud, scientists have sometimes misrepresented the results of research by alteringtheir data or reporting only some observations. wide access to researchdata helps ensure that such misrepresentations, when they occur, will beidentified by other researchers. the u.s. national science foundation has required that data used inprojects supported by its grants be placed in a publicly accessible archive.there are similar requirements at the u.s. national institute of justice andthe robert wood johnson foundation. the national institutes of healthhave pursued policies to encourage data sharing for further analysis orreplication studies in such areas as dna sequencing, mapping informaexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40expanding access to research datation, and crystallographic coordinates (soete and ter weel, 2003). someacademic journals promote reproducibility of empirical findings for thearticles they publish. however, many journals that have a policy of making the underlying data available (e.g., the american economic review)waive the requirement if any portions of the data are òrestricted use,ówhich undermines the value of the policy.some important data sets produced by statistical agencies pose particularly difficult challenges of confidentiality protection: they are therefore accessible only in a restricted access modeña secure research datacenter, a monitored remote access arrangement, or through a licensingagreement (see chapter 2). if scientific replication is to be encouraged,application procedures to use confidential data need to be as streamlinedas possible so that researchers, including graduate students and juniorresearchers, are not discouraged from applying by the length of time andamount of resources required for review (see chapter 5).microdata for policyrelevant researchthe nation faces a range of complex policy issues, including the provision and funding of health care, education standards, retirement incomesecurity, and savings and consumption behavior. equally complex policyissues are posed by such economic changes as increasing globalization oftrade and shifts in the relative importance of various industry sectors. inturn, these changes have widespread ramifications for employment opportunities and income security. addressing policy issues in these areasrequires increasingly sophisticated behavioral modeling, which, in turn,requires detailed microdata, particularly longitudinal microdata.the more detailed the data, the more utility they have for research.for example, the inclusion of geographic detailsñsuch as state, county, orcity of residenceñin microdata sets from large national probability samplesurveys would permit modeling disparities in health, economic, and otheroutcomes that vary significantly across geographic areas. similarly, theinclusion of contextual variables for cities and neighborhoods in microdata sets from national surveys would permit analyses of many policyrelevant issues. some rdcs do currently offer access to geographic detailfor selected surveys: for example, the national center for health statisticsincludes a version of the microdata from the national health interviewsurvey with state and county identifiers at its rdc, and researchers canmake special arrangements at the university of michigan to use microdatafrom the panel study of income dynamics with contextual neighborhoodlevel variables derived from census and other data.detailed microdata permit indepth analyses of socioeconomic trendsand their antecedents and consequences. such analyses require multivariate behavioral modeling, which cannot be effectively undertakenexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benefits of access41with aggregate data. for example, it has become increasingly clear overrecent decades that analysis of aggregate statistics does not give policymakers an accurate view of the functioning of the economy (abowd andlane, 2003). indeed, the creative turbulence that is a hallmark of the u.s.economy and a major contributor to its success is not apparent frommacrolevel indicators. analysis of microdata has revealed how flux inlabor markets factors into job creation (haltiwanger, david, and schuh,1996) and how widespread reallocation of factors of production (e.g.,workers) from one firm to another firm in and across narrowly definedindustries is a major contributor to u.s. productivity growthñmore important than investment in equipment and structures (foster,haltiwanger, and krizan, 2001).detailed microdata are also needed for modeling economic decisionsand other kinds of social behavior. indeed, research is expanding intoareas that were relatively untapped even a few years ago. for example,research using attitudinal information in combination with socioeconomicdata about individuals and families to model savings behaviorñalthoughanticipated 50 years ago by klein and goldberger (1955), who used dataon consumer sentiment to forecast consumptionñhas become a vibrantfield in recent years with the expanded collection of microdata and theirincreasing availability to researchers.a number of applied microdata examples relate to one prominentpublic policy issueñpopulation aging (see woodbury et al., 1999). theissue is at the forefront of public attention because of the changing demographic structure of the u.s. population and the budget pressures thatface medicare and social security. to develop policies for an aging population in an informed manner, researchers must assess such trends as increasing life expectancy, changing retirement and savings patterns,changes in pension plans, and declines in employerprovided health insurance coverage. rapidly changing medical technologies and increasingcosts of care add further complexity to the analysis. microdata for individuals and families can be used to simulate outcomes under differentpossible policies and to estimate costs and benefits associated with various policy options (see national research council, 1991, 1997). data fromthe health and retirement study (hrs), for example, have been instrumental in answering such questions as how social security benefits interact with pensions and savings in household efforts to finance retirement,how social security age eligibility requirements affect retirement rates andtiming, and how changes in outofpocket medical expenses affect the useof federal programs.11for a full bibliography of research using the hrs data, see the website for the survey atthe university of michigan: hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/papers/shopapers.php? hfyle=biball[may 2005].expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42expanding access to research dataanother example of microdata needs can be found in research on pollution abatement. in this case, and many others like it, use of aggregatedata leads to biased estimates of relationships among variables becausedifferent firms in an industry respond to regulations in different ways.moreover, when aggregated, industry responses are weighted to represent the universe of firms at a given time. as that universe changes as aresult of the entry and exit of firms, the assigned weights will no longer becorrect and neither will be the analyses based on them (see abowd andlane, 2004).microdata also allow for a much broader range of analyses than doaggregate data: for example, examining relationships among variables forindividual classes of firms in an industry or industries (mcguckin, 1995).the expansion of research on the human dimensions of environmentalchange is another. researchers increasingly include individuallevel contextual variables in their modelsñthe schools respondents attend, theneighborhoods they live in, the firms they work for, and the people withwhom they interact. linking data on people and their environmentsñincluding biological and spatial datañis at the very core of this kind ofresearch (rindfuss, 2002). more generally, the increasing complexity ofsocial and economic activity requires data that can be used to separate outdemographic interactions and economic and ecological effects.a key characteristic of microdata is that they allow the marginal effects of key variables to be isolated, adjusting for other factors. researchinto the relationship between household income and medicare expenditures is an example: interestingly, the results of recent studies have beenmixed. work by battacharya and lakdawalla (2003), which uses householdlevel data from the medicare current beneficiary survey linked tomedicare claims records, does not find a positive association between income and medicare use. in contrast, mcclellan and skinner (2004), usinginsurance claims and data from the census and the panel study of incomedynamics (psid), find that households in highincome neighborhoodspay more in medicare taxes but receive more in benefits. it will take morestudies, possibly with other microdata sets, to answer the important policyquestion about redistribution from poor to welltodo households throughthe medicare system. the microdatabased literature on medicare shows other interestingrelationships. for instance, a small proportion of the elderly populationaccounts for a very large proportion of medicare expenditures, and thosewho account for a high proportion of expenditures in one year are likelyto be aboveaverage users in subsequent and preceding years (garber,macurdy, and mcclellan, 1998). the importance of the medicare program, and research about it, is difficult to overstate: total disbursementsin 2002 were $265.7 billion, and its costs are growing faster than those ofexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benefits of access43social security. understanding medicare program use, and its correlationwith income and health, is critical to understanding its current effects andto making projections and policy recommendations for the future.longitudinal microdatafor many research applications, it is desirable to analyze not justmicrodata, but also longitudinal microdatañrepeated observations on thesame units over time. for example, decisions by individuals and firmsthat affect retirement behavior and benefits occur over long periods oftime, requiring microdata sets that follow people through their workinglives (national research council, 1997:7071). similarly, understandingthe cumulative effects of racial or gender discrimination on employment,health, and other outcomes requires longitudinal data on generations ofindividuals and families (national research council, 2004a:ch. 11).longitudinal data contribute to highquality research in at least twodistinct ways. first, such data allow more accurate estimation than is typically possible with a single crosssectional survey of such information astransitions between states (for example, a householdõs income falling below the poverty line), durations in a particular state, and changes in variables of interest. because shorter recall periods tend to result in more accurate reporting of retrospective information, collecting information eachyear about the past yearõs activities will produce more accurate data thanasking for, say, a 10year history (bound, brown, and mathiowetz, 2001).second, longitudinal data allow a researcher to control for the role of unobserved characteristics in explaining variation in outcomes among individuals, so long as the unobserved characteristics are relatively stable forindividuals over time (brown, 2003).longitudinal data generally derive from three sources: surveys, administrative records, and policy experiments. experiments in such areasas welfare reform usually combine data from surveys and administrativerecords for baseline information around the time of the intervention withfollowup surveys and administrative records at a later time to assess theeffects of the intervention (brown, 2003; national research council,2001b).longitudinal data collections are major investments, and their improvement over time is an important goal to which widespread access cancontribute. for example, timely researcher access has led to identificationof ways to improve economic measures in the hrs, such as the linking ofasset values with income from assets (hurd, juster, and smith, 2003). thisprogress can be contrasted with the lack of progress in the measurementof pension entitlements: those data are complex but, more important, lessavailable. it has taken many years for researchers to understand theirexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44expanding access to research dataweaknesses, in part because few of them have had access to the data andto become familiar with them (see national research council, 1997:97101).nearly anything that is done to facilitate the use of longitudinal datafor social science research also has the potential to contribute to informedpolicy discussion. the list of topics to which longitudinal microdata havebeen applied is a long one: welfare reform, job training, unemploymentinsurance, preschool programs, retirement, employerprovided health insurance, policies affecting the disabled, k12 educational reform, occupational safety, and tax policy. however, because of the time it takes togather and then analyze the data, they are not always available whenpolicy makers want them.for policy makers, the bestcase scenario may appear to be one inwhich there is a brief policy intervention, the effects of interest are shortrun, and the data needed for evaluation are contained in routinely collected administrative records. the experiments that preceded the 1996welfare reform legislationñwhich replaced aid to families with dependent children with the temporary assistance to needy families (tanf)programñare a good example of this happy coincidence. the main effectthat the experiments were designed to assess was the extent to which, andhow quickly, the prompt provision of job search assistance would moverecipients off the welfare rolls; administrative recordkeeping for the experimental programs went a long way toward providing the data neededfor this assessment. yet longer term effects of welfare reform, such as theextent to which former welfare recipients hold jobs for 2 or more years,are also of interest, and these kinds of assessments require longitudinalmicrodata (see national research council, 2001b).moreover, the early results of experiments can be misleading, so thatan adequate period of measurement is needed before effects can be confidently measured. for example, early analysis of the effects of the seattleand denver income maintenance experiments indicated that income support leads to marriage dissolution (groenveld, tuma, and hannan, 1980).subsequent analysis, however, suggested that longterm stability in marriage was enhanced by income support: what had been captured by thedata at the beginning of the experiment was a onetime enabling of divorce for women who had no other source of financial support (cain andwissoker, 1990).longitudinal data can also contribute to policy analyses when a program continues for a long enough time so that evaluations of its earlyincarnations can be informative in guiding subsequent decisions. headstart is an example. the earliest cohorts of head start participants havereached adulthood, and later cohorts have progressed far enough inschool so that the mediumterm effects on achievement can be assessed.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benefits of access45nevertheless, because head start was not designed as an experiment using randomly assigned control groups, the program evaluations have beenless clearcut than they might have been if a field experiment had beenconducted.2a third situation in which longitudinal data have timely policy relevance is when an ongoing longitudinal data program contains the information needed to address a current policy question. for example, the psidwas originally created in 1968 to study povertyrelated problems. it fulfilled that goal well in its early years, and in its more than three decades ofexistence it has also been the basis for very informative work on durationof spells of welfare receipt (oõneill et al., 1984; hoynes and macurdy,1994; boisjoly, harris, and duncan, 1998; duncan, 2000). the data are nowbeginning to be used to assess the effects of more recent welfare reforms.in 1979 the national longitudinal survey of youth (nlsy) was begun, and it and the psid extended data collection to the children of original psid respondents. both data sets have been able to shed light on theconsequences for children of poverty, welfare receipt, and maternal employment. similarly, the hrs, having continued long enough for its initialcohort to reach retirement age, has become the data set of choice for manypolicy discussions related to retirement.linking survey and administrative datathirtyfive years ago, interagency agreements permitted the linkageof some microdata from the internal revenue service (irs), the social security administration (ssa), and the census bureauõs current population survey (cps). a publicly available 1973 cpsssairs exactmatchfile was the basis for a major dynamic microsimulation model of socialwelfare policies and retirement income and was also used to analyze thequality of income reporting in the march cps. a 1978 cpsssa exactmatch file was the basis for another microsimulation model of retirementincome, although that file was not made publicly available. because linkeddata present challenges for minimizing the likelihood of reidentifyingindividuals, concerns about increasing nonresponse rates to governmentsurveys and, subsequently, legislation (e.g., the 1976 tax reform act, p.l.2in general, it is easier to mount evaluations with random assignment for experimentalprograms than for ongoing ones. for head start, if program administrators were to definepriority classes of applicants and select randomly when they cannot serve everyone in thehighest priority class, this difficulty could be overcome. see also the report of an evaluationof the high/scope perry preschool project, which did use random assignment and foundsubstantial positive effects after an interval of some 35 years (schweinhart, 2004).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46expanding access to research data94455) led agencies to curtail the development of linked microdata forpublic use. the linkages that were performed (for example, of march cpsfiles with limited tax return information) were for internal agency useonly (see national research council, 1991:6668, 134135).linking survey and administrative microdata can create datasets thatfacilitate a broad spectrum of research relevant to complex policy questions. for example, by linking wisconsin income tax records, social security earnings and benefits records, and probate records, menchik anddavid (1983) determined that prospective social security benefits did nothave a perceptible effect on lifetime wealth accumulation. linkages suchas those of hrs with social security records introduce detail to the datathat are particularly constructive for modeling savings incentives, retirement decisions, and other dynamic economic behavior. in this case, thepotential research benefits of linking were sufficiently large that the socialsecurity administration approved the link with minimal controversy (thelinked data are available through special access arrangements at the university of michigan).another example that illustrates the benefits of data linkage is research to investigate the effects of community context on child development and socialization patterns and the effects of the availability of childcare on parentsõ work decisions (gordon, 1999). by having access to annlsy file with detailed geographic codes for survey respondents, gordon was able to add contextual datañsuch as the availability of childcareñfor the neighborhoods in which respondents lived. gordonõs application highlights the tradeoff between data precision and disclosure risks.access to census tractlevel geocoding permitted more sensitive construction of community and child care variables central to the study; however,it also increased the identifiability of individual nlsy records.3the new medicare drug benefit provides another example in whichdata linkage might contribute significantly to policyrelevant research andmodeling. policy makers would like to know the effects of the legislation:who gains and by how much and how the benefit changes drug consumption, retirement decisions, and other behaviors. to observe and modelthese responses, individual survey data and linked medicare data areneeded on the same people both before and after the policy change.data linkage also has the potential to reduce data collection costsñboth direct costs and the cost of respondent burden. linking existing information from different surveys or a combination of survey and admin3it is important to keep in mind the distinction between identifiability of individualrecords and the risk of reidentification. the first is a statistical matter; the second assumes,in addition, intruder motivation (see chapter 4).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benefits of access47istration data, as in the continuing medical care expenditure panel survey (meps), can streamline the data collection process by reducing theneed to duplicate surveys. if survey designers know that links to administrative data can be made, they can limit the length of questionnaires aswell. yet statistical agencies have not made extensive use of linkages ofadministrative records and survey data in household surveys. they havemade much more extensive use of administrative records, such as taxrecords, for business data collection.another benefit from linkages of survey data and administrativerecords is that they can improve data accuracy and scope by giving researchers access to information that individuals may not be able to recallor estimate accurately. for example, the lifetime earnings data in the social security files that are linked to the hrs are virtually impossible forrespondents to recall or even find in their own records. similarly, respondents may not have immediate access to information in medical recordsor have the technical knowledge to answer some questions. yet administrative data contain their own errorsñsuch as omissions and duplicationsñand they may use different concepts and cover different populations than surveys. thus, although there are many advantages of linkeddata, care is needed in making linkages and in using the linked data.in addition to their role in complementing survey data, administrative records can be used to estimate the measurement errors in surveyreports, an idea that dates back at least to ferber (1966) and the work ofthe interuniversity consortium for savings research. for example, forthe survey of income and program participation (sipp), a census of federal and state administrative records was taken in 19831984 for four statesto ascertain the validity of reporting for eight income maintenance programs (marquis and moore, 1990). analysis of survey reports and administrative data for the food stamp program determined that systematicdifferences in reporting biased the relationships derived from the sippsample and that errorprone respondents were more likely to drop out ofthe sipp panels.another way in which linkage increases data utility is by making itpossible to get more research mileage from isolated datasets that wouldotherwise have limited application. in addition to the abovenoted valuein reducing data collection redundancies and improving data accuracy ina costeffective manner, linking information sources may provide increased flexibility to meet future research needs with existing data sets.for example, if sipp records were linked to administrative tax returns orwage and salary data from state unemployment insurance records, theincome data would be more accurate, the cost of the survey would decrease, and the utility of the data for research and policy analysis wouldincrease.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48expanding access to research datathe benefits of linked data extend beyond social science research.linking records is essential for highquality studies of effectiveness inmany areas of medical research by permitting the analysis of data alreadyavailable. for example, linking together emergency medical service (ems)data, hospital records, and death registries allows researchers to followpatients through the prehospital, hospital, and postdischarge stages (national highway traffic safety administration, 2001). data linkage alsofacilitates research on infrequent events, such as rare diseases that affectonly a small percentage of the population. in such cases, working fromgeneral sample data does not provide adequate sample sizes for targetgroups, and populationbased data, which are very expensive to collect,are often required. linkage can, in some instances, provide a much lesscostly substitute.access and data qualityresearchersõ access to and use of the complex data collected by federal statistical agencies are essential to maintain and improve data quality (abowd and lane, 2004). the findings derived from such analysesundergo reexamination and reinvigoration when disseminated to the research community. researchersõ use of government data creates an effective feedback loop by revealing data quality and processing problems, aswell as new data needs, which can spur statistical agencies to improvetheir operations and make their data more relevant. the use of data byoutside researchers can also verify or improve sampling frames for surveys and censuses. data access and use by a variety of researchers, fordiverse purposes, provides a range of feedback to data collection agencies. agencies may also be able to generate new data products when theycombine existing records with other information from research.the relationship between data use and data quality is the essentialfoundation for the common interest of the statistical system and the widerresearch community in broad and responsible access to data. that relationship is well recognized by such agencies as the census bureau. theagencyõs center for economic studies web page states: òexposing to thelight of research the conceptual and processing assumptions that are embedded in the census bureauõs micro databases constitutes a core element in the census bureauõs commitment to qualityó (see mission statement at ces.census.gov). this recognition is not new. mcguckin (1992)argued more than a decade ago that coordinated research efforts betweeninhouse and outside researchers offer the best model for ensuring thatagencies maximize the benefits from data users. in fact, mcguckin(1992:19) argued that it is a primary responsibility of statistical agencies tofacilitate researcher access to confidential microdata files. such access, byexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.benefits of access49improving the microdata for research and policy analysis, also improvesthe quality and usefulness of the aggregate statistics on trends and distributions that are the bread and butter of statistical agency output.thus, the benefits from research access to complex microdata accruenot only to policy makers, but also, and importantly, to the statistical agencies themselves. there is growing appreciation for the point of view thatthe largest single improvement that the u.s. statistical system could makeis to enhance the capabilities for analysis of statistical data by researchersinside and outside of government, which, in turn, would enable statisticalagencies to better understand and improve their data (see abowd andlane, 2003).there are many examples of the synergy that can be created fromlarge numbers of researchers using the same datasets, which allows forcorroboration of results and an accumulation of the benefits of knowledge. in a workshop featuring results from wave 1 of the hrs, for example, much was learned about what had gone right and wrong (journalof human resources, 1995). on a practical level, multiple users assure anincreased return on the investment in expensive data collection projects.although statistical agencies expend substantial resources to ensurethat they produce the best possible product, there is no substitute for actual research use of microdata to identify data anomalies. indeed, there isgeneral recognition of the direct correlation between the quality of a statistical agencyõs data and its openness to external research. a variety ofstudies offer evidence that the u.s. statistical system now collects morerelevant and higher quality statistics as a result of disclosing both the survey instruments and the data to outside researchers (e.g., levitan andgallo, 1990; mcguckin and nguyen, 1990; taeuber, 1981; triplett, 1991;see also soete and ter weel, 2003). by increasing access to their data, statistical and other data collection agencies will almost certainly improveboth the quality of the data and their usefulness for research and policyanalysis. such improvement will, in turn, increase the value of the investments in collecting, processing, and maintaining the data.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.504risks of access:potential confidentiality breaches andtheir consequenceschapter 3 has argued that to fulfill their function in a democraticsociety, statistical and research agencies must provide access tothe data they collect. yet, at the same time, they are chargedwithprotecting the data’s confidentiality. that charge rests on three underlying considerations: ethical, legal, and pragmatic. the ethical obligation, rooted in the belmont report (national commission for the protection of human subjects of biomedical and behavioral research, 1979),requires agencies to strive for a favorable balance of risks and harms forsurvey respondents. legally, they are bound by federal laws to honor thepromises of confidentiality they make, with potential civil and criminalpenalties if they fail to do so. on a pragmatic level, their ability to collecthighquality data from respondents will be compromised by real or perceived breaches of confidentiality. this chapter elaborates on all three ofthese assumptions.a pledge of confidentiality stipulates that publicly available data—whether summary data or microdata and including any data added fromadministrative records or other surveys—will be anonymized or otherwise masked to ensure that they cannot be used to identify a specific person, household, or organization, either directly or indirectly by statisticalinference. such a pledge also means that more readily identifiable datawill be made available for research purposes only through restricted access modalities that impose legal obligations and penalties to minimizethe risk that researchers with access to such data might disclose them toothers. an example of such more readily identifiable data is a set of houseexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.risks of access51hold survey records that, although stripped of names and addresses, contains codes for small geographic areas.the reason for confidentiality pledges and for stringent procedures toprevent disclosure is that they improve the quality of data collected fromindividuals, households, and firms. it is essential that respondents believethey can provide accurate, complete information without any fear that theinformation will be disclosed inappropriately. indeed, if the informationwas disclosed, harm might come to an individual respondent. many governmentsponsored surveys ask about sensitive topics (e.g., income or alcoholic beverage consumption), as well as about stigmatizing and evenillegal behavior. the disclosure of such information might subject a respondent to loss of reputation, employment, or civil or criminal penalties.furthermore, the breach of a confidentiality pledge would violate the principle of respect for those consenting to participate in research, even if thedisclosure involved innocuous information that would not result in anysocial, economic, legal, or other harm (see national research council,2003b:ch.5).the occurrence of a breach also threatens the research enterprise itself, because concerns about privacy and confidentiality are among thereasons often given by potential respondents for refusing to participatein surveys, and those concerns have been shown to affect behavior aswell. any confidentiality breach that became known would be likely toheighten such concerns and, correspondingly, reduce survey responserates. efforts to increase researchers’ access to data must, therefore, takeinto account the need to avoid increasing the actual and perceived risksof confidentiality breaches.this chapter begins by reviewing research linking survey nonresponse to concerns about confidentiality. the rest of the chapter discusses some of the ways in which confidentiality breaches might occur,with special attention to how increasing access might increase both theactual and perceived risks of confidentiality breaches. although much ofthis report focuses on statistical disclosure—reidentification of respondents or their attributes by matching survey data stripped of direct identifiers with information available outside the survey—these sectionsserve as a reminder that statistical disclosure is by no means the only,and perhaps not even the most important, way in which confidentialitybreaches might occur. they also serve as a reminder that public perceptions that personal data are being misused may be as potent a deterrentto participation by potential survey respondents as an actual breach ofconfidentiality.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52expanding access to research dataconfidentiality concerns and nonresponse incensuses and surveysthe first experimental demonstration that confidentiality concernsincrease refusal to participate in a government survey comes from a national research council study sponsored by the u.s. census bureau inthe late 1970s (national research council, 1979), but most of the evidencecomes from a series of surveys commissioned by the census bureau in the1990s. in the 1990 census, for example, people who were concerned aboutconfidentiality and saw the census as an invasion of privacy were significantly less likely to return their census form by mail than those who hadfewer privacy and confidentiality concerns (singer, mathiowetz, andcouper, 1993; couper, singer, and kulka, 1998). although such attitudesexplained a relatively small proportion of the variance in census returns(1.3 percent), this proportion represented a significant number of peoplewho had to be followed up in person to obtain information required forthe census.analysis of the mail returns of a sample of respondents in the 2000census yielded similar results. once again, respondents with greater privacy and confidentiality concerns were less likely to return their censusforms by mail. the variance in census returns explained by attitudes toward privacy and confidentiality was very similar to that obtained in 1990(singer, van hoewyk, and neugebauer, 2003). in 2000, respondents withgreater privacy and confidentiality concerns were also significantly lesslikely to provide an address to gallup survey interviewers for the purpose of matching their survey responses to the file of census returns, andthey were much less likely to respond to a question about their income.another way of looking at the effect of confidentiality concerns is tolook at the relationship between beliefs that the census may be misusedfor law enforcement purposes and the propensity to mail back the censusform. of the 478 respondents in the gallup survey following the 2000census who believed that census data are used for none of three purposes(identifying illegal aliens, keeping track of troublemakers, and using census answers against respondents), 86 percent returned their census formby mail. the percentage dropped to 81 percent among those who selectedexactly one of the three items (n = 303), to 76 percent among those whoselected exactly two items (n = 255), and to 74 percent among the 171respondents who selected all three items (singer, van hoewyk, andneugebauer, 2003). in 1990, census return rates declined from 78 percentto 55 percent on a similar index of confidentiality concerns (singer,mathiowetz, and couper, 1993). given the cost of obtaining census information that is not sent by mail, this reduction in the likelihood of returning the census form has significant consequences. other research on theexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.risks of access532000 census is in accord with these findings: one study (hillygus et al.,2006) concludes that the census return rate in 2000 would have been approximately 5 percent higher if there had not been public anxieties overprivacy and what was characterized in the media and by some politicalleaders as unwarranted “intrusiveness.”there is also indirect evidence that requests for information on thecensus form that respondents consider sensitive leads to higher nonresponse rates for both the sensitive item and the entire questionnaire.for example, a 1992 experiment involving the census bureau’s requestfor social security numbers led to a decrease of 3.4 percent in the returnof the census form and an increase of 17 percentage points in the numberof questionnaires returned with missing data (dillman, sinclair, andclark, 1993). an experiment involving a request for social security numbers conducted during the 2000 census led to an almost identical result(guarino, hill, and woltman, 2001:17).of particular interest in this context is the finding that concerns aboutconfidentiality and negative attitudes toward data sharing increased substantially between 1995 and 2000 (singer et al., 2001:tables 2.1617, 2.2129). people’s stated willingness to provide their social security numbersalso declined, from 68 percent in 1996 to 55 percent in 1999 (singer et al.,2001:table 2.45). several studies (summarized in bates, 2005) have alsodocumented that it has become increasingly difficult for the census bureau to obtain social security numbers. in the survey of income and program participation, there was an increase in refusals to provide them from12 percent in the 1995 panel to 25 percent in the 2001 panel; in the currentpopulation survey, there was an increase in refusals from approximately10 percent in 1994 to almost 23 percent in 2003.evidence about the effects of concerns about privacy and confidentiality on response to nongovernmental surveys is provided by a series ofsmallscale experiments carried out in the context of the survey of consumer attitudes (sca). the sca is a national telephone survey fieldedevery month at the university of michigan, primarily to measure economic expectations and attitudes.the first experiment, conducted in 2001, was designed to investigatewhat risks and benefits respondents perceived in two specific surveys—the national survey of family growth (nsfg) and the health and retirement study (hrs)—and how these perceptions affected their willingnessto participate in the research. after hearing the description of each study,respondents were first asked whether or not they would be willing to takepart in the survey, and if not, why not; they were then asked whether ornot they thought each of several groups (family, businesses, employers,and law enforcement agencies) could gain access to their answers andhow much they would mind if they did. both the perceived risk of discloexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54expanding access to research datasure (how likely various groups were seen as gaining access to respondents’ answers along with their names and addresses) and the perceivedharm of disclosure (how much respondents would mind such disclosure)significantly predicted people’s willingness to participate in the surveydescribed. perceived benefits, as well as the ratio of risk to benefit, werealso highly significant.in january and april 2003, two virtually identical experiments werecarried out, again on the sca (singer, 2004). the introductions to bothsurveys mentioned the possibility of record linkage—medical records inthe case of nsfg and government (financial) records in the case of hrs.respondents who indicated that they would not be willing to take part inthe survey described (48 percent of the sample) were asked why theywould not do so. the most frequent reasons given—59 percent of all firstmentioned reasons—were that the surveys were too personal or intrusiveor that they objected to giving out financial or medical information orproviding access to medical or financial records. as in the previous experiment, perceptions of disclosure risk, disclosure harm, individual andsocial benefit, and the ratio of risk to benefit were strong and significantpredictors of people’s willingness to participate. similarly, an experimentin connection with the 2000 census found that respondents primed to consider privacy issues had higher rates of item nonresponse to census longform questions than a control group (hillygus et al., 2006).these experiments point to the importance of perceptions of disclosurerisk, as well as of actual risks. public awareness of confidentiality breachesin nongovernment surveys may adversely affect perceptions of the risksarising from participation in government surveys. that is, public knowledge of a breach of confidentiality by an employee of a government benefit agency or private insurance company may increase concern aboutsuch breaches by federal statistical agencies, such as the census bureau.similarly, public knowledge of legal demands for identified records, suchas subpoenas for data about individuals by law enforcement agencies orattorneys for plaintiffs or defendants, may increase such concerns. similarconcerns and effects may result from identity theft, through unauthorizedaccess to an individual’s credit card account and social security numbers;from misuse of medical records by entities (e.g., insurance companies)that are entitled access to them for administrative purposes; or from misuse of administrative records or survey records by employees of a datacollection agency. and, as noted above, such concerns about confidentiality adversely affect the likelihood of participation in government surveys.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.risks of access55why confidentiality breaches might occurcarelessness and illegal intrusionssurvey researchers have identified various ways in which the confidentiality of individual respondents might be breached. perhaps the mostobvious and common threat to confidentiality protection of research dataarises from simple carelessness—not removing identifiers from questionnaires or electronic data files, leaving cabinets unlocked, not encryptingfiles containing identifiers, talking about specific respondents with othersnot authorized to have this information. although there is no evidence ofrespondents having been harmed as a result of such negligence, it is important for government data collection agencies and private survey organizations to be alert to these issues, provide employee guidelines for appropriate data management, and ensure that the guidelines are observed.confidentiality may also be breached as a result of illegal intrusionsinto the data. for example, in 1996, ten social security employees (bribedby outsiders) were found to have stolen confidential information fromagency computers. the key piece of information was mothers’ maidennames, which were stored in a database with password protection butless stringent security than that protecting earnings statements and otherprivate information. the information was used to activate credit cards ofresidents in the new york area. identity theft has been increasingly in thenews since then.as detailed data collected under a pledge of confidentiality are increasingly made available to researchers through licensing agreements orin research data centers, the potential for inadvertent disclosure as a result of carelessness and through deliberate illegal intrusions may also increase unless strong educational and oversight efforts accompany suchmeans of access. in chapter 5 we offer several recommendations designedto strengthen protections against these sources of disclosure of information about individuals.however, the extent of the problem is not easily determinable, eitherby assessing past experience or predicting future effects. numerous media stories have documented harms of identity theft from such sources ascredit card and banking data. in contrast, there is no documented evidence of harms from misuse of research data or carelessness by researchers or others. overall, very little is known about how many breaches ofconfidentiality may actually occur in such settings or how many peopleare harmed as a result. under most circumstances, attempted breachesare difficult to detect, and relying on selfreports is problematic. a july1993 survey by harris, for example, reported that between 3 percent and15 percent of the public, depending on the person or organization askedexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56expanding access to research dataabout, believed that medical information about them had ever been improperly disclosed, and about onethird of these said they had beenharmed by the disclosure (singer, shapiro, and jacobs, 1997). but the accuracy of these reports is unknown. moreover, disclosure of medical information to an insurance company may be permitted by law but regarded by survey respondents as improper. for many people, questionsabout breaches of confidentiality may be highly abstract so that theirideas about the uses that might be made of their medical information arelimited. as a result, little is really known about what people have in mindwhen they answer such questions, and even less about the actual state ofaffairs. again, in chapter 5 we offer some recommendations to addressthis concern.law enforcement and national securitypotentially more serious threats to confidentiality than simple carelessness are legal demands for identified data, which may come in theform of a subpoena or as a result of a freedom of information act (foia)request. requests may also come from a law enforcement or national security agency to a statistical or other government agency; the legal statusof such requests is not fully resolved, as discussed below. individualrecords from surveys that collect data about such illegal behaviors as druguse are potentially subject to subpoena by law enforcement agencies. toprotect against this possibility, researchers and programs studying mental health, alcohol and drug use, and other sensitive topics, whether federally funded or not, may apply for certificates of confidentiality from theu.s. department of health and human services. the national institute ofjustice (in the u.s. department of justice) also makes confidentiality certificates available for criminal justice research supported by agencies ofthe u.s. department of justice. such certificates, which remain in effectfor the duration of a study, protect researchers in most circumstances frombeing compelled to disclose names or other identifying characteristics ofsurvey respondents in federal, state, or local proceedings (42 code of federal regulations section 2a.7, “effect of confidentiality certificate”). theconfidentiality protection afforded by certificates is prospective; researchers may not obtain protection for study results after data collection hasbeen completed.protection for identifiable statistical data collected by federal agenciesor their agents under a promise of confidentiality is also provided by theconfidential information protection and statistical efficiency act(cipsea), which was enacted as title v of the egovernment act of 2002(p.l. 107347). the legislation is intended to “safeguard the confidentialexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.risks of access57ity of individually identifiable information acquired under a pledge ofconfidentiality for statistical purposes by controlling access to, and usesmade of, such information.” the statute includes a number of safeguardsto ensure that information acquired for statistical purposes under a pledgeof confidentiality “shall be used by officers, employees, or agents of theagency exclusively for statistical purposes,” and “shall not be disclosedby an agency in identifiable form, for any use other than an exclusivelystatistical purpose, except with the informed consent of the respondent.”identifiable information can be disclosed, under proper conditions, for“statistical activities,” which are broadly defined to include “the collection, compilation, processing, or analysis of data for the purpose of describing or making estimates concerning the whole, or relevant groups orcomponents within, the economy, society, or the natural environment” aswell as “the development of methods or resources that support those activities, such as measurement methods, models, statistical classifications,or sampling frames.”cipsea also imposed additional responsibilities on statistical agencies, requiring them to “clearly distinguish data or information [they collect] for nonstatistical purposes,” and to “provide notice to the public,before the information is collected, that the data could be used fornonstatistical purposes.” nonstatistical purposes are defined as “any administrative, regulatory, law enforcement, adjudicatory, or other purposethat affects the rights, privileges, or benefits of a particular identifiablerespondent” and include disclosure under the freedom of informationact. the act also provides criminal penalties for a knowing and willfulbreach of confidentiality by employees of the sponsoring agency and anyof its “agents,” who may be data collectors or outside analysts.cipsea offers great promise for increasing researcher access to confidential data. fulfillment of that promise requires, in the first place, coordination of access and protection procedures across the various agenciesin order to satisfy the uniform protection promised by the act. at the timeof this report, the office of management and budget is preparing regulations to implement the safeguards under cipsea. these implementingregulations will be critically important in translating a statutory right intoclear rules that protect research participants across all federal agencies.the regulations are expected to define both the reach of protection forconfidential statistical records and the opportunity for research access.the regulations will have to cover a wide range of questions, such as:•other than federal agency personnel, who can qualify as an“agent” under the statute and thereby be eligible for research access toidentifiable records?expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58expanding access to research data•does a licensing agreement between an agency and a private researcher for research access fall within the coverage of the statute?•what degree of risk of inadvertent disclosure of identifiable information will govern the release of anonymized records?•what form of public notice is required when a statistical agencycollects identifiable information for nonstatistical purposes?•which, if any, of the cipsea protections extend to identifiableadministrative records that are used for research purposes?•how does cipsea affect existing regulations and practices underother agency statutes that protect research records?•what procedural safeguards are required to monitor the work ofagency staffs and nonagency personnel who are deemed “agents” undercipsea?fulfillment of the potential for research access to data sharing undercipsea will ultimately also require companion legislation that wouldpermit the census bureau to share tax information that it receives fromthe internal revenue service (irs) with the bureau of labor statistics andthe bureau of economic analysis in order to reconcile the business listsbuilt by the three agencies. in the absence of such legislation, data sharingfor research among the three agencies is restricted to information that doesnot include, or derive from, tax data. another topic that may need futurelegislative attention is the sharing of individual data, since the datasharing provisions of cipsea currently apply only to business data.the seeming clarity of the protections afforded by cipsea is cloudedby concerns about potential conflict with access to identifiable data fornational security purposes. in the past, government agencies have attempted to use confidential data collected by a statistical agency for lawenforcement purposes, especially in times of heightened national securityconcerns. seltzer and anderson (2003) review attempts by various government agencies to obtain confidential census data between 1902, whenthe census bureau was established as a permanent agency, and 1965. afew of these attempts in the years before enactment of title 13 in 1929—especially those involving national security—were successful and, in atleast some of them, actual disclosure of information about individuals fornational security or law enforcement purposes occurred. in 1917, for example, personal information from the 1910 census was released to courts,draft boards, and the justice department for several hundred young mensuspected of not complying with the draft (barabba, 1975:27, cited in seltzer and anderson, 2003). during world war ii, according to prewitt(2000:1): “the historical record is clear that senior census bureau staffproactively cooperated with the internment [of japanese americans], andthat census tabulations were directly implicated in the denial of civil rightsexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.risks of access59to citizens of the united states who happened also to be of japanese ancestry.”1 in 2004 the census bureau provided information about the residences of arab americans to the customs and border protection agencyof the u.s. department of homeland security, but that information wasalso available on a publicuse site and involved data masked to protectconfidentiality. although this incident was not a violation of law, it wasperceived as such by many people, as well as a violation of trust (seeclemetson, 2004).the 2001 usa patriot act, which is being considered for renewal bycongress as this report is being written, includes provisions for access bythe u.s. attorney general to identifiable research records of the nationalcenter for education statistics (in the u.s. department of education). thisprovision appears to be unique: the panel is not aware of any other provisions for access to confidential research data for national security purposes. both the homeland security act of 2002 (p.l. 107296) and the intelligence authorization act for fiscal year 2003 (p.l. 107306) make clearthat exchange of federal agency information for homeland security needsdoes not include exchange of individually identifiable information collected solely for statistical purposes. nevertheless, as seltzer and anderson have shown, national security crises have in the past led to circumventions or actual violations of confidentiality guarantees.2statistical disclosurebreaches of confidentiality due to carelessness, as well as those fromillegal intrusions, are obviously more likely to occur if a data file containsdirect identifiers—name, address, or social security number, for example.yet there is increasing awareness that even without such identifiers, statistical disclosure may be possible. “statistical disclosure” refers to thereidentification of respondents to a survey (or their attributes) eventhough direct identifiers such as names and addresses have been removed from the data file. statistical disclosure involves using data available outside the survey to breach the protection thought to have been1in that same speech, former census bureau director kenneth prewitt apologized on behalf of the agency for its activities in connection with the internment of japanese americans.for a detailed history of census bureau cooperation with national security activities duringworld war ii, see seltzer and anderson (2000).2although it is not directly relevant to national security, the shelby amendment (part ofp.l. 105277) and the data quality act (see chapter 2) also have implications for confidentiality protection that have not yet been fully determined.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60expanding access to research dataafforded a survey data set by various data deletion and masking techniques. reidentification of respondents may be increasingly possiblebecause of highspeed computers, external data files containing namesand addresses or other direct identifiers as well as information about avariety of individual characteristics, and sophisticated software formatching survey and other files. in chapter 2 we noted some of the factors that may increase statistical disclosure risk and harm for respondents in governmentsponsored surveys, including factors that are integral to the survey design and factors that are external to data collectionagencies and researchers. in addition, there is a growing concern by datacollection agencies (see below) that wider dissemination of research datamay itself increase disclosure risk.for a breach of confidentiality due to statistical disclosure to occur,there must be the technical or legal means, as well as the motivation to usethem. with regard to motive, there are (at least) four: curiosity, sport (e.g.,hackers), profit (e.g., identity theft), and law enforcement or nationalsecurity.3breaches occurring because of curiosity or sport may never becomeknown to the respondent. however, the confidentiality pledge has beenviolated, and ethical harm has been done, even if all that has happened isthat someone has identified a record in a data file and not used it for anypurpose.the further harm a breach of confidentiality may cause depends inpart on the type of intruder and the type of data. federal regulations forthe protection of human subjects of research (in the common rule, 45code of federal regulations 46) focus mainly on the potential harm to anindividual’s reputation, livelihood, or liberty resulting from the disclosure of confidential information, suggesting that disclosure of deviant orillegal behavior or unpopular beliefs is most likely to be harmful. however, if an intruder’s aim is identity (or property) theft, then anything thatpermits the appropriation and abuse of another’s identity may be harmfulto that individual. if the intruder is a hacker simply out to embarrass thesurvey organization, then public identification of one or more survey participants may be enough to do harm to the data collection and researchenterprise, even if the information is not sensitive and the participants arenot directly harmed.a survey design factor that, prima facie, would seem to increase therisk of statistical disclosure is the increasing number and diversity of at3ochas et al. (2001) list additional reasons why reidentification might be attempted: investigative reporting, blackmail, marketing, denial of insurance, and political action.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.risks of access61tributes asked about and stored on the data record for each respondent.the greater the number of attributes about which information is provided,the greater is the theoretical potential for reidentification. since the late1960s, surveys have become more detailed on several dimensions. thus,more and more surveys are collecting detailed socioeconomic attributesfor individuals and households; more and more surveys are asking aboutindividual behaviors, including those that are risky and even illegal; andmore and more surveys are longitudinal in design, collecting repeatedmeasurements on the same individuals. in addition, a growing number ofboth crosssectional and longitudinal surveys collect data about an individual from multiple sources: for example, surveys of children in whichdata are obtained from parents, schoolteachers, and others, and surveysthat collect information about individuals, the schools they attend, andthe neighborhoods in which they live.more recently, a small but growing number of surveys are makinguse of new technologies for collecting biological and geographic information, which in turn make it easier to identify respondents—or more difficult to conceal their identity (see, e.g., national research council, 1998,2001a). such information, which includes dna samples, biological measurements, and geospatial coordinates, complicates the problem of making data files anonymous and heightens the dilemma of data collectionagencies and researchers who want to increase access to the data theycollect while protecting the confidentiality of respondents (see, e.g.,abowd and lane, 2004).other factors that may increase the risk of statistical disclosure areexternal to the survey organization and researcher. as noted above and inchapter 2, these factors include the increasing availability of files in theexternal environment that are suitable for matching to survey records and,in addition, contain names and addresses or other direct identifiers; theready availability of matching software; and quantum increases in theprocessing and storage capabilities of computer hardware and software,which make it possible to manipulate multiple files with rapidity and relative ease. if microdata have been stripped of direct identifiers but noadded steps have been taken to minimize disclosure risk, it is relativelyeasy to match the file with external databases that contain some of thesame variables as the original midcrodata (plus names and addresses)and thus to identify some respondents (see, e.g., winkler, 1988). similarresearch has been conducted by others (see, e.g., sweeney, 2001). however, the panel knows of no information on whether this has been doneother than in a research context.statistical agencies and survey organizations understandably worrythat wider access to ever more complex datasets, in an era of cheap, capacious computing technology and many outside data sources for matchexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62expanding access to research dataing, will increase the risk of statistical disclosure and the potential forharm to respondents, as well as to survey participation. although manyfactors seem to increase the risk of disclosure, there is some evidence suggesting that increasing the number of attributes in a data record does notnecessarily lead to increased disclosure. for example, the retirement history survey (rhs), which followed people who were aged 5863 in 1969for 10 years, made more information publicly available than the hrs,which has followed people aged 51 and older since 1992. yet there are noknown instances of a breach of confidentiality for the rhs, from whichmicrodata have been publicly available for more than 30 years. similarly,there are no known instances of disclosure or consequent harm for otherrichly detailed and longavailable datasets, such as the panel study ofincome dynamics, which has followed families and their descendants formore than 35 years. although this evidence is suggestive, it is importantfor statistical and other agencies to know how often inappropriate disclosures of information actually occur and what the risk of disclosure is indifferent circumstances.ultimately, decisions about how much disclosure risk is acceptable inorder to achieve the benefits of greater access to research data involveweighing the potential harm posed by disclosure against the benefits potentially foregone, as well as a judgment about who should make thosedecisions. the panel does not resolve these difficult issues. rather, inchapter 5 we recommend research to reduce disclosure risk while preserving data utility. we also recommend research that improves estimation of disclosure risk and procedures for monitoring the actual frequencyof disclosure. finally, we recommend continuing consultation with datausers and data providers about all of these issues.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.635reconciling the benefits and risks ofexpanded data accessthe charge to this panelñand the challenge to those who collectdata from individuals and organizations and those who use themñis to understand and weigh the tradeoffs between the benefits andrisks of increased access to research data. the benefits of increased accessare better data for policy analysis and research; the risks are breaches ofconfidentiality and their consequences. as noted in chapter 4, breaches ofconfidentiality can occur in a variety of ways. the work of this panel hasfocused primarily on statistical disclosureñthe reidentification of individual respondents (or their attributes) through the matching of surveydata with information available outside the survey.achieving the benefits of access to research data presupposes a willingness by people in households and organizations to provide detailedand sometimes sensitive information for governmentsponsored statistical surveys and censuses. such willingness requires public trust: trust thatthe data will be used for important research and policy purposes and thatthe confidentiality of the information will be maintained. thus, the agencies that collect data have an obligation to communicate clearly to respondents the purposes of the data they collect and to assure respondents ofthe confidentiality of the information they provide.in this final chapter of the report, we draw on technological, legal,administrative, and statistical sources to offer recommendations that webelieve will facilitate access to research data while protecting the confidentiality of information provided by the public. we offer recommendations in eight broad areas: documenting the use of research data; planningexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64expanding access to research datafor access to data through a variety of modes; expanding access to publicuse files; facilitating access to research data centers; expanding remoteaccess capabilities; broadening the use of licensing and bonding agreements; assuring informed consent; and safeguarding confidentialitythrough training, monitoring, and education in research ethics.documenting useas discussed in chapter 3, data collected by government agenciesbenefit society by providing the basis for research and policy analysis,which, in turn, can inform policy makers and the public. longitudinalsurveys that obtain data for analyzing the determinants and consequencesof social and economic behaviors have been a major positive development for research and policy in the past 30 years. linking survey andadministrative data can create particularly rich datasets that, in somecases, can substitute for additional surveys, thus reducing respondentburden as well as government costs. to realize the full potential of thesedata, researchers outside of government need access to them.the united states has a decentralized, pluralistic research structure,in which not only the staffs of statistical and other data collection agencies, but also researchers in many institutions, with different policy preferences and perspectives, can and should have access to data. this broadaccess by independent researchers and analysts provides checks and balances on the governmentõs dominant role in public policy. the fruits ofthe diverse, decentralized social science research enterprise include notonly studies that contribute to longerterm understanding of the dynamics of individual, household, and organizational (e.g., business) behavior,but also analyses that contribute directly to public discourse and the development and evaluation of public policies.the rapid expansion of information and communication technologiesin the past decade has enhanced the potential for society to benefit evenmore from the collection and provision of data for social science research.with greater computing power and better software, the value of data,especially complex longitudinal microdata, has increased. with such data,investigators can estimate and test models that are closer approximationsto reality and that directly address problems of causal inference. althoughthe new technologies make it more difficult to protect the confidentialityof respondents, they also enhance the possibilities for disseminating research data more widely. failure to use such technologies inhibits the ability of society to exploit fully the rich data collected by federal agencies orothers on their behalf.in part because of the public goods aspect of data collection and research and in part because of the decentralized structure of both data colexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access65lection and data analysis activities, it is difficult for data collection agencies, research organizations, or society to assess the value of the data produced. although the benefits of data access are compelling (see chapter3), no one has developed a generally accepted approach for quantifyingthe extent and value of that access or placing a quantifiable value on theuses of the data.careful tracking of the numbers and types of users and the body ofresearch produced would provide a sense of the importance of variousdata products.more broadly, we conclude that a more comprehensiverecord of the research use of data would be valuable to agencies, policymakers, and researchers.registries and documentation of data use couldhelp foster understanding by both the public and policy makers of thevalue of various kinds of data, including microdata, and the research thatthese data inform.in addition to a record of the use of research data, it is importanttoknow how many requests for data are received and how many of thoseare denied, as well as the time required to gain access when the request isgranted.the panel that produced private lives and public policies explicitly recommended that procedures be established for keeping records ofdata requests denied or partially fulfilled (national research council,1993:100). this panel endorses that recommendation, which has not yetbeen implemented.records of such requests for confidential data mayalso be useful to agencies in monitoring confidentiality protection procedures and actual breaches of confidentiality (see òresearch on breaches ofconfidentiality,ó in this chapter).a first step in documenting use would be to assemble bibliographiesof research papers for particular data sets. the bibliographies of researchpapers maintained for some existing datasets offer models of the kinds ofdocumentation that we envision. they include: the national longitudinalsurveys of labor market experience (nls, housed at the center for human resource research at ohio state university), the panel study of income dynamics (psid, housed at the university of michigan), the healthand retirement study (hrs, housed at the university of michigan), andthe general social survey (gss, housed at the university of chicago). theu.s. census bureau has a bibliography of nearly 2,000 references to published and unpublished work using data from the survey of income andprogram participation (sipp) and the predecessor income survey development program, but the bibliography has not been updated since 1998(www.sipp.census.gov/sipp/aboutbib.html). in addition to research publications, such as articles and books, we encourage bibliographies of research presentations at scholarly meetings and any research analysis presented in the form of software applications.federal statistical agencies could use such bibliographies, not only toexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66expanding access to research dataassess the use of their data sets, but also as a sampling frame for contacting researchers to obtain feedback on the quality and usefulness of thedata. similarly, research funding agencies could usefully commissionanalyses that build on research bibliographies to assess the extent, quality, and importance of social science research conducted with statisticaldata, particularly microdata.recommendation 1as a first step to facilitate systematic study ofthe extent and value of data access for research, public and privateagencies that collect social science research data should maintain uptodate bibliographies of research and policy analysis publications,presentations, and software applications that use the data.access through multiple modesthe actual data collected for statistical purposes from households, individuals, business establishments, and other organizations through censuses and surveys under a pledge of confidentiality are never made available to users. instead, data are made available either in the form ofconfidential, restrictedaccess data files or in the form of anonymized dataproducts, including published tables and microdata files.confidential files delete direct identifiers such as names and addressesbut retain the observational structure of the original data and include allof the value added by an agency to generate its published statistics (suchas analysis weights, imputation for unit and item nonresponse, data quality edits, geocoding, industry coding, occupation coding). they also contain details (such as place of residence, occupation, industry, income, andwealth) that cannot be made available on publicuse files. in some casesan agency may also create links to administrative records or other datafiles.publicuse microdata files, constructed from the confidential files, contain data that have been masked through various steps (rounded, aggregated, edited) or that have been altered through such techniques as multiple imputation to ensure that individual respondents and their attributescannot be identified. publicuse files are the most accessible and widelyused microdata products made available by statistical agencies, but theirvalue for much policyrelevant research is limited. to exploit the full research and policy value of microdata, researchers will often need access tothe confidential files. modes of access to such data (restricted accessmodes) include access at supervised locations, remote access with priorreview of data output, and access through licensing and bonding agreements (discussed below).because publicuse files are available to all, statistical agencies mustexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access67exercise great care to ensure their anonymity, as well as their usefulnessand accuracy. the ultimate goal is to provide publicuse data that willyield the same statistical inferences that would be derived from the confidential data. but since many of the analyses that will be performed onpublicuse files cannot be foreseen at the time of their release, the processof assuring their quality requires a continual feedback relationship between the publicuse files and the underlying confidential data. analysesperformed on the confidential data can be used to improve the next generation of publicuse data in several ways. for example, such analyses canidentify errors in the original data, the publicuse data, or both, as well asanomalies that should be corrected in statistical procedures (such as imputation). they can also identify ways in which the publicuse data couldbe made more useful for research by altering the procedures for confidentiality protection for some items. such analyses can also suggest priorityareas for improvement and enhancement of data content in subsequentdata collections.this feedback relationship serves two related purposes. first, it improves the quality and relevance of publicuse files, an outcome of greatimportance to the statistical agencies because they must attest to the usefulness of these products as a source of statistical information to a broadaudience. second, it justifies a substantial investment in facilitating accessto the underlying confidential microdata because such an investment supports an agencyõs core mission of assuring the quality and usefulness ofits publicuse products. both kinds of accessñrestricted access to the confidential data and unrestricted access to inferencevalid publicuse datañare needed, not only to accommodate different types of users with different purposes, but also to maintain and improve the quality of publicusefiles and to obtain accurate estimates of the error entailed by their use.economists and statisticians have begun to model the optimum mixof different data access modes by examining the costs and benefits of providing research access through publicuse data products or through restricted access modes (abowd and lane, 2004). such modeling is in itsinfancy but could be valuable at several levels. for individual variables,costbenefit modeling might identify specific items that could be movedfrom restricted access to publicuse data without impairing confidentiality protection and, conversely, items that should be moved from publicuse products to restricted access modes.at a broader level, costbenefit modeling could be used to evaluatethe tradeoffs among the various forms of restricted accessñresearch datacenters, remote access, licensingñas well as among different ways of restricting data (through various masking techniques and various ways ofproducing synthetic data). costbenefit modeling entails the use of a largenumber of assumptions, including the expected number, variety, andexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68expanding access to research datavalue of uses in each mode; the disclosure risk and associated costs foreach mode; the user costs for access through a research data center compared with a publicuse file or a licensing arrangement; and the producercosts for preparing the publicuse product compared with running a research data center and approving and overseeing licensees. for realisticestimation, costbenefit modeling will require empirical estimates of suchfactors as disclosure risks and costs, numbers and benefits of researchuses, user costs of access for various modes, and producer costs of providing various modes of access. such estimates do not currently exist, andsome of them, including disclosure risks and costs and the benefits ofresearch use, are not easy to develop, although promising work is underway on estimating disclosure risk (see reiter, 2003; see also òpublicusedataó in this chapter).given the importance of facilitating research access to statisticalmicrodata, statistical and research agencies should encourage research onthe most efficient allocation of resources among different access modes toguide their planning and to support changes (including legislativechanges, if needed) to facilitate one or other type of access. if a variety ofagencies, as well as users, are involved in such research and planningefforts to develop data access programs, the data that agencies produceare more likely to be widely used, ultimately leading to better researchand policy analysis and to important feedback to data producers that canenable them to enhance data quality and relevance. examples of the kinds of involvement of users and producers thatwe envision include the major longitudinal surveys that are fundedthrough grants to academic survey organizations (including the hrs andthe psid), which have active boards of users and potential users that guidetheir development. although most federal statistical agencies also haveoutside advisory groups, they rarely focus on data access programs forparticular data sets. however, one example of focused user involvementfor a statistical agency microdata collection is the association of publicdata users working group on sipp data products, which was active from1989 to 1994. it played a major role in the development of more userfriendly data products and comprehensive user documentation from thesurvey of income and program participation.recommendation 2data produced or funded by government agencies should continue to be made available for research through a variety of modes, including various modes of restricted access to confidential data and unrestricted access to publicuse data altered in avariety of ways to maintain confidentiality.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access69recommendation 3the national science foundation, the nationalinstitutes of health, and major statistical agencies should support research to guide more efficient allocation of resources among differentdata access modes.recommendation 4statistical and other data collection agenciesshould involve users more fully in planning modes of access to theirdata.publicuse dataimproving qualitypublicuse files, introduced in the 1960s, are the most widely available form of research data. as described above, information generatedfrom investigating confidential data in a restricted access environmentcan be used to improve their quality and relevance. improved publicusedata files, in turn, can reduce the need and demand for restricted accessfor some data sets. if, for example, it is possible to move certain variables,such as summary measures or average values, from restrictedaccess topublicuse files while maintaining confidentiality protections, overall access to research data could be increased at reduced cost to users and producers. doing so requires further sustained research and development ofmethods that permit data collection agencies to assess the increase in disclosure risk posed by the addition of specific variables to existing publicuse files. data from the hrs provides an example of the kind of assessmentneeded. the primary insurance amount (pia), which is calculated fromthe detailed social security earnings records of hrs respondents, is avery desirable variable for many researchers, most of whom do not needthe detailed social security administrative records. pia informationwould seem to present little additional disclosure risk because many patterns of lifetime earnings will produce the same pia. thus, one cannotrecover any particular detailed earnings history from a single pia number. but because hrs policy requires that any variable derived from social security records must be a confidential variable, all researchers mustapply for access to the confidential files (a tedious and costly process) inorder to gain access to the pia data. research that demonstrated the absence of increased disclosure risk might make it possible to alter the hrspolicy so that pia data could be made available as part of the publicusefile. such a step would be likely to substantially reduce the demand fordetailed earnings data. moreover, and paradoxically, by increasing acexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70expanding access to research datacess to the publicuse file, the overall risk of disclosure might be reducedbecause fewer people would have access to the confidential data.other improvements to publicuse files also require research. currently, these files rely on a variety of disclosure limitation methods, suchas rounding, coarsening, data swapping, and top coding (see duncan,2002). research is needed to examine and quantify the tradeoffs betweendisclosure risk and data utility when these methods are used. since allpublicuse files require disclosure limitation in order to protect confidentiality, it is crucial that the methods used maximize both the utility of thedata and the protection of confidentiality, recognizing that a zero risk ofdisclosure can never be guaranteed.1disclosure risk research has begun to advance from the delineation ofgeneral approaches with simulated data to empirical estimation of thedisclosure risk in existing microdata sets. for example, reiter (2003) estimated changes in disclosure risk by altering variables, such as age andproperty taxes, in the current population survey, under alternative assumptions about what a data snooper might know (see also duncan et al.,2001; duncan and stokes, 2004). much could be learned from more empirically based work with different variables and different files, includingwork by agencies that do not currently release much, if any, publicusemicrodata, such as the social security administration. that work mightdetermine that such disclosure limitation methods as calculating summary measures or average values from confidential data and attachingthese measures to other commonly used microdata could result in highlyuseful, fully protected publicuse microdata for research and policy analysis on such important topics as taxation and retirement income security.currently, studies of the probabilities of disclosure include estimatesof the technical possibility of matching publicuse survey data with otherwidely available information, but they do not include estimates of thelikelihood that such matching would be attempted. consequently, estimates of disclosure risk may overstate the potential risk. yet without dataon peopleõs propensities for snooping through different types of surveydata (which may not be the same as their propensities for hacking intocredit card company records or other data sets that present clear financialincentives), one cannot empirically estimate the likelihood of attempts toreidentify records in particular microdata sets. however, it would bepossible to use different assumptions about those propensities to helpagencies set bounds on their estimates of disclosure risk for particulartypes of data.1for a bibliography on disclosure risk analysis and best practices for statistical disclosurecontrol, see oõrourke and gutmann (2005).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access71another factor that could be considered in the calculus of the disclosure riskbenefit tradeoff is the degree of harm that might result fromdisclosure of particular types of information about an individual or organization. it may be that some degree of uncertainty about the risk of disclosure could be tolerated for data that are not likely to put an individualat risk of serious harm, while a worstcase assumption about disclosurerisk would be prudent for highly sensitive data (e.g., reports of illegaldrug use or detailed information about financial assets). in making a decision about acceptable levels of disclosure risk, it is important that dataprovidersõ views be considered along with those of the data collectionagency and potential research users (see below).research on disclosure limitation methods should include establishment (business) data as well as household and individual data. this topichas so far received relatively little attention for business data because ofthe presumption that establishments are too easy to identify unless theirattributes are so heavily masked that the resulting publicuse microdatawould have little analytic value. yet there may be methods that could beeffective in protecting confidentiality and preserving research utility forestablishmentbased publicuse microdata. without research on differentmethods, access to establishment data is likely to continue to be severelyrestricted, limiting research and policy analysis on important topics.methods of disclosure limitation based on synthetic or virtual data,which are constructed from confidential data through partial or completemultiple imputation techniques, show promise in safeguarding confidentiality and permitting the estimation of complex models; they should continue to be explored as an alternative to other disclosure limitation methods (see, e.g., abowd and woodcock, 2001; doyle et al., 2001;raghunathan; 2003). the chief drawback of synthetic data, as of maskeddata, is their potential for yielding misleading results, especially whencomplex models are estimated. empirical estimates of the amount of error introduced by imputationbased disclosure limitation methods under various assumptions are needed both to demonstrate their utility andto suggest ways in which they can be improved. such research, whichshould also be conducted for perturbation and data swapping methods,will become increasingly important as highly useful but highly sensitivevariablesñsuch as biological markers, including dna samples, andgeospatial coordinatesñare increasingly linked with survey responses.synthetic publicuse microdata could also facilitate data access by providing a means for researchers to explore, test, and refine estimation models at relatively low cost before incurring the higher costs of access toconfidential data through a research data center or another restricted access mode. for this purpose, the synthetic data would need to meet a highstandard for supporting valid inference but not as high a standard asexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72expanding access to research datawould be necessary for research and policy analysis that relied on thesynthetic data alone.recommendation 5agencies that sponsor data collection shouldconduct or sponsor research on techniques for providing useful, innovative publicuse data that minimize the risk of disclosure. such research should also be a funding priority for the national institutes ofhealth and the national science foundation. in particular, researchshould be directed to:(1)developing measures for quantifying disclosure risk;(2)estimating the effect on disclosure risk of adding selected variables from confidential data files to publicuse files;(3)estimating and improving the utilitydisclosure limitation tradeoffs of alternative disclosure limitation methods, including syntheticdata; and(4)developing disclosure limitation methods for establishment data.facilitating access to publicuse filesacademic researchers in the united states need approval from an institutional review board (irb) to conduct research involving human participants, including, in many cases, secondary analyses. currently many,perhaps most, irbs lack the expertise required to review the adequacy ofthe confidentiality protection for research that involves original data collection. as a result, researchers spend much time justifying to irbs proposed reanalyses of publicuse microdata from federal agencies and established data archives that incorporate best practices for confidentialityprotection (see national research council, 2003b).the panel on institutional review boards, surveys, and social science research recommended a new confidentiality protection system,built on existing and new data archives and statistical agencies, to facilitate secondary analysis of publicuse microdata (national research council, 2003b:138 [recommendations 5.2 and 5.3]). such a system would permit irbs to exempt secondary analysis with such data from review as amatter of standard practice under clause 46.101(b)(2) of 45 cfr 46, subpart a, federal policy for the protection of human subjects.the system could be developed as follows: the office for human research protections in the u.s. department of health and human serviceswould work with statistical agencies, appropriate interagency groups, anddata archives to develop a certificate to accompany the release of publicuse data sets. data producers and archives could obtain certification forall of their publicuse data sets or for individual files if they rarely produce publicuse data. such a certificate would attest that the publicuseexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access73file reflects good practice for confidentiality protection and that the datawere collected with appropriate concern for informed consent and otherhuman research participant protection issues. with such a certificate, theirb would exempt from further review any analysis that proposes to useonly the data from the certified files.in supporting its recommendation, the panel noted (national research council, 2003b:138139):we argue that irb review of secondary analysis with publicusemicrodata is unnecessary and a misuse of scarce time and resources . . . ifthe data in a file have been processed to minimize the risk of reidentifying a respondent by using widely recognized good practices for confidentiality protection, then the research is eligible for exemption underthe common rule. . . .development of the process of certification assumes heavy participation by the statistical agencies, the office of human research protections,the office of management and budget statistical and science policy office, and interested data archives and would clearly require an initial investment of significant amounts of time and money. but if irbs throughout the country accepted certification as sufficient to exempt from reviewresearch involving data from a statistical agency or a nationally recognized survey organization, access to research microdata would be considerably enhanced. we therefore endorse the recommendations of the earlier panel.recommendation 6to enhance access to publicuse files for secondary analysis, we endorse the recommendations of the panel on institutional review boards, surveys, and social science concerning establishment of a new system of confidentiality protection forpublicuse microdata based on existing and new data archives andstatistical agencies. statistical agencies and participating archiveswould certify that publicuse data sets obtained from them were sufficiently protected against statistical disclosure to be acceptable forsecondary analysis, and irbs would exempt such analyses from review on the basis of the certification provided.extending legal obligations to data usersat present, the obligation to protect individual respondents falls primarily on those who collect the data, thereby creating a disincentive forproviding access to other researchers. we believe this obligation shouldbe extended to the users of publicuse data as well. all releases of statistical data by federal agencies, including publicuse data files, should include a warning that the data are provided for research purposes onlyexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74expanding access to research dataand that any attempt to identify an individual respondent in the data fileis a violation of federal law and will result in penalties comparable tothose currently imposed only on agency personnel and licensed users.such a warning currently accompanies publicuse records released by thenational center for education statistics (nces). although such restrictions may be difficult to enforce, especially for publicuse data, the legalsanction will stand as an expression of professional norms regarding theuse of research data.the ability to seek penalties may require new legislation for mostagencies. the language that is in place for data sets from the nces (p.l.107279, education sciences reform act of 2002, section 183(d)(6)) is anexample of the kind of penalties that would be appropriate to invokeagainst users of publicuse data from federal statistical agencies whobreach confidentiality:any person who uses any data provided by the director, in conjunction with any other information or technique, to identify any individualstudent, teacher, administrator, or other individual and who knowinglydiscloses, publishes, or uses such data for a purpose other than a statistical purpose, or who otherwise violates subparagraph (a) or (b) of subsection (c)(2), shall be found guilty of a class e felony and imprisoned fornot more than five years, or fined as specified in section 3571 of title 18,united states code, or both.recommendation 7all releases of publicuse data should include awarning that the data are provided for statistical purposes only andthat any attempt to identify an individual respondent is a violation ofthe ethical understandings under which the data are provided. usersshould be required to attest to having read this warning and instructed to include it with any data they redistribute.recommendation 8access to publicuse data should be restricted tothose who agree to abide by the confidentiality protections governingsuch data, and meaningful penalties should be enforced for willfulmisuse of publicuse data.at noted above, new legislation would be required for some agencies tohave the authority for such penalties.facilitating access to research data centersone key way to provide researcher access to confidential data isthrough research data centers (rdcs), including the eight centers maintained by the census bureau and those maintained at the headquarters ofexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access75the agency for healthcare research and quality and the national centerfor health statistics, in the department of health and human services,the bureau of labor statistics in the department of labor, and some otheragencies.2as noted in chapter 2, the census bureauõs rdcs represent an important step toward facilitating research access to confidential data; however, they are believed to be underused, and their use appears to be declining. two of the three reasons for this trend are the length of the reviewprocess and the costs involved in doing research away from oneõs homeinstitution. the third reason is a very stringent interpretation of the fivecriteria for approving a research project, which must demonstrate:(1)a likely benefit to the census bureau under title 13 and, indeed,that its predominant purpose is to provide one or more title 13 benefits,such as improving imputations for nonresponse (see www.ces.census.gov/ces.php/guidelines);(2)scientific merit in terms of a projectõs likelihood to contribute toexisting knowledge (which is similar to the criterion for researchfundingagencies, such as the national science foundation [nsf] and the nationalinstitutes of health [nih]);(3)a clear need for nonpublic data;(4)feasibility; and(5)from the applicant, a willingness to accept all confidentiality protection and disclosure review requirements, including strict limits placedon how much and how often intermediate output can be taken out of therdc (e.g., by a graduate student for review by his or her professor) andthe requirement that the addition of new investigators to a project requiresa de novo review and approval.stringent application of these criteria may discourage applications orthe withdrawal of proposals before a decision is reached and probablycontributes to the length of the review process. yet such stringency arguably does not enhance confidentiality protection nor forward the missionof the census bureau to facilitate data use. in particular, the panel concludes that the first criterion has been interpreted in a way that actuallyimpedes furtherance of the agencyõs mission. research that uses title 13data should be deemed eligible for approval so long as the researcheragrees to provide information to the census bureau about the quality andusefulness of the data, without the requirement to demonstrate that the2for a description of the census bureauõs rdc operations, see hildreth (2003); see also thesummary of the panelõs workshop, appendix a.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76expanding access to research dataresearchõs predominant purpose is for data improvement under title 13(see hildreth, 2003; see also discussion in appendix a). the research useof the data is a key part of the allimportant feedback cycle that contributes to improvement of published statistics, publicuse microdata, andsummary products, as well as the census bureauõs knowledge about itsdata.with regard to the length of review, (incomplete) data from the census bureauõs rdc network indicate that it takes an average of 7 monthsfor approval of a project with economic data and an average of as much as20 months for review of a project using matched administrative data, suchas state medicaid and unemployment records matched with cps or sippdata. (these figures do not include proposals that require revision andresubmission or that are withdrawn from consideration.) one reason thatthe use of matched data takes so long to approve is that the custodian ofthe administrative data undertakes its review following that of the census bureau. if a researcher is then asked to revise and resubmit the proposal, and the researcher has, say, a 2year grant period, the project isimpossible to carry out in the allotted time.until recently, the process was further slowed because there were onlythree review cycles each year. in 2004, the census bureau implemented acontinuous review process in which reviews are being conducted on anòon demand basis.ó although it is too early to assess the effects of thischange, it is an important step in improving access to confidential dataunder the rdc program. however, the internal revenue service, becauseof staff limitations, continues to have only three review cycles each yearfor projects that propose to use data from social security earnings recordsor income tax returns.3as noted in chapter 2, the census bureau has indicated openness toother ideas for streamlining the application and review process for rdcprojects, and some ideas may also be relevant for rdc operations at otheragencies. for example, some research projects that are proposed for implementation at an rdc have already been reviewed and recommended forfunding by an agency (e.g., the nsf or nih) through its own peer reviewprocess. the census bureau (or other agency) could accept that fundingrecommendation as part of its review process, concentrating only on theappropriateness of the rdc for the work.3for a description of the agreement between the census bureau and the irs regardingaccess to confidential irs data, see òcriteria for the review and approval of census projectsthat use federal tax informationó (www.ces.census.gov/download.php? document=50[may 2005]). this document applies with full rigor only to proposals using both title 13(census) and title 26 (irs) data. when the proposal uses only title 13 data, the censusbureau may interpret the statute without irs review.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access77recommendation 9to achieve the research potential and costeffective operation of the census bureau data centers, the censusbureau should (1) broaden the interpretation of the criteria for assessing the benefits of access to data; (2) maintain the continuousreview cycle; and (3) take account of prior scientific review of research proposals by established peer review processes.if irs data are involved, that agency would also have to agree on the newcriteria.other steps to consider for stimulating use of research data centersinclude broader advertising of the centers and the procedures for usingthem, and special proposal submission and review processes for juniorresearchers. in addition, the census bureau and other statistical agenciesshould explore ways to house confidential data from as many agencies aspossible in a single supervised location in a number of host institutions inorder to add to their value for research use. the 2002 confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea) may facilitatethis process.currently, statistical agencies have few resources to facilitate accessto confidential files by external researchers, which is a disincentive tomaintain, let alone expand, the operations of research data centers andother modes of restricted access. similarly, potential host organizationsoften lack adequate resources to contribute to the operations of researchdata centers, and they are unlikely to increase their contributions if theaccess process is so cumbersome that it deters researchers from seeking touse confidential data. in order to provide adequate access, research datacenters need funds for a range of tasks, from processing applications andoverseeing access, to preparing and updating userfriendly documentation and access tools, to checking researchersõ work to ensure that breachesof confidentiality have not occurred. we note that the census bureaurdcs are supported in part through grants from the nsf and the national institute on aging (see national research council, 2000:48). increased funding through a variety of mechanisms, and from a variety ofagencies, should be explored, contingent on improved data access. expanding and improving remote accessone way to reduce the costs in time and money involved in travelingto a research data center is to expand access to the confidential data storedin those centers from a remote computer. because the methodology usedby an agency in processing and archiving its data affects how remote access to the data can be structured, there are no simple designs for remoteaccess (see rowland, 2003). furthermore, access from a remote computerexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78expanding access to research dataposes significant challenges to the maintenance of confidentiality becauseof the risk posed by repeated queries to the database and the potentialability to infer individual attributes by comparing results for some tablecells against others (see duncan and mukherjee, 2000). at this stage ofsoftware development for disclosure review, manual monitoring beforeoutput is sent back to a user may be more effective at protecting confidentiality. it may also, as in the nchs system, allow users to request a broaderarray of outputs (e.g., regressions of various types in addition to tables).however, manual monitoring is more costly for the sponsor agency andprecludes rapid response to user submissions.research that will permit expansion of this mode of access to confidential data is needed. the research should focus on efficient disclosurelimitation methods for remote access that allow users to request a widerange of outputs and obtain output within reasonable time limits.recommendation 10statistical agencies and other agencies thatsponsor data collection should conduct or sponsor research on costeffective means of providing secure access to confidential data bymeans of a remote access mechanism, consistent with their confidentiality assurance protocols.licensing agreementsan alternative to research data centers, one that reduces burden tousers because it does not require them to travel to a different location, is alicensing agreement. licensing agreements, which are a valuable meansof access to confidential data, have developed in different ways for different datasets. although the census bureau does not currently have theauthority to allow access to its confidential data under licensing agreements, the bureau of labor statistics, the nces, and nsfõs division ofscience resources statistics, among other agencies, license the use of confidential data to researchers who meet certain criteria. the hrs, which iscarried out at the university of michigan with funding from the nationalinstitute on aging, also licenses researchers to use its data. these licensesenable researchers to work at their home institution, without incurringthe costs of relocating.ncesñwhich currently uses licensing more than any other agencyñrequires potential users (such as state and local agencies, contractors, researchers) to complete an application designed for the specific type ofuser. the process involves preparing and submitting a formal letter ofrequest, a license document, an affidavit of nondisclosure, and a securityplan.4 users of confidential hrs data must be affiliated with an institu4for details, see òrestricteduse data procedures manualó (nces.ed.gov/statprog/rudman/[november 2004]).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access79tion that has a human subjects review process (including an irb that isregistered with and has been approved by the office for human researchprotections in the u.s. department of health and human services) and bea current recipient of federal research funds. users of hrs data are required to submit for approval a research proposal and a data protectionplan, as well as irb review and a signed agreement for use of restricteddata.5 most licensing agreements are time limited and require users toreturn or destroy the confidential data files.although potentially very useful for expanding access to confidentialdata, licensing is not yet widely used by statistical agencies. this mechanism could be significantly expanded: agencies that currently lack authority for licensing should investigate obtaining such authority, and agenciesthat currently license only a few data sets should consider expanding thenumber of data sets for which a license may be obtained. in expanding theuse of licensing agreements, agencies should sponsor consultations amongdata users and producers in developing the standards governing suchagreements in order to assure the widest possible access consistent withconfidentiality protection. implementation of cipsea will facilitateñindeed, requireñdeveloping relatively uniform procedures across agencies.recommendation 11statistical and other agencies that provide datafor research and do not yet use licensing agreements for access toconfidential data should implement such an access mechanism. agencies that use licensing for only a few confidential data sets shouldexpand the files for which a license may be obtained.for some agencies, such a mechanism may require new legislation.recommendation 12statistical and other agencies that provide datafor research should work with data users to develop flexible, consistent standards for licensing agreements and implementation procedures for access to confidential data.both the nces and the hrs licensing agreements include two important enforcement provisions. one is random auditing of the licensed research site by a qualified auditor for adherence to the conditions of thelicense, including storage of the data on secure servers, restriction of access to personnel named on the agreement, and encryption of the datawhen in transit. the second is severe penalties for serious violations of theagreement. in the case of the hrs, for example, the penalties include forfeiture by the investigatorñand, possibly, the investigatorõs entire insti5for details, see òhrs restricted data: application materials: basic requirementsó(hrsonline.isr.umich.edu/rda/rdapkgreq.htm#reqoutline [november 2004]).expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80expanding access to research datatutionñof all current funding, and denial of future funding by the sponsoring agency.an early review of the results of audits by nces revealed that theviolations uncovered resulted from simple carelessness, did not result inconfidentiality breaches, and did not trigger the imposition of penalties(see mcmillen, 1999). a more recent review concluded that enforcementmechanisms throughout the government are quite weak (see seastrom,wright, and melnicki, 2003), contributing to violations; however, most ifnot all of the violations resulted from carelessness or not following properprocedures, rather than from willful misuse of data, and, again, there wasno evidence of disclosure of individual data.although the panel recognizes that broadening access through licensing agreements may increase the risk of disclosure by increasing the number of people with access to confidential data, we believe that the risk isoutweighed by the benefits of wider access. in order to provide as muchprotection as possible, we recommend that future licensing agreementsinclude the two key enforcement featuresñauditing and penalties for violationsñthat are designed to minimize that risk. we also recommend thatall data providers be informed that their data may be used in unanticipated ways, and by researchers other than those carrying out the datacollection, but only for research purposes (see recommendation 14).recommendation 13licensing agreements should include auditingprocedures and appropriate legal penalties for willful misuse of confidential data.informing respondents of data useas we stress throughout this report, the foundation for achieving thebenefits of data for research and policy is the publicõs willingness to supply the information requested. in turn, all agencies that collect data havean obligation to inform respondents about the purposes for which thedata are being collected and how they will be used.recommendation 14basic information about confidentiality anddata access given to everyone asked to participate in statistical surveys should include notification about:(1)planned record linkages for research purposes;(2)the possibility of future uses of the data for other researchpurposes;(3)the possibility of future uses of the data by researchers other thanthose collecting the data;(4)planned nonstatistical uses of the data; andexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access81(5)a clear statement of the level of confidentiality protection that canbe legally and technically assured, recognizing that a zero risk of disclosure is not possible.this recommendation substantially mirrors one from private lives andpublic policies (national research council, 1993:220221).the following paragraph may provide a model for a brief statementthat responds to the spirit of items (1) ð (5).6your information is being collected for research purposes and for statistical analysis by researchers in our agency and in other institutions.your data will not be used for any legal or enforcement purpose [unlessrequired by the patriot act]. the researchers who have access to yourdata are pledged to protect its confidentiality and are subject to fines andprison terms if they violate it. data will only be provided to researchersoutside our agency in a form that protects your identity as an individual.some uses of your data may require linking your responses to otherrecords, always in a manner that honors our pledge to protect your confidentiality.the panel also believes that in formulating policies about data access,neither statistical agencies nor irbs should assume that they know whatkinds of data members of the public consider sensitive or what disclosurerisks they are willing to tolerate. instead, these policies should take theviews of the public into account.recommendation 15statistical and funding agencies should supportcontinuing research to monitor the views of data providers and thegeneral public about research risks and benefits, including such topics as the sensitivity of questions, data sharing for statistical purposes,methods of obtaining consent for survey participation, the importanceof privacy and confidentiality, and similar topics.safeguarding confidentiality:training, monitoring, and educationso far, we have discussed ways of expanding research access whileprotecting confidentiality, focusing mainly on risks of statistical disclosure and how to measure and safeguard against them. in this concludingsection, we address the issue of confidentiality protection more generally,6guidance from the office of management and budget on the wording of a confidentialitypledge to be given to respondents participating in data collections subject to cipsea iscurrently in draft form for comment.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82expanding access to research dataacknowledging, as we did in chapter 4, that wider access to confidentialdata is likely to increase the risk of confidentiality breaches, but that statistical disclosure is not the only, or even the main, threat. we considerthree aspects of confidentiality protection: (1) training employees in procedures to safeguard confidential data, (2) research on violations of confidentiality protection procedures and actual breaches of confidentiality,and (3) educating researchers and staff in the ethical foundations of privacy and confidentiality.training employeesone common threat to confidentiality protection of research dataarises from simple carelessnessñnot removing identifiers from questionnaires or electronic data files, leaving cabinets unlocked, not encryptingfiles containing identifiers, talking about specific respondents with othersnot authorized to have this information. just as institutional review boardscurrently require researchers to undergo training in human subjects protection issues before undertaking research involving human participants,so statistical agencies and private survey organizations should providetheir employees with guidelines for confidentiality protection, as well asregularly updated training in appropriate data management (such as secure storage of identifiable information) to ensure that the guidelines areobserved. data collection agencies that have such guidelines and trainingshould regularly review their procedures to ensure that they are up todate and systematically enforced.recommendation 16statistical agencies and survey organizationsthat collect individually identifiable data should provide writtenguidelines for confidentiality protection, as well as training in confidentiality practices and data management that guard against disclosure, for all staff who work with or have access to such data.such training should include all aspects of data managementñentering,storing, manipulating, and analyzing electronic records. everyone whohandles electronic records needs to be fully aware of the need to protectthem, as they do with paper records.research on breaches of confidentialityjust as better information is needed about the use made of researchdata (see chapter 3), information is also needed about violations of confidentiality protection practices and the actual occurrence of confidentialitybreaches. without knowing how many breaches occur in an agency, it isexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.reconciling the benefits and risks of expanded data access83impossible to know, for example, whether laws and penalties designed toprevent improper disclosure of confidential information are effective orwhether other kinds of deterrents are needed. statistical agencies and individual researchers have generally resisted suggestions for research onconfidentiality breaches, yet such research is necessary to evaluate theeffectiveness of data access mechanisms in preventing unwarranted disclosure.the office of research integrity in the u.s. department of health andhuman services is currently funding research into such violations of research ethics as data fabrication and plagiarism; a few such studies havebeen published (see, e.g., swazey, anderson, and louis, 1993; martinson,anderson, and de vries, 2005). research into the extent, nature, and causesof confidentiality breaches is long overdue. if welldesigned and executedresearch and monitoring finds little evidence of such breaches, it woulddo much to reassure the public and the agencies themselves that the benefits accruing from wider dissemination of research data will not incurundue costs in terms of breaches of confidentiality. the u.s. governmentaccountability office has in the past expressed an interest in undertakingsuch research.recommendation 17statistical agencies should set up procedures formonitoring, on an ongoing basis, violations of confidentiality protection practices and instances of confidentiality breaches that may occur. the system should be designed to obtain information on thecauses and consequences of these breaches.education in research ethicslaws and procedures designed to prevent confidentiality breachesand punish their occurrence will not be optimally effective unless they areaccompanied by internalized norms of research ethics and fair information practices (see barquin and northouse, 2003; duncan, 2004). to inculcate these among current and future researchers and the staffs of the statistical agencies, universities as well as agencies that collect data from thepublic should be encouraged to develop curricula (presented in courses,workshops, and other educational forums) dealing explicitly with the requirements of fair information practices, as well as with the requirementsfor conducting ethical research with human beings. the two are not identical, and both have a role to play in the training of researchers and otherswho will work in the field of government statistics. such education programs should deal with ethical, legal, and data quality issues, as well aswith administrative and technical procedures for confidentiality protection, data security, disclosure limitation, and informed consent.statistical agencies could make important contributions to the develexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84expanding access to research dataopment of such training programs by providing advice based on theirexperience and expertise. funding organizations, such as the nsf and thenih, could contribute to the necessary financial support. there is also animportant role in education for professional associations, many of whichhave codes of professional conduct and ethical standards. such associations as the american statistical association, the american sociologicalassociation, the population association of america, the american economic association, the american association for public opinion research, and their counterparts for other disciplines and fields can contribute significantly to the development of strong norms for fair and ethicalpractices in research and information gathering.recommendation 18training in ethical issues related to research,including fair information practices, as well as principles and practices related to research with human participants, should be part ofthe professional training of all those involved in the design, collection, distribution, and use of data obtained under pledges of confidentiality. such training should be updated at intervals after the endof formal schooling.recommendation 19professional associations should develop strongcodes of ethical conduct that reflect the need to protect the confidentiality of personal data and make adherence to these codes an integralpart of their educational activities.in addition to encouraging educational and research institutions toadd training to their programs, consideration should also be given to requiring completion of a specialized training program as a condition foruse of confidential data. such a program might be designed along thelines of the training and certification programs required of all researcherswho are subject to irbs. professional associations may be one kind of organization to provide such training.the challenge facing statistical and other data collection agencies indisseminating the best data as widely as possible in order to foster soundpublic policy and research while protecting the confidentiality of thosedata is formidable, but it can be met. with appropriate safeguards, andrecognizing that the technological and legal environment is likely to beone of continual change, the nation can reap enormous benefits from theinformation the public provides.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.85referencesabowd, j.m., and j.i. lane2003the economics of data confidentiality. unpublished paper presented at the national research councilõs committee on national statistics workshop on confidentiality of and access to research data files, october 1617, washington,dc. available: http://instruct1.cit.cornell.edu/~jma7/abowdlanecnstateconomics ofconfidentiality2003016.pdf [july 2005].2004new approaches to confidentiality protection: synthetic data, remote access andresearch data centers. pages 282289 in j. domingoferrar and v. torra, editors.,privacy in statistical databases. new york: springerverlag.abowd, j.m., and s.d. woodcock2001disclosure limitation in longitudinal linked data. in confidentiality, disclosure anddata access: theory and practical application for statistical agencies, p. doyle, j.i.lane, j.m. theeuwes, and l.v. zayatz, editors. amsterdam, the netherlands:northholland.american association of state colleges and universities2003access for all? debating instate tuition for undocumented alien students. available:http://www.aascu.org/specialreport/accessforall.htm [december 3, 2004].bailar, j.c., iii2003the role of data access in scientific replication. unpublished paper presented atthe national research councilõs committee on national statistics confidentialdata access for research purposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc.barabba, v.1975the right of privacy and the need to know. in the census bureau: a numerator anddenominator for measuring change. u.s. census bureau technical paper 37. washington, dc: u.s. government printing office.barquin, r., and c. northouse2003data collection and analysis: balancing individual rights and societal benefits.unpublished paper presented at the national research councilõs committee onnational statistics confidential data access for research purposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86expanding access to research databates, n.a.2005development and testing of informed consent questions to link survey datawith administrative records. proceedings of asa survey research methods section.alexandria, va: american statistical association.battacharya, j., and d. lakdawalla2003does medicare benefit the poor? new answers to an old question. nber workingpaper no. 9215 revised. cambridge, ma: national bureau of economic research.boisjoly, j., k.m. harris, and g.t. duncan1998trends, events, and duration of initial welfare spells. social service review72(4):466492.bound, j., c. brown, and n. mathiowetz2001measurement error in survey data. in handbook of econometrics, volume 5, j.heckman and e. leamer, editors. amsterdam, the netherlands: north holland.brown, c.2003longitudinal data and public policy. unpublished paper presented at the national research councilõs committee on national statistics confidential data access for research purposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc.cain, g., and d. wissoker1990a reanalysis of marital stability in the seattledenver income maintenance experiment. american journal of sociology 95(5):12351269.clemetson, l.2004homeland security given data on arabamericans. new york times, july 30.cohen, s.h., and w. hadden2004issues and impediments to expanding access to confidential statistical agency data:restricted data and restricted access. statistical policy working paper no. 35, federal committee on statistical methodology seminar. available: http://www.fcsm.gov [september 2005].consortium of social science associations2004behavioral and social science in the administrationõs fy 2004 budget. available:www.aaas.org/spp/rd/04pch21.pdf [november 29, 2004].couper, m.p., e. singer, and r.a. kulka1998participation in the 1990 decennial census: politics, privacy, pressures. americanpolitics quarterly 26: 5980.dalenius, t., and s.p. reiss1982dataswapping: a technique for disclosure control. journal of statistical planningand inference (6):7385.dash, e., and t. zeller2005mastercard says 40 million files are put at risk. new york times june 18:a1david, p.a.2001digital technologies, research collaborations and the extension of protection forintellectual property in science: will building ôgood fencesõ really make ôgoodneighborsõ in science? merit research memorandum no. 2001004. maastricteconomic research institute on innovation and technology, maastrict, the netherlands.dillman, d.a., m.d. sinclair, and j.r. clark1993effects of questionnaire length, respondentfriendly design, and a difficult question on response rates for occupantaddressed census mail surveys. public opinionquarterly 57:289304.domingoferrer, j., and v. terra2001disclosure control methods and information loss for microdata. in confidentiality,disclosure and data access: theory and practical application for statistical agencies, p.doyle, j.i. lane, j.m. theeuwes, and l.v. zayatz, editors. amsterdam, the netherlands: northholland.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references87doyle, p., j.i. lane, j.j.m., theeuwes, and l.v. zayatz.2001confidentiality, disclosure, and data access: theory and practical applications for statistical agencies. amsterdam, the netherlands: northholland.duncan, g.t.2002confidentiality and statistical disclosure limitation. in international encyclopedia ofthe social and behavioral sciences, n.j. smelser and p.b. baltes, editors. oxford, u.k.:pergamon.2004exploring the tension between privacy and the social benefits of governmentaldatabases. in a little knowledge: privacy, security and public information after september 11, p.m. shane, j. podesta, and r.c. leone editors. new york: the centuryfoundation.duncan, g.t., s.e. fienberg, r. krishnan, r. padman, and s.f. roehrig2001disclosure limitation methods and information loss for tabular data. in confidentiality, disclosure and data access: theory and practical applications for statistical agencies, p. doyle, j.i. lane, j.m. theeuwes, and l.v. zayatz, editors. amsterdam, thenetherlands: northholland.duncan, g.t., s. kellermcnulty, and s.l. stokes2003disclosure risk vs. data utility: the ru confidentiality map. working paper. available: http://www.heinz.cmu.edu/wpapers/detail.jsp?id=4386 [november 29,2004].duncan, g.t., and d. lambert1986disclosurelimited data dissemination. journal of the american statistical association 81:1018.1989the risk of disclosure for microdata. journal of business and economic statistics 7:207217.duncan, g.t., and s. mukherjee2000optimal disclosure limitation strategy in statistical databases: deterring trackerattacks through additive noise. journal of the american statistical association(95):720729.duncan g.t., and r.w. pearson1991enhancing access to microdata while protecting confidentiality. statistical science6:219239.duncan, g.t., and s.l. stokes2004disclosure risk vs. data utility: the ru confidentiality map as applied totopcoding. chance 17:1620.duncan, k.2000incentives and the work decisions of welfare recipients: evidence from the panelsurvey of income dynamics, 19811988. american journal of economics and sociology 59(3):433449.dunton, n.2000pums. pp. 311312 in encyclopedia of the u.s. census, m.j. anderson, editor.washington, dc: cq press.ferber, r.1966the reliability of consumer reports of financial assets and debt. studies in consumersavings # 6. urbana, il: bureau of economic and business research, university ofillinois.foster, l., j. haltiwanger, and c.j. krizan2001aggregate productivity growth: lessons from microeconomic evidence. chapter8 in new directions in productivity analysis, e. dean, m. harper, and c. hulten,editors. chicago: university of chicago press.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88expanding access to research datafox, s., and o. lewis2001fear of online crime: americans support fbi interception of criminal suspectsõ emailand new laws to protect online privacy. pew internet & american life project.available: http://www.pewinternet.org.gaquin, d.2000adata dissemination and use. in encyclopedia of the u.s. census, m.j. anderson,editor in chief. washington, dc: cq press.2000bsummary tape files. encyclopedia of the u.s. census, m.j. anderson, editor. washington, dc: cq press.garber, a.m., t.e. macurdy, and m.c. mcclellan1998persistence of medicare expenditures among elderly beneficiaries. pp. 153180 infrontiers in health policy, vol. 1, a.m. garber, editor. cambridge, ma: mit press.gilheany, s.2000the decline of magnetic disk storage cost over the next 25 years. available: http://www.berghell.com/whitepapers/storage%20costs.pdf [december 2, 2004].gordon, r.1999confidential data files linked to the national longitudinal survey of youth, 1979cohort: a case study. unpublished paper presented at the national researchcouncilõs committee on national statistics workshop on confidentiality of andaccess to data research files, october 1415, washington, dc.groenveld, l. p., n.b. tuma, and m.t. hannan1980the effects of negative income tax programs on marital dissolution. the journal ofhuman resources 15(4)(fall):654674.groves, r., and j. lepkowski1985cost and error modeling for largescale telephone surveys. pp. 330357 in proceedings of the bureau of the census first annual research conference. washington, dc:u.s. department of commerce.guarino, j.a., j.m. hill, and h.f. woltman2001analysis of the social security number  notification component of the social securitynumber, privacy attitudes, and notification experiment. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.haltiwanger, j., s. davis, and s. schuh1996job creation and destruction. cambridge, ma: mit press.hawala, s., l. zayatz, and s. rowland2004american factfinder: disclosure limitation for the advanced query system. journal of official statistics 20(1):115124.hayes, b.2002terabyte territory. american scientist 90(3):212216.hildreth, a.k.2003the census research data center (rdc) network: problems, possibilities andprecedents. unpublished paper presented at the national research councilõscommittee on national statistics confidential data access for research purposesworkshop, october 1617, washington, dc.hillygus, s., n. nie, and k. prewitt with g. pals2006civic mobilization and privacy concerns in the 2000 census. new york: russell sagefoundation.hoynes, h., and t. macurdy1994has the decline in benefits shortened welfare spells? american economic review84(2):4348.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references89hurd, m., f.t. juster, and j.p. smith2003enhancing the quality of data on income: recent innovations from the hrs. journal of human resources 38(3):758772.institute of medicine2005vaccine safety research, data access, and public trust. committee on the review ofnational immunization programõs research procedures and data sharing program, board on health promotion and disease prevention. washington, dc: thenational academies press.journal of human resources1995vol. 30, no 5. available: http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/jhr/1995ab/loprest.html[may 23, 2005].klein, l., and a.c. goldberger1955an econometric model of the united states, 1929ð1952. amsterdam: northhollandpublishing co.kuhn, t.1962the structure of scientific revolutions. chicago, il: university of chicago press.lambert, d.1993measures of disclosure risk and harm. journal of official statistics 9:313333.levitan, s.a., and f. gallo1990work and family: the impact of legislation. monthly labor review, march, 3440.linet, m.2003impact of hipaa on research. testimony prepared for the national committeeon vital and health statistics subcommittee on privacy and confidentiality, november 1920, silver spring, md.little, r.j.a.1993statistical analysis of masked data. journal of official statistics 9:407426.marquis, k.h., and c.j. moore1990measurement errors in sipp program reports. pp. 721745 in proceedings of thebureau of the census 1990 annual research conference. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.martinson, b.c., m.s. anderson, and r. de vries2005scientists behaving badly. nature 435:737738.mcclellan, m., and j. skinner2004the incidence of medicare. (working paper.) available: http://www.dartmouth.edu/~economic/faculty/skinner/papers/ms%20medicare%206%20feb%2004.pdf [november 30, 2004].mccullagh, d.2004database nation: the upside of òzero privacy.ó reason (june). available: http://www.reason.com/0406/fe.dm.database.shtml [december 21, 2004].mcguckin, r.h.1992the importance of establishment data in economic research. discussion paper,center for economic studies. u.s. census bureau, washington, dc.1995establishment microdata for economic research and policy analysis: looking beyond the aggregates. journal of business and economic statistics 13(1):121126.mcguckin, r.h., and s.v. nguyen1990public use microdata: disclosure and usefulness. journal of economic and socialmeasurement 16(1):1939.mcmillen, d.2003privacy, confidentiality, and data sharing. unpublished paper presented at thenational research councilõs committee on national statistics confidential dataaccess for research purposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90expanding access to research datamcmillen, m.1999national center for education statistics: data licensing systems. unpublishedpaper presented at the national research councilõs committee on national statistics workshop on confidentiality of and access to data research files, october1415, washington dc.menchik, p.l., and m. david1983income distribution, lifetime savings, and bequests. american economic review73(4):672690.national commission for the protection of human subjects of biomedical and behavioralresearch1979the belmont report: ethical principles and guidelines for the proection of human subjects of research. office of human subjects research, national institutes of health.washington, dc: u.s. department of health and human services.national highway traffic safety administration2001national ems research agenda. available: http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/people/injury/ems/emsagenda/toc.htm [december 6, 2004].national research council1979privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response. panel on privacy and confidentiality as factors in survey response, committee on national statistics,asssembly of behavioral and social sciences. washington, dc: national academy press.1985sharing research data. committee on national statistics. s.e. fienberg, m.e. martin, and m.l. straf, editors. commission on behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, dc: national academy press.1991improving information for social policy decisions: the uses of microsimulation modeling. volume i: review and recommendations. panel to evaluate microsimulationmodels for social welfare programs, c.f. citro and e.a. hanushek, editors. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, dc: national academy press.1993private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. panel on confidentiality and data access, g.t. duncan, t.b. jabine, and v.ade wolf, editors. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioraland social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.1997assessing policies for retirement income: needs for data, research, and models. panelon retirement income modeling, c.f. citro and e.a. hanushek, editors. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.1998people and pixels: linking remote sensing and social science. committee on the human dimensions of global change, diana liverman, emilio f. moran, ronald r.rindfuss, and paul c. stern, editors. commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.2000improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshop. committee on national statistics, c. mackie and n. bradburn, editors. commission onbehavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.2001acells and surveys: should biological measures be included in social science research?committee on population, c.e. finch, j.w. vaupel, and k. kinsella, editors. commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references912001bevaluating welfare reform in an era of transition. panel on data and methods formeasuring the effects of changes in social welfare programs, r.a.moffitt and m.ver ploeg, editors. committee on national statistics, division of behavioral andsocial sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.2002access to research data in the 21st century: an ongoing dialogue among interestedparties. report of a workshop. science, law, and policy panel, policy and globalaffairs. washington, dc: national academy press.2003aensuring the quality of data disseminated by the federal government: workshop report. ad hoc committee on ensuring the quality of government information,science, technology, and law program, policy and global affairs. washingtond.c.: the national academies press.2003bprotecting participants and facilitating behavioral and social science research. panelon institutional review boards, surveys, and social science research, c.f. citro,d.r. ilgen, and c.b. marrett, editors. committee on national statistics and boardon behavioral, cognitive, and sensory sciences, division of behavioral and socialsciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.2004ameasuring racial discrimination. panel on methods for assessing discrimination,r.m. blank, m. dabady, and c.f. citro, editors. committee on national statistics,division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: thenational academies press.2004bthe 2000 census: counting under adversity. panel to review the 2000 census, c.f.citro, d.l. cork, and j.l. norwood, editors. committee on national statistics,division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: thenational academies press.2005principles and practices for a federal statistical agency, third edition. committee onnational statistics. m.e. martin, m.l. straf, and c.f. citro, editors. division ofbehavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: the nationalacademies press.ochas, s., j. rasmussen, c. robson, and m. salib2001reidentification of individuals in chicagoõs homicide database: a technical andlegal study. unpublished manuscript, massachusetts institute of technology.oõneill, j., d. wolf, l. bassi, and m. hannan1984an analysis of time on welfare. washington, dc: the urban institute.oõrourke, j.m., and m.p. gutmann2005citations databaseñhuman subjects protection and disclose risk analysis,project 3: statistical disclosure control: best practices and tools for the socialsciences. interuniversity consortium for political and social research, ann arbor, mi. available: www.icpsr.umic.edu/hsp/bibliographykeyword.htm. [october 2005].paas, g.1988disclosure risk and disclosure avoidance for microdata. journal of business andeconomic statistics 6:487500.perrit, h.h., jr.2003protecting confidentiality of research data through law. unpublished paper presented at the national research councilõs committee on national statistics confidential data access for research purposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc.prewitt, k.2000remarks prepared for session on census 2000 organized by the census 2000 initiative and the leadership conference on civil rights, march 24, washington dc.2004what if we give a census and no one comes? science (676):14521453.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92expanding access to research dataraghunathan, t.e.2003evaluation of inferences from multiple synthetic data sets created usingsemiparametric approach. unpublished paper presented at the national researchcouncilõs committee on national statistics confidential data access for researchpurposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc.raghunathan, t.e., j.p. reiter, and d.r. rubin2003multiple imputation for statistical disclosure limitation. journal of official statistics19:116.reiter, j.p.2003estimating probabilities of identification for microdata. unpublished paper presented at the national research councilõs committee on national statistics confidential data access for research purposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc. [submitted to journal of the american statistical association.]rhea, s., p. eaton, d. geels, h. weatherspoon, b. zhao, and j. kubiatowicz2003pond: the oceanstore prototype. proceedings of the 2nd usenix conference on fileand storage technologies (fast 03). available: http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~ebelding/courses/276/f04/papers/pond.pdf [august 2005].rindfuss, r.r.2002conflicting demands: confidentiality promises and data availability. newsletter ofthe international human dimensions programme on global environmental change, february. available: http://www.ihdp.unibonn.de/html/publications/update/update0202/update0202art1.html [november 30, 2004].rowland, s.2003examination of monitored, remote microdata access systems. paper presentedat the national research councilõs committee on national statistics confidentialdata access for research purposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dc.rubin, d.b.1993discussion of statistical disclosure limitation. journal of official statistics (9):461468.ruggles, s.2000data userõs perspective on confidentiality. of significanceñjournal of the association of public data users 2:15.schweinhart, l.j.2004the high/scope perry preschool study through age 40. available: www.highscope.org/research/perryproject/perryage40sumweb.pdf [december 3, 2004].seastrom, m.2001licensing. pp. 279296 in confidentiality, disclosure, and data access: theory andpractical applications for statistical agencies, p. doyle, j.i. lane, j.j.m. theeuwes,and l.v. zayatz, editors. amsterdam, netherlands: northholland, elsevier science.seastrom, m.m., c. wright, and j. melnicki2003the role of licensing and enforcement mechanisms in promoting access andprotecting confidentiality. unpublished paper presented at the national researchcouncilõs committee on national statistics confidential data access for researchpurposes workshop, october 1617, washington, dcseltzer, w., and m. anderson2000after pearl harbor: the proper role of population data systems in time of war.available: http://www.uwm.edu/~margo/govstat/integrity.htm [december 15,2004].expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.references932003government statistics and individual safety: revisiting the historical record ofdisclosure, harm, and risk. paper presented at the national research councilõscommittee on national statistics confidential data access for research purposesworkshop, october 1617, washington, dc. available: http://www.uwm.edu/~margo/govstat/wsmacnstat.pdf [december 8, 2004].sieber, j.1991sharing social science data: advantages and challenges. newbury park, ca: sagepublications.singer, e.2004principles and practices related to scientific integrity. in survey methodology, r.m.groves et al. new york: wiley.singer, e., n.a. mathiowetz, and m.p. couper1993the impact of privacy and confidentiality concerns on survey participation: thecase of the 1990 census. public opinion quarterly 57(4):465482.singer, e., r.y. shapiro, and l.r. jacobs1997privacy of health care data: what does the public know? how much do they care?in health care and information ethics, a.y chapman, ed. washington, dc: american association for the advancement of science.singer, e., j. van hoewyk, and r. neugebauer2003attitudes and behavior: the impact of privacy and confidentiality concerns onparticipation in the 2000 census. public opinion quarterly 65(3):368384.singer, e., j. van hoewyk, and r. tourangeau2001final report on the 19992000 surveys of privacy attitudes. contract no. 50yabc766019, task order no. 46yab90002. washington, dc: u.s. censusbureau.singh, a.c., f. yu, and g.h. dunteman2003massc: a new data mask for limiting statistical information loss and disclosure. paper presented at the joint ece/eurostat work session on data confidentiality, luxembourg. available: statistics research division, rti international,research triangle park, nc.soete, l., and bas ter weel2003ict and access to research data: an economic review. unpublished paper(june). maastrict economic research institute on innovation and technology,maastrict, the netherlands.spruill, n.l.1983the confidentiality and analytic usefulness of masked business microdata. in proceedings of the section on survey research methods, american statistical association.washington, dc: american statistical association.swazey, j., m.s. anderson, and k. s. louis1993ethical problems in academic research. american scientist online (originally appeared in november/december issue). available: http://www.americanscientist.org/template/assetdetail/assetid/33432;jsessionid=baaglvqub8uc7f?fulltext=true [may 31, 2005].sweeney, l.1999computational disclosure control for medical microdata: the datafly system. inrecord linkage techniques 1997: proceedings of an international workshop and exposition. committee on applied and theoretical statistics. washington, dc: nationalacademy press.2001information explosion. in confidentiality, disclosure, and data access: theory andpractical applications for statistical agencies, p. doyle, j.i. lane, j.m. theeuwes, andl.v. zayatz, editors. washington, dc: urban institute.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94expanding access to research datasweeney, l., b. malin, and e. newton2003trail reidentification: learning who you are from where you have been. dataprivacy laboratory technical report, lidapwp12. carnegie mellon university,school of computer science.taueber, c.1981america enters the eighties: some social indicators. the annals of the americanacademy of political and social science (vol. 453). thousand oaks, ca: sage publications.triplett, j.1991the federal statistical systemõs response to emerging data needs. journal of economic and social measurement 17(34):155177.u.s. census bureau2004u.s. census bureau privacy principles. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.u.s. office of management and budget2004statistical programs of the united states government: fiscal year 2005. washington,dc: executive office of the president. also available: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/05statprog.pdf [september 2005].2005final information quality bulletin for peer review. 70 fr 266402 (january 14).willenborg, l., and t. de waal1995statistical disclosure control in practice. (lecture notes in statistics 111.) new york:springer.winkler, w.e.1988using the em algorithm for weight computation in the fellegisunter model ofrecord linkage. pp. 667671 in proceedings of the section on survey research methods.washington, dc: american statistical association.1998reidentification methods for evaluating the confidentiality of analytically validmicrodata. research in official statistics 1:87104.woodbury, r., a. gustman, l. lillard, o. mitchell, and r. willis1999the value of linked data in aging research. paper prepared for april 1718,2000, meeting of the panel on a research agenda and new data for an agingworld, committee on population, national research council, washington, dc.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.95appendixaworkshop summaryaccess to research data:assessing risks and opportunitiesoctober 1617, 2003the panel held a workshop early in its deliberations to hear from experts about how microdata can best be made available to researchers whileprotecting respondent confidentiality. the workshop goals were to generate information for the panelõs use and to provide a venue for the paperscommissioned by the panel to be presented and discussed in a public forum.this summary, following the workshop, is organized around the sixtopics that were the subjects of the commissioned papers:¥the changing legal landscape;¥facilitating data access;¥measuring the risks and costs of disclosure;¥the impact of multiple imputation on disclosure risk and information utility;¥assessing the benefits of researcher access to longitudinalmicrodata; and¥assessing research and policy needsñthe economics of dataaccess.the papers, presenters, and discussants are listed at the end of theexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96expanding access to research dataappendix. the papers are available electronically (www7. nationalacademies.org/cnstat/dataaccesspanel.html).background and overviewin 1999 the committee on national statistics (cnstat) held a workshop focused on the procedures used by agencies and organizations forreleasing publicuse microdata files and for establishing restricted accessto nonpublic files. tradeoffs between research and other data user needsand confidentiality requirements were articulated, as were the relativeadvantages and costs of data alteration techniques versus restricted(physical) access arrangements. the report of that workshop, improvingaccess to and confidentiality of research data (national research council2000), provided a starting point for the panelõs work.the panelõs workshop followed up on many of the topics discussed inthe 1999 workshop, but the focus was less on what agencies are currentlydoing and more toward emerging opportunities, specifically relating toresearch access to longitudinal microdata. participants provided an indepth look at a number of topics ranging from the role of licensing andpenalties for infringing on licensing agreements to the potential of datalinking (e.g., between survey and administrative data), particularly thetechnical, legal, and statistical arrangements that would be needed to promote linking within and between agencies and between government andprivatesector data producers. the workshop also sought to promote discussion of how to measure the risks and costs associated with data use,disclosure, and limiting access; what levels of risk are acceptable; andpublic perceptions about privacy as they pertain to market data in comparison with government data.the first day was devoted to three topics on risks and opportunities:legal, technical and organizational, and normative. the papers and discussion in the first session examined various aspects of the legal landscape, emphasizing important recent changes, particularly the confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002 (cipsea).the papers highlighted that the legal framework offers a range of opportunities for promoting wider access to research data. for example, throughthe use of licensing agreements, some of the legal responsibility for maintaining confidentiality can be shifted to data users by the agencies thatcollect the data.the papers and discussion in the second session focused primarily ontechnical and organizational opportunities, both on a general level and asmanifested by special organizations like the census bureauõs researchdata centers and remote access to data that are stored centrally. the thirdsession was devoted to the difficult problem of accurately assessing disexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a97closure risks associated with access to microdata and also to the questionof what if any harms have come to participants as a result of the disclosure of the information they provided to government agencies.the second day of the workshop focused on ways of dealing withpotentially conflicting goalsñinformation utility and confidentiality protection. session four focused on one particular method for accommodating those two values, the creation of imputed data, and assessed how wellanalyses based on such data might approximate models estimated fromunaltered data.session five was devoted primarily to discussing the scientific andpractical benefits of providing restricted as well as unrestricted access toresearch data. participants also considered scientific replication and theusefulness of access to data by multiple parties in that process. the finalsession attempted to assess costs and benefits associated with differentapproaches to providing data access and protecting confidentiality.session i:the changing legal landscapedavid mcmillen opened the session with the presentation of his paper òprivacy, confidentiality, and data sharing,ó which reviewed newlegislation dealing with these issues. he also provided an overview of thelegislative history of cipsea, which is title v of the egovernment act of2002, and offered some thoughts about its implementation.mcmillen focused on the principle and application of informed consent agreements. he underscored the point that the legislative history onprivacy indicates that when people provide information to the government, or to a private entity, they do not give up all rights to how thosedata are used. conversely, when the government receives informationfrom the public, it is not free to use that information for purposes otherthan those for which the information was collected. the central issue formcmillen, then, is what the terms of this implied contract between dataproviders and their government are and what responsibility the government has for making those terms clear and explicit.mcmillen argued that agencies that collect information from the public should be as clear and detailed as possible in explaining to respondents how the information will be used and what the limits of confidentiality protection are. he concluded with the statement that government isbased on open access to the citizens it serves, and that openness should beone of the principles that guide the development of policies about informing respondents of their rights and responsibilities when asked for information.during the discussion of mcmillenõs paper, there was considerableexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98expanding access to research datadivergence of opinion about how detailed informed consent agreementsshould or could be. some participants articulated the view that mcmillenõsprescriptions would lead to a serious decrease in the utility and value ofgovernmentcollected microdata.marilyn seastrom, candice wright, and john melnicki then presentedtheir paper, òthe role of licensing and enforcement mechanisms in promoting access and protecting confidentiality.ó licensing agreements allow researchers to use protected confidental data files in a secure environment at their home institution, subject to the terms and responsibilitiesspecified in an agreement. in the first part of their presentation, the authors reviewed the strengths and weaknesses of various licensing arrangements currently in practice in the united states and abroad. they alsodescribed instances when enforcement has led to sanctions and when administrative penalties have been implemented for misuse of data. theauthors also reviewed application procedures and data security plans andthe many types of data agreements in place.the authors concluded that the enforcement mechanisms are, for anumber of reasons, quite weak and that, consequently, there have beenviolations, though most of them are relatively minor (e.g., computers leftunattended, failure to maintain a log for check in/out of data, or data notproperly stored when not in use). they concluded with three recommendations: (1) more routine use of security inspections, (2) implementationof termination procedures, and (3) maintenance of a tracking database.first, given the potential importance of security inspections as a meansof monitoring and enforcement of datause agreements, all agencies thatlicense external researchers to use confidential microdata files should giveserious consideration to instituting security inspections on a regular basis. second, to meet the legal requirements associated with individuallyidentifiable data, entities licensing the use of confidential data must haveprocedures in place for monitoring the disposition of the data files at thecompletion of a research project. this requirement can help ensure thatthe data are not subsequently used for unauthorized purposes. third, torun an effective datause agreement program, an agency must have andmaintain complete, accurate, and thorough records for each data agreement. such records are essential for monitoring the authorized users, theapproved uses of the data, and the security of the data.henry h. perritt, jr., concluded the opening session with the presentation of his paper, òefficacy of different theories of enforcement.ó thepaper suggests a framework within which the efficacy of legal protectionsof confidentiality can be evaluated, offers qualitative standards for evaluating the effectiveness of existing law, and identifies alternative approaches for strengthening legal protections. the paper begins with anevaluation of the possibility that federal or state law might compel reexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a99searchers to disclose confidential data received from federal governmentsources. it identifies the two kinds of private interests that warrant shielding data from disclosure and the sources of law that prohibit disclosure ofdata identified as confidential by the government agency from which itwas received.perritt concluded that legal liability is only a weak protection for dataconfidentiality because the principal privacy statutes do not recognizeprivate rights of action for wrongful disclosure, and the case law undercommonlaw legal theories provides sparse support, at best, for recoveryfor disclosure. moreover, difficulties in detection, proof, establishment ofdamages, and the high cost of litigation make it unlikely that victims ofwrongful disclosure would seek relief in the courts. perritt noted that atleast one respected commentator agrees with these shortcomings of existing privacy law.perritt proposed two promising ways to afford legal protectionagainst wrongful research disclosure: (1) to require researchers who receive confidential data to establish internal protections, on pain of contract cancellation and bars to receiving grants in the future, and (2) to putnondisclosure language in license agreements that supports òthirdpartybeneficiaryó recovery by data subjects.during the discussion of perrittõs paper, participants said that an additional protection exists because the institution at which the researcherworks has the ability to discipline the researcher further; bringing the institution into the arrangement can strengthen the potential sanctions fordisclosure. perritt concurred, recommending that the design of the institutional mechanism should make clear that the individual researchershave responsibility and accountability and that they will be subject to discipline or discharge if they violate their obligations under the agreement.furthermore, institutional liability itself is important since, in some sense,the institution has more at risk then does an individual. this incentive canbe exploited to promote conformity to data protection rules.joe cecil, one of the formal discussants for the session, said he foundperrittõs argumentñthat it would be difficult to create a meaningful rightof private action for an individual and have it work in a way that wouldgive agencies confidence that they are not left responsible for a breach ofconfidentialityñconvincing. he argued that the notion expressed at the1999 workshop of transferring this responsibility to data users and at thesame time giving agencies greater confidence is perhaps a false hope. hesuggested that perhaps the focus should be on how to strengthen the institutional mechanisms that seastrom and others explored and developing datause agreements for researchers who want to download publicuse files.katherine wallman, the second formal discussant, provided extenexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100expanding access to research datasive clarification about the specifications of cipsea. she noted thatcipsea is the culmination of the work of not just four congresses, butalso almost 25 years of work by her, her predecessors as chief statisticianof the u.s. office of management and budget, and many others. the legislation is only the most recent in a long history of efforts to strengthen thelegal protection of confidentiality for statistical information collected bythe federal government.the other major objective addressed in cipsea concerns the sharingof information among agencies with various kinds of confidential protections and others who are legitimate users of the information, includinglicensed researchers at universities, licensed researchers in publicsectororganizations and pro bono organizations, and others. she noted, however, that the dual objectives of protecting confidentiality and increasingdata sharing have sometimes caused confusion about what is in cipseaand what is not and about who is covered and who is not covered. forexample, although only three named agencies are covered by the datasharing provisions of the legislation, cipseaõs confidential protectionsextend to all federal agencies that collect statistical data under a pledge ofconfidentiality. wallman concluded her remarks by briefly outlining theplans for implementing cipseaõs provisions.session ii:facilitating data accessmichael larsen gave a presentation on the technical, legal, and organizational barriers to data linkage. larsen first identified the benefits motivating the goal of data linkageñhow such data would be used to enhance analyses. he then discussed technical and legal barriers inhibitingdata linkage. he concluded by discussing the role of data enclaves andthe example of data linking between the health and retirement study(hrs) and social security administration (ssa) records.several themes emerged from the presentation. first, larsen clearlyarticulated the importance of data access and data linkages to research,noting examples of questions that could not be answered without accessto linked data. in addition to the technical challenges associated with accurately matching records across sources, it is important when seekingrespondentsõ permission at the beginning of a project to think carefullyabout potential linkages. proactive work is needed both to make linkagepossible and to have respondentsõ support.the paper by andrew hildreth, òthe census research data centernetwork: problems, possibilities and precedents,ó assessed the trackrecord of research data centers (rdcs) and the potential and problemsexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a101associated with them. the rdc system stems from the desire to permitaccess to confidential data sets housed at the u.s. census bureau. theprogram started as a pilot in 1994; it was initially funded through the u.s.national science foundation (nsf) in partnership with the national bureau of economic research (nber). the goal was to make such data setsas the longitudinal research database more accessible to researchers bymaking them available in locations other than washington, d.c.hildreth began with an overview of how to apply for access, the kindsof research projects that are undertaken, and what applicants can expectin terms of process, particularly how long it might take to get to an rdcand start working with the data. he also discussed questions relating tothe longterm financial prospects of the data centers. the key problemthat hildreth focused on was that of time delays. he spoke strongly infavor of a system that allows continual review of project applications.in conclusion, hildreth said his most important recommendation wasto improve the proposal submission and review process for junior users.wider access will bring wider recognition of what the research has meantto the census bureauõs data programs and what work the rdcs do andcan do. second, rdcs can be a way to achieve better alignment of the dataprograms with the census bureauõs goals. third, some kind of core funding would be very helpful, perhaps through local institutional support, sothat rdcs and the researchers who want to use them do not face yearlyworries around budget time.j. bradford jensen related his experiences òfrom the trenchesó in trying to design a national framework for a data enclave model. he characterized the rdc enterprise as expensive, fragile, and tenuous. he suggested that the u.s. census bureau experience is representative of thoseof other countries and other contexts. jensen confirmed many of hildrethõsobservations about the difficulties that lie ahead for the rdc system.however, he, too, noted the immense potential to advance research at therdcs and was hopeful that the obstacles to their continued and improvedoperation could be overcome.sandra rowland presented a paper, òan examination of monitored,remote microdata access systems,ó that focuses on monitored remote(electronic) access to confidential microdata. many national statistical offices disseminate microdata in three ways: publicuse microdata files oncdrom or online, research centers or licensed sites, and remote access.rowlandsõ paper covers a sampling of systems in national statistical offices that permit monitored remote access to confidential microdata. thesample includes six foreign systems and three systems in the unitedstates. the foreign systems are the luxembourg income study, statisticscanada, statistics denmark, statistics netherlands, the australian bureauof statistics, and statistics sweden. the u.s. agencies are the nationalexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102expanding access to research datacenter for health statistics, the national center for education statistics,and the census bureau.the paper reviews the type of methodology used in each of the systems because the methodology influences the kinds of access and resultsgiven to users. rowland reviewed the use of each system and the kinds ofresearch that have benefited from remote access to the extent that suchinformation is available.joseph hotz, the formal discussant for the session, emphasized thetradeoffs associated with different confidentiality protection methods. hesaid he was struck by the number of dimensions on which the variousapproaches differ, which makes the process of making an òoptimaló decision difficult: there is no simple way of deciding on òthe right method.óacross these different modesñfrom public access to data enclaves to remote access to licensingñthere are differences not only in terms of degreeof access, but also in ease of use, cost, appropriateness for the types ofdata and information available, ability to customize versus having to relyon standardized data, etc. the alternative methods also differ substantially with regard to how they are financed and how they might be financed. hotz concluded that in evaluating different methods, one has toconsider much more than simply access.session iii:measuring the risks and costs of disclosurethe paper by jerome reiter, òestimating probabilities of identification for microdata,ó describes methods for measuring identification disclosure risks, including those associated with reidentifications frommatching to external databases with publicuse microdata. the paper describes general methods for calculating sampled unitsõ probabilities of reidentification from the released data, given assumptions about intruderbehavior.when agencies release microdata to the public, intruders may be ableto match the information in those data to records in external databases.reiter presented specific methods for altering data to prevent such matching, including global recoding of variables, data swapping, and addingrandom noise. he illustrated the methods with data from the currentpopulation survey, including random swapping of a subset of the valuesof variables needed to protect sample òuniquesó (across combinations ofvariables such as age, sex, race, marital status) and using an age recode inaddition to swapping to provide the swaps with good protection . henoted that knowing property taxes greatly increases probabilities of reidentification, and adding noise to positive tax values is not sufficient foreliminating uniques, though top coding helps.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a103william seltzer and margo anderson presented the paper, ògovernment statistics and individual safety: revisiting the historical record ofdisclosure, harm and risk,ó which examines the sparse but importanthistorical record of disclosure, harm, and risk. in the broadest terms, thepaper has two interrelated objectives: presentation of a body of facts andpresentation of a reconceptualization of a number of the issues related todisclosure and statistical confidentiality in order to understand the implications of the facts assembled. the latter is rooted in the ethical, statisticalpolicy, and statutory origins of the idea of statistical confidentiality.the focus of the presentation was on issues of disclosure, harm, andrisk that have emerged from the use of government statistical agencies orprograms to assist in the nonstatistical task of targeting individuals orpopulation subgroups for administrative action. the paper sets out theavailable evidence concerning such government efforts, which the authorsargued have led to serious human rights abuses. seltzer and andersonalso described a number of barriers to the study of disclosures, harms,and risks associated with government activities.george duncan, as the formal discussant, framed his comments onhow to evaluate disclosure limitation methods in the context of measuring the risks and costs of disclosure. he cited limitations in current methods for measuring the presence of population uniques: most methods ignore the knowledge state of data snoopers (e.g., a snooper may or maynot know that the target individual is in a sample); they provide littleinformation about continuous data; and they provide minimal guidancefor evaluating alternative disclosure limitation procedures. duncan applauded reiterõs application (using data from the march 2000 currentpopulation survey) to demonstrate a framework based on probability ofidentity disclosure and for rigorously exploring the efficiency of such disclosure limitation approaches as global recoding, data swapping, and adding random noise.session iv:the impact of multiple imputation ondisclosure riskthe presenter and discussants in this session focused on the advantages and disadvantages of using synthetic data as a method of protectingconfidentiality while at the same time providing greater access to dataand preserving their informational utility. the presentation and discussion concentrated on three questions: could use of a multiple imputationmethod improve data confidentiality without significantly compromisinginformational utility? how well do the statistical inferences from multiply imputed data match the results that are obtained using the originalexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104expanding access to research datadata? do multiple imputations provide proper balance between data confidentiality and accessibility?the paper presented by trivellore raghunathan, òevaluation of inferences from multiple synthetic data sets created using a semiparametric approach,ó examined evidence on the difference in modeling results with original data and masked data. techniques of dataalterationñsuch as data swapping, postrandomization, masking,subseparation, truncation, rounding, and collapsing categoriesñmayprotect confidentiality, but they may also introduce bias in statistical inferences. the idea of using multiple imputations to create synthetic datasets for public release was introduced by rubin (1993). the paper reviews pioneering work by rubin (1993) and little (1993) developing themethodology, presents extensions, and evaluates the methodology withsimulated data sets. raghunathan outlined the generalpurpose semiparametric approach for creating multiple synthetic data sets and showedit to be especially useful when underlying relationships are nonlinear.the goal of raghunathanõs approach was dual: to protect confidentialityand to preserve the key statistical properties of the original data.raghunathan mentioned several advantages of creating syntheticsamples. for example, one can link the data, synthesize the linked data,and enhance the missing data in the original data file (as is currently being attempted for the hrs and supplemental security insurance (ssi)variables). for that application, the plan is to take some hrs publicusedata and the ssi data and then create a full synthesis of that data set.although the method of generating synthetic data sets is computationally intensive, raghunathan emphasized that these multiple datasets can be analyzed using existing software packages with little additional effort. moreover, he suggested, users of synthetic data should beable to construct an unbiased estimate from the altered data withoutknowing what exact alteration procedure was used to protect confidentiality.john rust, serving as the formal discussant, agreed withraghunathanõs goal of being able to have some statistical procedure thatprotects confidentiality without altering inference, but he expressedstrong distrust of any completely mechanistic procedure to generate synthetic samples. he said that multiple imputation methods might work forsome data sets, but he sees many problems with the application of thisapproach to such complex data as, for example, the hrs.during the general discussion, michael hurd suggestedñand severalother discussants supportedñthe idea of an experiment whereby multiple data sets are imputed from actual data, and then one group of researchers analyses the actual data, while another group does the sameexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a105analysis on the synthetic data. then the differences between their resultscould be compared. discussants agreed that such a test would provide alot of valuable information. john abowd said that such experiments arealready under way at the census bureau, with a link between data fromthe survey of income and program participation (sipp) and detailed social security earnings records and other administrative data from the ssa.an extension of the above experiment, proposed by george duncan,would be to also bring in data snoopers, using whatever tools they mighthave, to try to identify records in both data sets.session v:empirical assessments of the benefits of researchaccess to longitudinal microdatajohn bailar presented a paper, òthe role of data access in scientificreplication,ó that describes the underlying issues raised by the role ofaccess to data in scientific replication and, more broadly, the value of scientific replication. his focus was on data generated by nongovernmentalsources, primarily in academia, and balancing the concerns of those whogenerate the data against the public interest in broader use. he noted thatthe state of understanding about this aspect of academic research is nowhere near as advanced as thinking about confidentiality of and access tofederal microdata.bailar addressed several conflicts that arise in the context of data access in scientific replication. one such conflict is that society has a stronginterest both in protecting privacy and confidentiality and in assuring thatscientific findings and interpretations are as close to correct as the state ofthe art allows. another conflict is that much research information has personal and proprietary value, which creates barriers to broad access to thedata. a third conflict reflects the fact that data are the stock in trade formost research scientists, and scientific rewards are based almost exclusively on the generation and interpretation of data.bailar concluded with several propositions. first, few researcherswould be happy to give away their final datañand especially the intermediate products of their investigationsñif the products of their workare going to be examined by hostile interests bent on destroying the credibility of the findings. nor is hostile scrutiny likely to advance the state ofthe science. it may discourage the best scientists from engaging in certainkinds of work that could lead to loss of exclusive access to data. bailarstrongly opposed the view that hostile examination is the best way touncover the truth. broad data access also raises questions about beingscooped by competitors. although this is certainly a big concern to reexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106expanding access to research datasearchers and often a barrier to sharing the data, it may have little effecton practice for the simple reason that if nobody generates data, everybody will soon be out of business.bailarõs second proposition was that the people who are good at generating data are not always the best at analyzing the data. he suggestedthat there may often be good reasons (though with some limitations) forseparation of support for data generation from that for analysis. one limitation is that such separation should be considered case by case. he alsonoted that those who generate data are not always diligent about completing their own work and making the results public.charles brown presented the sessionõs second paper, òthe value oflongitudinal data for public policy decisions that have been taken overtime,ó which assessed the effects of research that uses longitudinal dataon public policy. assessing the effects on policy is more difficult thanassessing the effects on academic research: legislators (and other decisionmakers) rarely cite academic papers and, when they do refer to academicwork, it is fair to question whether the research changed the vote (or program decision) or whether the vote (or decision) was based on other considerations, which simply prompted reference to supporting research.however, brown did attempt to identify policyrelated findings based onlongitudinal data and to ask whether policy appears to have responded tosuch findings.longitudinal data can make two contributions to research. first, theyallow more accurate reporting of transitions between states, durations ina particular state, and changes in variables of interest than is typicallypossible from a single crosssectional data collection. second, longitudinal data allow a researcher to control for otherwiseomitted variation inoutcomes among individuals, as long as this variation is constant for givenindividuals. both of these contributions are evident in the examples discussed in brownõs paper, drawn from five policy areas: welfare reform,job training, unemployment insurance, preschool programs, and retirement.though longitudinal data have played an important role in thesepolicy areas, the contribution of research is constrained by a fundamentaland inherent tensionñpolicy research often demands prompt òanswers,óand longitudinal data take time to be collected. brown made several suggestions that he said would be particularly helpful for strengthening thecontributions of longitudinal microdata to policy analysis:¥persistence in studying longrun effects. often, because of funding issues, data are not collected over a long enough period to fully exploit the opportunities to study longrun effects.¥mining regulatory data. academic researchers can make imporexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a107tant contributions to policy debates about regulatory activities if moredata can be made available.¥matching. data linking opens up many research opportunities.as an example, creation of data about firms matched to workersõ recordswould be extremely helpful to a range of research questions about business dynamics and the economy.dan newlon, the formal discussant for the session, agreed with johnbailar that researchers should, on publishing their results, make dataavailable at data archives, so that researchers who want to verify the results or extend them can do so. newlon pointed out that the nsf fundeda study by bill dewald, then editor of the journal of money, credit, andbanking, of the replicability of research results published in the journal.the disturbing surprise was that a third of the authors were unable orunwilling to provide data to support their published results. another thirdof authors provided data, but without adequate documentation, so that itwas impossible to replicate the published results.newlon disagreed with bailarõs position that researchers should notbe forced to share their data with others and that the value of giving otherresearchers access to data was outweighed by the possibility of criticalscrutiny that would require investigators to divert energy, time, and effort away from their own research. newlon explained the essence of thecurrent nsf policy on data sharing: there is a grace period, but once aresearcherõs grant is finished and the researcher has started publishingresults based on those data, then the data are expected to be in the publicdomain so others can use the data and extend and check the validity ofthe results.during the open discussion, richard suzman provided another example of when replication in the form of a metaanalysis has been doneand is neededñresearch on the levels of disability in the older population, and trends of disability. many studies have been done, and they provide very different results. there have been concerns that some surveyresults could not be replicated: the issue is not just one of making the dataavailable, but also of making the documentation clear.keith rust pointed out that the journal of applied econometrics has anonline data archive, and the journal just introduced a replication policy aswell, which encourages submission of articles replicating results. suzmansupported the idea of withholding some fraction of a grant award thatinvolves data collection (to ensure funds to make the data available), although there are a few data sets that, if they had to be shared, wouldnever be collected in the first place. he also recommended reprinting bothòsharing research dataó (national research council, 1985) and òprivatelives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government staexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108expanding access to research datatisticsó (national research council, 1993) and using them as a requiredcomponent in training grants.richard rockwell commented on the costs to data producers ofarchiving data. in his experience, almost all of these very real costs revolve around the documentation, not the data. for replication, and forsecondary analysis of all sorts, researchers and data producers need funding to enable them to archive their data in a usable form.trivellore raghunathan added the point that the current situationwith data sharing is much better in social science than in medical science,where the prevailing attitude seems to be that òit is my data, and i have a25year plan for the data analysis, and only after the dataanalysis plan isexhausted can i think about sharing the data.ó he said he finds it disturbing that policy decisions can be made on the basis of some data analyses,but researchers and others cannot verify and replicate the findings thatunderpin those decisions.session vi:assessing research and policy needsand confidentiality concernsñthe economics of data accessthe final session of the workshop was designed to facilitate discussion of the tradeoff between societal benefits of data dissemination andconfidentiality concerns. it began with the presentation of a paper byramon barquin (coauthored by clayton northouse), òdata collection andanalysis: balancing individual rights and societal benefits.ó barquin focused on government data collections, which provide the basis for analyzing factors involved in such issues as poverty, health care, education,traffic, public safety, and the environment. he described five benefits ofdata dissemination:¥the wide dissemination of government statistical data informspolicy research.¥the findings that emerge from the analysis of statistical data undergo reexamination and reinvigoration when disseminated to the research community; this process improves data quality by exposing errors.¥data that are used for one purpose can be put to other uses without substantial investments in new data collection. in addition, data canbe combined and result in much more powerful tools for examining theproblems facing society.¥when research techniques are shared along with the data, the research community and other data centers improve and hone their owntechniques.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a109¥when data are shared with the research community, it will actively involve researchers in the problems confronting the nation andpolicy makers.barquin outlined a framework for how government agencies can attempt to balance the privacy concerns of the individual with the societalgood generated from the use of data, offering three guidelines. first, establishing contractual relations with nongovernmental researchers offersa wealth of opportunity without causing undue risks to privacy and confidentiality. the process of applying for and receiving unfettered access tolimited sets of government statistical data should force researchers to fullyjustify their projects and should demonstrate why it is necessary for theresearcher to have access to all the data, rather than to a restricted set ofthe data with identifiers blurred or stripped. the contract should also rigorously uphold the principles of informational privacy, namely, security,accountability, and consent. second, the census bureauõs efforts to establish research data centers across the united states offer a fruitful opportunity to share census bureau data and provide a good model for the sharing of other types of government statistical data. third, ultimately, inbalancing the public good and individual rights, data collection institutions must effectively manage the three components of this balance: theymust supply the technology, provide the correct policy, and cultivate anethical environment of good will and trust.julia lane presented a paper (coauthored with john abowd), òtheeconomics of data confidentiality,ó in which she focused on costbenefitanalysis of data dissemination and confidentiality. in considering howstatistical agencies might pursue optimal policies, lane stated that thisgoal relies on accurate assessment of the benefits derived from the use ofsuch data, the risks of access (and other costs), and the tradeoff betweenthe two.lane noted the substantial social benefits associated with releasingmicrodata (benefits that are not always realized by the statistical institutes themselves), citing examples similar to those noted by other presenters:¥it permits analysis of complex questions;¥it allow researchers to calculate marginal, not just average effects;¥it creates scientific safeguards when it ensures that other scientists can replicate research findings;¥it promotes improvements to data quality: although statistical institutes expend enormous resources to ensure that they produce the bestfeasible product, there is no substitute for actual research use of microdatato identify data anomalies;expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110expanding access to research data¥it promotes development of a core constituency: the funding of astatistical agency depends on the development of a constituency andgreater use of data, which includes the creation of new products fromexisting data and fosters a broader constituency beyond those who directly have access to the data.there are three costs of microdata use that must be weighed againstthe benefits of providing access. first is the cost of providing access.clearly, the cost of providing access depends on the modality, and severalhave been developed by statistical institutes across the world: publicusemicrodata, licensing, remote access systems, and research data centers.the second cost is that of reputation. most agencies expend enormouseffort to make sure that published statistics with their imprimatur are of ahigh quality and take precautions to protect the confidentiality of the data;they would also have to expend sufficient funds to provide access. thethird cost is that of the potential disclosure of respondent identities. theultimate cost to an agency is for an external researcher to disclose theidentity of a business or individual respondent. while the penalties forthis are typically substantialñranging up to 10 years in jail and a $250,000fine in the united statesñthe consequences of such a breach could bedevastating to respondent trust and response rates.lane said it is clear that statistical agencies will increasingly be challenged to provide more access to microdata. this pressure provides achance to fulfill a critical societal mission. however, since increased access does not come without increased costs, it would seem reasonable totry to control these costs by combining research efforts. some areas inwhich joint research and development might provide substantial dividends, for example, include:¥the creation of inferencevalid synthetic data sets;¥the protection of microdata that are integrated across several dimensions (such as workers, firms, and geography);¥the quantification of the riskquality tradeoff in confidentialityprotection approaches; and¥the effect on response rates of increased microdata access.michael hurd served as the discussant for the barquin and lane presentations. commenting on barquinõs paper, he expressed the view that,although the issues of ethics and trust are important, selfinterest is a powerful mechanism limiting the risk of data disclosure. for an academic researcher, being involved in data disclosure through improper use of datawould seriously impair that personõs career.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a111hurd noted that one omission from both papers is the role of trainingand education. researchers ought to be trained in ethics, but they alsoought to be continually trained in proper procedures, so that they areaware that this is a serious issue.on the abowd and lane paper hurd remarked that, at the individuallevel, researchers want more data, and the reason they want more data isthat they get great benefits from more data but bear very little of the costif something goes wrong. in contrast, agencies are more or less in the opposite position. this creates the tension between the two groups. in economistsõ terms, those interests need to be internalized in a utility frameworkin which, as a society, people can make a more informed decision thatbenefits society rather than the individual actors, namely, the researchersand the agencies. john rust suggested broadening the two dimensionsand including politics, which is another form of selfinterest; it providesincentives that determine not just what data are released, but what dataare collected. this political dimension can also drive the enterprise to inefficient solutions.abowd argued that one of the distinctions that lane and he are tryingto make is to distinguish the different analytic frameworks that economists and statisticians bring to this problemñnot because they are in conflict, but because they actually are thinking about two different parts ofthe problem. abowd said that statisticians have helped enormously inquantifying the tradeoffs in data production associated with risk measures and the informationloss measures from the basic data. but the economic tradeoffs involve other considerations, such as the benefits to society of research and the costs to individuals of disclosure.newlon noted that one needs to distinguish between academic usersand other users. in the case of the academic user, there are reputationaleffects. in the nordic countries, an academic researcher does not have tohave a sworn status to access the data that government employees havebecause the academic user is viewed as part of the same research andpolicy advisory community. that is the kind of longterm goal he wouldlike to see emerge.suzman raised the sociological issue of what sorts of data people donõtwant to be released about themselves, and why. there seem to be hugevariations in what can and cannot be asked among different people orgroups. the ethos of what people consider to be confidential is simply notunderstood. for example, in some states property values and propertytaxes are publicly available on the web, yet these appear to be òconfidentialó data in other states. that is an area that requires more study.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112expanding access to research datapapers and participantsauthors and papersjohn m. abowd and julia lane, òthe economics of data confidentialityójohn bailar, òthe role of data access in scientific replicationóramon barquin and clayton northouse, òdata collection and analysis:balancing individual rights and societal benefitsócharles brown, òthe value of longitudinal data for public policy decisions that have been taken over timeóandrew hildreth, òthe census research data center network: problems,possibilities and precedentsódavid mcmillen, òprivacy, confidentiality, and data sharingóhenry h. perritt, jr., òefficacy of different theories of enforcementótrivellore raghunathan, òevaluation of inferences from multiple synthetic data sets created using a semiparametric approachójerome reiter, òestimating probabilities of identification for microdataósandra rowland, òan examination of monitored, remote microdata access systemsómarilyn seastrom, candice wright, and john melnicki, òthe role of licensing and enforcement mechanisms in promoting access andprotecting confidentialityówilliam seltzer and margo anderson, ògovernment statistics and individual safety: revisiting the historical record of disclosure, harmand riskóparticipantsjohn m. abowd (panel member) is edmund ezra day professor ofindustrial and labor relations at cornell university, director of the cornellinstitute for social and economic research (ciser), and a distinguishedsenior research fellow at the u.s. census bureau.margo anderson is a professor of history and director of the urbanstudies program at the university of wisconsinmilwaukee.john bailar is professor emeritus at the university of chicago. hisresearch is in the fields of medicine and statistics, and he has written extensively about science conduct and ethics.ramon barquin is president of barquin international and was previously the first president of the data warehouse institute. his work is directed to developing information system strategies and data warehousingfor the public and private sectors.charles brown is a professor of economics and program director atexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a113the survey research center at the university of michigan whose researchfocuses on a wide range of topics in empirical labor economics.joe s. cecil (panel member) is project director in the program on scientific and technical evidence of the division of research at the federaljudicial center. he is responsible for judicial education and training inthe area of scientific and technical evidence.george t. duncan (panel member) is a professor of statistics in the h.john heinz iii school of public policy and management and the department of statistics at carnegie mellon university.andrew hildreth is research director at the california census research data center and a professor in the department of economics at theuniversity of california at berkeley.v. joseph hotz (panel member) is a professor and chair of the department of economics at the university of california at los angeles.michael hurd (panel member) is senior economist and director forthe rand center for the study of aging.j. bradford jensen is deputy director of the institute for internationaleconomics, having recently moved there from serving as director of thecenter for economic studies at the u.s. census bureau. at the censusbureau, he directed the centerõs internal and external research programs,managed its research data center network, and supervised its relationships with collaborating universities and research organizations.diane lambert (panel member) is the director of statistics and datamining research at bell labs. she has made seminal contributions to fundamental statistics theory and methods and has been a leader in defininga role for statistics in data mining and massive data problems.julia lane is a principal research associate in the labor and socialpolicy center at the urban institute, concentrating in the areas of incomeand wealth distribution, labor markets, employment, and education. michael larsen is a professor in the department of statistics at iowastate, working in the areas of survey sampling, administrative recordsand record linkage, missing data problems, finite mixture modelsand latent class models, smallarea estimation, and bayesian statisticalmodeling.david mcmillen is the information and government organizationspecialist with the committee on government reform and oversight,u.s. house of representatives, and the government information specialist for henry a. waxman (dca). he covers issues involving the collection, dissemination, and preservation of government information, andhe has worked extensively on legislation relating to confidentiality anddata sharing.john melnicki is president and ceo of harbor lane associates, inc.,expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114expanding access to research datain washington, d.c. in addition, he is the senior security advisor for restricted data for the u.s. department of education, the national sciencefoundation, and various research and educational institutions around theworld.dan newlon is program director for economic science at the u.s.national science foundation, where his job is to select directions for investment in research.henry h. perritt, jr., is a professor of law and vice provost at theillinois institute of technology and director of the center for law andfinancial markets at chicagokent college of law.jerome reiter is a professor at the institute of statistics and decisionsciences at duke university. he has worked with the u.s. census bureauand recently joined the digital government project of the national institute of statistical sciences. trivellore raghunathan is a research professor at the institute forsocial research and professor of biostatistics, both at the university ofmichigan.richard c. rockwell (panel member) is a professor of sociology atthe university of connecticut.sandra rowland recently retired from the u.s. census bureau, whereshe was the internet data dissemination system team leader. among otherduties, she managed the advance query interactive web system.john rust is a professor of economics at the university of maryland,with major research interests in numerical dynamic programming andretirement behavior.marilyn seastrom is chief statistician and program director for thestatistical standards program at the national center for education statistics, u.s. department of education. she has written extensively on dataaccess, licensing, and confidentiality issues.william seltzer is a senior research scholar at the institute for socialresearch of the department of sociology and anthropology at fordhamuniversity.eleanor singer (panel chair) is a research professor at the survey research center of the institute for social research at the university ofmichigan. her research focuses on motivation for survey participationand has touched on many of the important issues in survey methodology,such as informed consent, incentives, interviewer effects, and nonresponsebias.richard suzman is associate director for behavioral and social research at the national institute on aging (nia). suzman developed niaõseconomics of aging program, one of the first of its kind to look at socioeconomic factors and health.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a115katherine wallman is chief statistician at the u.s. office of management and budget. she is responsible for overseeing and coordinating federal statistical policies, standards, and programs; developing and fostering longterm improvements in federal statistical activities; andrepresenting the federal government in international organizations.candice wright is an analyst at the u.s. office of management andbudget. she recently completed her m.s. in public policy from carnegiemellon university and holds a b.s. in management from bentley college.her current interests include data privacy and information security.expanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116appendixbbiographical sketches ofpanel members and staffeleanor singer (chair) is a research professor at the survey research center of the institute for social research at the university of michigan. herresearch focuses on motivation for survey participation and has touchedon many of the important issues in survey methodology, such as informedconsent, incentives, interviewer effects, and nonresponse bias. two of hermajor studies examined the role of privacy and confidentiality concernsas factors in response to the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses, and shewas a member of the national academies panel that produced privatelives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. she is most recently a coauthor of survey methodology (with robertm. groves and others) and a coeditor of methods for testing and evaluatingsurvey questionnaires (with stanley presser and others). she is a past president of the american association for public opinion research and a recipient of its award for exceptionally distinguished achievement. sheholds a b.a. degree from queens college and a ph.d. degree in sociologyfrom columbia university.john m. abowd is the edmund ezra day professor of industrial and labor relations at cornell university and director of the universityõs institute for social and economic research. he is also a distinguished seniorresearch fellow at the u.s. census bureau, a research associate at the national bureau of economic research in cambridge, ma, and a researchaffiliate at thecentre de recherche en economie et statistiquein paris,france.previously, he was also on the faculty of cornellõs johnson graduate school of management.professor abowdõs current research focusesexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b117on the creation and use of linked, longitudinal data on employees andemployers.his other research interests include international comparisonsof labor market outcomes; executive compensation, again with a focus oninternational comparisons; bargaining and other wagesetting institutions;and the econometric tools of labor market analysis.joe c. cecil is project director of the program on scientific and technicalevidence in the division of research of the federal judicial center (fjc),in washington, dc. in that position he is responsible for judicial education and training about scientific and technical evidence and the lead stafffor the fjcõs reference manual on scientific evidence, which is the primary source book on scientific evidence for federal judges. he is the author of numerous publications concerning legal standards affecting exchange of information for research purposes. other areas of interestinclude the use of scientific and technical evidence in litigation, variationsin procedures used by federal courts of appeals, and management of masstort litigation. he holds a ph.d. degree in psychology and a j.d. degree,both from northwestern university.constance f. citro (staff director) is director of the committee on national statistics. she is a former vice president and deputy director ofmathematica policy research, inc., and was an american statistical association/national science foundation research fellow at the u.s. censusbureau. for the committee, she has served as study director for numerousprojects, including the panel to review the 2000 census, the panel on estimates of poverty for small geographic areas, the panel on poverty andfamily assistance, the panel to evaluate the survey of income and program participation, the panel to evaluate microsimulation models for social welfare programs, and the panel on decennial census methodology.her research has focused on the quality and accessibility of large, complex microdata files, as well as analysis related to income and povertymeasurement. she is a fellow of the american statistical association. shehas a b.a. degree from the university of rochester and m.a. and ph.d.degrees in political science from yale university.george t. duncan is a professor of statistics in the h. john heinz iiischool of public policy and management and the department of statisticsat carnegie mellon university. his current research work centers on information technology and social accountability. he has lectured in brazil,italy, turkey, ireland, mexico and japan, among other places. duncanchaired the panel on confidentiality and data access of the nationalacademies (19891993), which produced private lives and public policies:confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics, and he chaired theexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118expanding access to research dataamerican statistical associationõs committee on privacy and confidentiality. he is a fellow of the american statistical association, an electedmember of the international statistical institute, and a fellow of theamerican association for the advancement of science. in 1996 he waselected pittsburgh statistician of the year by the american statistical association. he received b.s. and m.s. degrees from the university of chicagoand a ph.d. degree from the university of minnesota, all in statistics.eugenia grohman (study director) is associate executive director of thedivision of behavioral and social sciences and education at the nationalresearch council. she served as study director for the panel during thelast stages of its work. she has worked on many previous reports of thecommittee on national statistics, including sharing research data and private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of governmentstatistics. she attended the university of chicago and received a b.a. degree in political science from the university of california at los angeles.v. joseph hotz is a professor in the department of economics at the university of california at los angeles. he also serves as a principal investigator of the california census research data center. his work concentrates on the economics of the family, applied econometrics, and theevaluation of social programs. his extensive published work has examined the relationship between the labor force participation and childbearing patterns of married women; the effect of working while in school onthe subsequent wages of men in the united states; and methods for assessing the causal effects of social programs. his most recent work hasfocused on assessing the effects of child care regulations on childrenõsaccident rates; the effects of welfaretowork programs on the labor market successes of past welfare recipients; the strategic interactions of parents and adolescents over the lattersõ engagement in risky behavior; andevaluation of the employment effects of the earned income tax credit(eitc) program.michael hurd is senior economist and director for the center for thestudy of aging of rand and a research associate at the national bureauof economic research. previously, he was professor of economics at thestate university of new york at stony brook. he is a member of the national academy of social insurance, the steering committee for the healthand retirement study, and he was a member of the technical panel forthe social security advisory council in 19901991. he has served as consultant to the national institute on aging on reinterviewing in the retirement history survey and to the social security administration on reinterviewing in the new beneficiary survey. his research involves incomeexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b119and wealth of the elderly and pensions and retirement economics. he received a ph.d. degree in economics from the university of california atberkeley.diane lambert is the director of statistics and data mining research atbell labs. she has made seminal contributions to fundamental statisticstheory and methods and has been a leader in defining a role for statisticsin data mining and massive data problems. she continues to introducesignificant technological innovations in statistics, as well as fostering aclose relationship between research and various business units. lambertholds five patents. she previously served as editor of the journal of theamerican statistical association, and she is a fellow of both the americanstatistical association and the institute of mathematical sciences. sheholds a ph.d. degree from the university of rochester in new york.christopher mackie (study director) is on the staff of the committee onnational statistics and served as study director for most of the panelõslife. he served as study director for a number of economic measurementprojects, including those that produced the reports, at what price? conceptualizing and measuring costofliving and price indexes, and beyond themarket: designing nonmarket accounts for the united states. prior to joiningcnstat, he was a senior economist with sag corporation, where heconducted a variety of econometric studies in the areas of labor and personnel economics, primarily for federal agencies. he is the author of canonizing economic theory. he has a ph.d. in economics from the universityof north carolina and has held teaching positions at the university ofnorth carolina, north carolina state university, and tulane university.kenneth prewitt is the carnegie professor of public affairs at the schoolof international and public affairs at columbia university. he was director of the u.s. census bureau from 1998 to january 2001. his governmentservice followed a career in higher education and private philanthropy,including: president of the social science research council, senior vicepresident of the rockefeller foundation, director of the national opinionresearch center, based at the university of chicago, and professorshipsat the university of chicago, stanford university, washington university, the university of nairobi, and makerere university in uganda. hiscurrent research is on the policy consequences of racial classification inofficial statistics, and he recently published science and politics in censustaking. he holds a ph.d. degree from stanford university.richard rockwell is a professor of sociology at the university of connecticut. previously, he was executive director of the institute for socialexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitiescopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120expanding access to research datainquiry/roper center for public opinion research and director of theinteruniversity consortium for political and social research at the university of michigan. one of the nationõs foremost experts on social scienceand public opinion research, he has published numerous articles on socialscience methodology and has designed related software programs. heholds a ph.d. degree in sociology from the university of texas at austin.