detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11516network science124 pages | 8.5 x 11 | paperbackisbn 9780309100267 | doi 10.17226/11516committee on network science for future army applications; board on army scienceand technology; division on engineering and physical sciences; nationalresearch councilnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on network science for future army applicationsboard on army science and technologydivision on engineering and physical sciencesnetwork sciencenetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of thenational research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academyof sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members ofthe committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regardfor appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract/grant no. daad1903d0002, between the national academy of sciences and the department of the army. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect theviews of the organizations that provided support for the project.international standard book number 0309100267 (book)international standard book number 0309653886 (pdf)library of congress control number 2005936575additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifth street,n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2005 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americanetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholarsengaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and totheir use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, theacademy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academyof sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and inthe selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising thefederal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed atmeeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the servicesof eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health ofthe public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues ofmedical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate thebroad community of science and technology with the academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, thecouncil has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr.ralph j. cicerone and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national researchcouncil.www.nationalacademies.orgnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on network science for future army applicationscharles b. duke, chair, xerox innovation group, webster, new yorkjohn e. hopcroft, vice chair, cornell university, ithaca, new yorkadam p. arkin, lawrence berkeley national laboratory, berkeley, californiarobert e. armstrong, national defense university, washington, d.c.albertlaszlo barabasi, university of notre dame, notre dame, indianaronald j. brachman, defense advanced research projects agency, arlington, virginianorval l. broome, mitre corporation (retired), suffolk, virginiastan davis, brookline, massachusettsrichard a. de millo, georgia institute of technology, atlantawilliam j. hilsman, institute for defense analyses, philadelphia, pennsylvaniawill e. leland, telcordia technologies, inc., piscataway, new jerseythomas w. malone, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridgerichard m. murray, california institute of technology, pasadenajack pellicci, oracle public sector, reston, virginiapamela a. silver, harvard medical school, boston, massachusettspaul k. van riper, ltg, united states marine corps (retired), williamsburg, virginiaduncan j. watts, columbia university, new yorkstaffrobert j. love, study directornia d. johnson, research associatetomeka n. gilbert, senior program assistant (until may 23, 2005)leon a. james, senior program assistant (after may 23, 2005)ivnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vboard on army science and technologyjohn e. miller, chair, l3 communications corporation, reston, virginiahenry j. hatch, vice chair, army chief of engineers (retired), oakton, virginiaseth bonder, the bonder group, ann arbor, michiganjoseph v. braddock, the potomac foundation, mclean, virginianorval l. broome, mitre corporation (retired), suffolk, virginiarobert l. cattoi, rockwell international (retired), dallas, texasdarrell w. collier, u.s. army space and missile defense command (retired), leander, texasalan h. epstein, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridgerobert r. everett, mitre corporation (retired), new seabury, massachusettspatrick f. flynn, cummins engine company, inc. (retired), columbus, indianawilliam r. graham, national security research, inc., arlington, virginiapeter f. green, university of michigan, ann arboredward j. haug, university of iowa, iowa citym. frederick hawthorne, university of california, los angelesclarence w. kitchens, science applications international corporation, vienna, virginiaroger a. krone, boeing integrated defense systems, philadelphia, pennsylvaniajohn w. lyons, u.s. army research laboratory (retired), ellicott city, marylandmalcolm r. oõneill, lockheed martin corporation, bethesda, marylandedward k. reedy, georgia tech research institute (retired), atlantadennis j. reimer, dfi international, washington, d.c.walter d. sincoskie, telcordia technologies, inc., piscataway, new jerseyjudith l. swain, university of california, san diegowilliam r. swartout, institute for creative technologies, marina del rey, californiaedwin l. thomas, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridgebarry m. trost, stanford university, stanford, californiastaffbruce a. braun, directorwilliam e. campbell, manager, program operationschris jones, financial associaterobert j. love, senior program officermargaret novack, senior program officerharrison t. pannella, senior program officerdonald l. siebenaler, senior program officerdeanna p. sparger, program administrative coordinatornetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethis study was an exercise in coping with complexity.the subject matter is complex. important networks like theinternet and the power grid are becoming ever larger, encompassing up to hundreds of millions if not billions ofnodes. they exhibit complex and often dynamic patterns oflinks between the nodes. networks interact with one anotherand are recursive. social networks are built upon information networks which are built upon communications networks which in turn are built on physical networks. moreover, this layered structure of interacting networks built ontop of other networks is reflected directly in the diversity ofcommunities that study networks: sociologists, managementtheorists, warfare strategists, economists, biologists, chemists, physicists, and a wide variety of engineers. getting sucha diverse group to agree on a common core of knowledgeabout networks, i.e., the content of network science, is a significant challenge. last but by no means least, the customercommunity for this study is equally diverse. military planners and strategists, operational commanders (òwarfightersó), logistics commanders, and r&d managers each havetheir own points of view on what network science ought toprovide in order to be useful to the military.the extent to which the committee did manage to copesuccessfully with these complexities will be judged by you,the reader. in order to comprehend the topical scope, committee members were selected who are actively publishingexperts on physical, biological, engineered, and social networks. systematic efforts at outreach to interested communities were undertaken, including a survey of extant courseson networks and a questionnaire sent to members of as diverse a group of communities as the committee could identify. committee members also were selected to encompassvarious constituencies in the military that have an interestin the design, procurement, deployment, and use of networks. representatives of each of these groups made presentations to the committee. value creation scenarios wereprepared to address the concerns of these constituencies.thus, the composition of the committee, the data that it collected, and the analyses that it generated are broadly representative of the inherent complexities of the subject of thestudy.the committee was able to lay out the scope of the topic,organize an overview of the diverse streams of activity andknowledge into a synthetic whole, and survey the sorts ofoptions that the army might want to explore to create valuefrom investments in network science. as a result, it is myhope that this report will broaden the horizons of its readers, stimulate them to think about the role of network science in todayõs connected world, and, hopefully, act upontheir enhanced understanding of this role.the committee learned three major things of overarchingimportance about the role of networks in modern society andthe availability of the knowledge necessary to create andoperate them. first, networks lie at the core of the economic,political, and social fabric of the 21st century. the demandfor structured knowledge that can be used to design, procure, and operate networks is ubiquitous and growing rapidly. moreover, social and communications networks lie atthe core of both conventional military operations and thewar on terrorism. thus, investment in network science isboth a strategic and urgent national priority.second, the current state of knowledge about the structure, dynamics, and behaviors of both large infrastructurenetworks and vital social networks at all scales is primitive.a lot is known about the design, construction, and use ofthe components of physical networks. the science of integrating these components into large, complex, interactingnetworks that are robust and whose behaviors are predictable is uncharted ground. communications networks thatare being built today exhibit unpredictable behavior and robustness. for social networks, even the characteristics of thecomponents are largely unexplored. the development ofpredictive models of the behavior of large complex networks is difficult. it is basically an unsolved problem thatwill require focused attention from the best brains in the nation to make significant progress on it.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacethird, the united states is not on track to consolidate theinformation that already exists about the science of large,complex networks, much less to develop the knowledge thatwill be needed to design the networks envisaged by the military to realize futuristic warfare concepts like networkcentric operations. current research on networks is highly fragmented, usually conducted in disciplinary settings. thecommittee did observe an encouraging preliminary consensus on the part of practitioners about the broad outlines ofthe core of knowledge that allows them to practice their artin a wide variety of applications areas. nevertheless, individual researchers are naturally more interested in marketing their own work than in collaborating on larger projectsof the scope that would have a realistic chance to impact thearmyõs aspirations. major changes in the funding and organization of activities on network science are required beforethe knowledge that can realistically be expected from research in this area will be available in a form that is usefulfor the design and procurement of the capabilities envisagedby the army.the committee does not expect its report to change any ofthese things. it does, however, aspire to articulate its learnings clearly and to document the data and analysis on whichthey are based. it also aspires to provide specific answers tothe questions in the statement of task. i hope that the readerswill find that these aspirations were accomplished.charles b. duke, chaircommittee on network sciencefor future army applicationsnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacknowledgmentsthe committee thanks the organizations and guest speakers that provided support. the presentations from the military on networkcentric operations (nco), on the procurement and deployment of operational capabilities of nco inthe field, and on the armyõs r&d portfolio of networkrelated research were especially helpful.the committee also thanks the various academic and military researchers with whom it conducted personal interviewsover the telephone. their candid comments were instrumental in the committeeõs achieving a realistic understanding ofthe complexities of current research on networks.the committee is deeply grateful to katy bırner of indiana university for her analysis of the data acquired from ouroutreach questionnaire and her permission to use this material in its report.the excellent support of the national research councilstaff is especially appreciated. special thanks go to boblove, who worked closely with the chair and vice chairduring the entire study process. the cheerful and effectiveassistance of tomeka gilbert, nia johnson, deborahkuzmanovic, and leon james was indispensable to accomplishing this study.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgment of reviewersxthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the nrcreport review committee. the purpose of this independentreview is to provide candid and critical comments that willassist the institution in making its published report as soundas possible and to ensure that the report meets institutionalstandards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness tothe study charge. the review comments and draft manuscriptremain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals fortheir review of this report:anthony ephremides, university of maryland,gerald j. iafrate, north carolina state university,leonard kleinrock, nae, university of california,los angeles,scott e. page, university of michigan,lawrence g. roberts, nae, anagran, inc.,alan b. salisbury, u.s. army (retired), andjudith l. swain, iom, university of california,san diego.although the reviewers listed above have provided manyconstructive comments and suggestions, they were not askedto endorse the conclusions or recommendations nor did theysee the final draft of the report before its release. the reviewof this report was overseen by stewart d. personick, nae,drexel university. appointed by the national researchcouncil, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the finalcontent of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary11introduction7scope of the study, 8study approach and constraints, 8report organization, 9references, 102networks and network research in the 21st century11references, 183networks and the military19networks and the army, 19networkcentric warfare and networkcentric operations, 19challenges, 22optimizing warfighting organizations, 22network research of special interest to the military, 24references, 254the definition and promise of network science26what is network science?, 26positioning of network science, 28references, 295the content of network science30how do we know?, 30content, 30references, 326status and challenges of network science33key messages, 33questionnaire process, 33the respondents, 33dissenting voices, 34defining the field, 34attributes of a network, 34derived properties of networks, 35future evolution of the definition of network science, 36xinetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontentsresearch challenges, 36the social structure of network science, 37reference, 387creating value from network science:39scope of the opportunitycreating economic value from research knowledge, 39scenarios for value creation, 39scenario 1, building the base, 39scenario 2, nextgeneration r&d, 40scenario 3, creating a robust networkcentric warfare/operations capability, 41implication of the scenarios, 42findings from scenario 1, 42findings from scenarios 2 and 3, 44references, 458conclusions and recommendations46overarching conclusions, 46specific conclusions, 48recommendations, 49appendixesabiographical sketches of committee members55bcommittee meetings and other activities58ccontent of network science courses60dquestionnaire data65eopportunities for creating value from network science93frecommended reading list107network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiifigures, tables, and boxesfigures21number of papers with the term òcomplex networkó in the title, 1522magazines and journals with articles on networks, 16321representative activities and networks involved in responses to a bioterrorist attack, 2361reasons for saying there is no field of network science, 3562share of responses that mention an attribute, 3563responses identifying driving applications, 3664major research challenges, 3665relationships among invitees, respondents, and collaborators, 3766network science researchers network, 37d1new names by response id, 72d2countries where respondents were located, 73d3states where respondents were located, 75d4fields selected by respondents, 77d5most frequently mentioned fields, 78d6reasons for saying there is no field of network science, 79d7responses identifying network attributes, 80d8derived properties of networks mentioned by respondents, 81d9driving applications identified by respondents, 84d10number of responses to driving applications question, 84d11major research challenges, 86d21relationships among invitees, respondents, and collaborators, 88d22network science researchers network, 89d23researchers with high bc values and low bc values, 90d24largest component of the nsrn, 91d25disciplinary heterogeneity of the nsrn, 92e1schematic depiction of nextgeneration model for army r&d showing therelationship between the main entities in this model, 99network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivfigures, tables, and boxestableses1network research areas, 521representative networks, 1222maturity, structure, characteristics, and impacts of some networks, 1331network research areas, 2481network research areas, 50c1representative list of courses on computer science, 61c2realworld networks appearing in courses, 62c3content of a typical network science course, 62c4network models commonly used to generate network topologies andanalytical tools used to characterize and study the properties of models, 63d1respondentõs country, 74d2canadian respondent provinces, 74d3respondent states, 76d4responses per field, 77d5respondent affiliations, 78d6is your work potentially part of an emerging field of network science?, 78d7is there an identifiable field of network science?, 79d8summary decomposition of the input attributes of networks, 80d9summary decomposition of the derived properties of networks, 82d10summary decomposition of constraint models, 83d11summary decomposition of the problem dimensions of networks, 83d12major players and cited applications, 85d21researchers who are frequently mentioned and listed as collaborators, 88d22researchers who act as gatekeepers, 89d23components in the nsrn, 90boxeses1summary of responses to the statement of task, 211network science: foundation of our connected age, 812statement of task, 821books relevant to network science, 1731case studies in netcentric operations, 2132dependence of army operations on networks: an example, 2381summary of responses to the statement of task, 47d1nrc network science survey, 66d2mapping the social network and expertise of network science researchers, 88e1case study from the world health organization: avian influenza, 103network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acronyms and abbreviationsaaasamerican association for the advancement of scienceaidsacquired immunodeficiency syndromeapsamerican physical societybastboard on army science and technologybctbrigade combat teambftblue force trackerc3command, control, and communicationsc4isrcommand, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, andreconnaissancecdccenters for disease controlcopcommon operational picturedarpadefense advanced research projects agencydoddepartment of defensedoedepartment of energyfbcb2force xxi battle command brigade and belowfcsfuture combat systemgigglobal information gridhivhuman immunodeficiency virusiedimprovised explosive devicejcijoint combat identificationjnnjoint network nodesjtfjoint task forcemasmedical aid stationnasnational academy of sciencesnasanational aeronautics and space administrationncenetworked center of excellencenconetworkcentric operationsncwnetworkcentric warfarexvnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviacronyms and abbreviationsnihnational institutes of healthnrcnational research councilnsfnational science foundationnsrnnetwork science researcher networkntcnational training centerocpopen control platformoftoffice of force transformationopforopposing forceosiopen system interconnectionpiprincipal investigatorr&dresearch and developmentrfprequest for proposals&tscience and technologysarssevere acute respiratory syndromesbirsmall business innovation researchsecsoftwareenabled controlsiamsociety for industrial and applied mathematicstcp/iptransmission control protocol/internet protocoluavunmanned aerial vehicleugcunmanned ground vehicleurluniform resource locatorwhoworld health organizationwwwworld wide webnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarysociety depends on a diversity of complex networks forits very existence. in the physical sphere, these include theair transportation network, highways, railroads, the globalshipping network, power grids, water distribution networks,supply networks, global financial networks, telephone systems, and the internet. in the biological arena, they includegenetic expression networks, metabolic networks, our bodies, ant colonies, herds, food webs, river basins, and the global ecological web of earth itself. in the social domain, theyinclude governments, businesses, universities, social clubs,churches, public and private school systems, and militaryorganizations. the militaryõs dependence on interacting networks in the physical, information, cognitive, and socialdomains is clear from its effort to transform itself into a forcecapable of networkcentric operations (nco).in spite of societyõs profound dependence on networks,fundamental knowledge about them is primitive. manyphysical networksñfor example, global communication andtransportation networksñhave quite advanced technological implementations, but their behavior under stress still cannot be predicted reliably. for biological and social networks,scientists do not understand what they are, much less howthey operate. there is a huge gap between what we need toknow about networks to ensure the smooth working of society and the primitive state of our fundamental knowledge.this gap makes the military vision of nco problematic, atbest.study approachthe present study was commissioned by the army to findout whether identifying and funding a new field of investigation, ònetwork science,ó could help close this gap. the chairworked with the nrc staff to nominate committee membersrepresentative of the broad scope of efforts in network research and also of the interests in this topic on the part of thearmy.at its initial meetings the committee focused on data collection tasks. members were invited to present their ideasabout the definition and content of network science. thisexercise was expanded to encompass telephone interviewswith a number of distinguished researchers and a questionnaire distributed inquiring about the role of networks intodayõs global economy and the military in particular. thecommittee also collected data on the use of networks in themilitary, learning from extensive reading and presentationsat its second and third meetings. the results of these datagathering tasks are reported in chapters 2 through 4.the committee formed two special task teams. one teamsurveyed academic courses on network research to determine the content of core knowledge about networks. theresults of this effort are reported in chapter 5 based on thedata presented in appendix c. the other task team developed and circulated the questionnaire to as broad a crosssection of the network research community as possible giventhe time and financial constraints of this study. the committeeõs analysis of the responses is reported in chapter 6and appendix d.after characterizing the importance and content of network science, the committee turned its attention to the matter of how the army might create value by investing in research on networks. this task was complicated by the factthat òthe armyó is shorthand for a diverse group of constituencies with multiple agendas and priorities. the committeeformed into new task teams to formulate three different investment scenarios that span the various interests and agendas. the scenarios are reported in appendix e and are summarized, along with specific findings, in chapter 7.representative literature used over the course of the studyis listed in appendix f. the body of the reportñchapters 2through 7 and appendixes c through eñcontains the factual findings, and chapter 8 contains the committeeõs conclusions and recommendations. box es1 provides a summary of how the various report chapters respond to thestatement of task.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2network scienceoverarching conclusionsthe committee reached three overarching conclusionsabout the significance of networks and the state of knowledge about them. first, it documented the pervasive influence of networks in all aspects of lifeñbiological, physical,and socialñand concluded that they are indispensable to theworkings of the global economy and to the defense of theunited states against both conventional military threats andthe threat of terrorism.second, the fundamental knowledge needed to predict theproperties of large infrastructure networks (such as theinternet and power grid) and vital social networks (the global economic system and military command and control) isbox es1summary of responses to the statement of taskthe assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics, and technology) has requested the national research council (nrc) board on armyscience and technology (bast) conduct a study to define the field of network science. the nrc will:1.determine whether initiation of a new field of investigation called network science would be appropriate to advance knowledge of complexsystems and processes that exhibit network behaviors. if yes, how should it be defined?a working definition of network science is the study of network representations of physical, biological, and social phenomenaleading to predictive models of these phenomena. initiation of a field of network science would be appropriate to provide a bodyof rigorous results that would improve the predictability of the engineering design of complex networks and also speed up basicresearch in a variety of applications areas (chapter 4).2.identify the fields that should comprise network science. what are the key research challenges necessary to enable progress in network science?general consensus exists among practitioners of network research in diverse application areas on topics that constitute network science (chapter 5). there are seven major research challenges (chapter 6).3.identify specific research issues and the theoretical, experimental, and practical challenges to advance the field of network science. consider suchthings as facilities and equipment that might be needed. determine investment priority, time frame for realization, and degree of commercialinterest.current military concepts of ònetcentricityó are based on applications of computer and information technology that are farremoved from likely results of basic research in network science. table es1 lists current areas of network research of interest tothe army, including priority, time frames, and commercial interest (chapter 3).current funding policies and priorities are unlikely to provide adequate fundamental knowledge about large complex networksthat will advance networkcentric operations. besides the information domain, there are social, cognitive, and physical technology domains in the current conceptual framework for networkcentric operations; there is no òbiologicaló domain (chapters 2ð4).a basis for network science is perceived in different ways by the communities concerned with engineered, biological, andsocial networks at all levels of complexity. basic research efforts are incoherent (chapters 5 and 6).options for obtaining value from investments in network science include scenarios ranging from building a base of basicresearch, to leveraging business practices for marketdriven r&d in specific areas of network applications, to creating a robustcapability for networkcentric operations (chapter 7).4.given limited resources (and likely investments of others), recommend those relevant research areas that the army should invest in to enableprogress toward achieving networkcentric warfare capabilities.recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2, and 3 provide the army with an actionable menu of alternatives that span the opportunities accessible to it. by selecting and implementing appropriate items from this menu, the army can develop a robust networkscience to enable the desired progress (chapter 8).note: the statement of task is in lightface; the summary of responses is in boldface.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3primitive. not even physical communications networks canbe designed so that their resistance to failure and scaling upfrom small to large can be predicted a priori with confidence.networks are built on top of one another. social networks,for example, are built on information networks, which inturn are built on communications networks that operate using physical networks for connectivity. the networks required to make nco for the military a reality span the physical, information, cognitive, and social domains. they areinteractive and mutually interdependent.there is no science today that offers the fundamentalknowledge necessary to design large, complex networks insuch a way that their behaviors can be predicted prior tobuilding them. given this shortfall, trying to implement networkcentric operations capabilities as envisioned by thedepartment of defense (dod) is like trying to design andbuild a modern combat jet aircraft without resorting to thescience of fluid dynamics.third, in spite of the need for a science of networks andthe high level of interest in the scientific community, currentfunding policies and practices of federal agencies are focusedon specific network applications and are not focused on accumulating fundamental knowledge about networks.research on networks is fragmented. it is supported indisciplinary stovepipes that encourage jargon, parochialterms, and local values. fundamentals of network structure,dynamics, and simulation are being rediscovered by different groups that emphasize uniqueness rather than a commonintellectual heritage and methodologies. the fragmentationis aggravated by fundingagency policies and procedures thatreward narrow disciplinary interests rather than results thatare demonstrably usable for addressing national problems.nor is funding focused in areas with widespread application, such as the development of predictive models of socialnetworks, which could directly impact vital national problems, from secondary education in urban slums to militarycommand and control.although researchers, especially the best researchers, arereacting rationally to the incentives placed before them, theseincentives reflect poorly the national interests of the unitedstates in a globally connected world.specific conclusionson the basis of its data collection and analysis, the committee offers the following conclusions containing answersto the specific questions posed in the statement of task.different research communities give different answers tothe question, what is network science? nevertheless, thecommittee discerned some basic features. first, network science is distinct from both network technology and networkresearch: it is characterized by the discovery mode of science rather than the invention mode of technology and engineering. network research encompasses both.network science is broad in scope, encompassing physical, biological, and social networks. synergies between network representations and models in these domains give itpower. it creates fundamental knowledge that enables the apriori prediction of the behaviors of diverse networks in contrast to their a posteriori characterization. in short, networkscience consists of the study of network representations ofphysical, biological, and social phenomena, leading to predictive models of these phenomena.the remarkable diversity and pervasiveness of networkrepresentations and models render network science a topicthat can be leveraged by both civil society and the military.a provisional consensus exists around its core contents,making network science an identifiable area of investigation. excellent research problems on a variety of topics exist. by making an investment in network science, the armycould forge a single approach to a diverse collection of applications. the committee therefore concludes that networkscience is an emerging field of investigation whose supportwould address important societal problems, including thearmyõs pursuit of nco capabilities.although the boundaries of network science are fuzzy,the committee found broad consensus among practitionersin network applicationsñincluding physical, biological, social, and information networksñon the key topics, the typesof tools that must be developed, and the research challengesthat should be investigated. based on the responses to itsquestionnaire and its own knowledge, the committee concluded that there are seven major research challenges, thesurmounting of which will enable progress in network science:¥dynamics, spatial location, and information propagation in networks. better understanding of the relationship between the architecture of a network and its function is needed.¥modeling and analysis of very large networks. tools,abstractions, and approximations are needed that allow reasoning about largescale networks, as well astechniques for modeling networks characterized bynoisy and incomplete data.¥design and synthesis of networks. techniques areneeded to design or modify a network to obtain desired properties.¥increasing the level of rigor and mathematical structure. many of the respondents to the questionnaire feltthat the current state of the art in network science didnot have an appropriately rigorous mathematical basis.¥abstracting common concepts across fields. the disparate disciplines need common concepts definedacross network science.¥better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. current data sets on largescale networkstend to be sparse, and tools for investigating their structure and function are limited.¥robustness and security of networks. finally, there isa clear need to better understand and design networkednetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4network sciencesystems that are both robust to variations in the components (including localized failures) and secureagainst hostile intent.finally, although all the military services have a vision ofthe future in which engineered communications networksplay a fundamental role, there is no methodology for ensuring that these networks are scalable, reliable, robust, and secure. of particular importance is the ability to design networks whose behaviors are predictable in their intendeddomains of applications. this also is true in the commercialsphere. the committee therefore concluded that the highvalue attached to the efficient and failurefree operation ofglobal engineered networks makes their design, scaling, andoperation a national priority.the ultimate value derived from these engineered networks depends on the effectiveness with which humans usethem. these uses can be beneficial (e.g., better combat effectiveness) or detrimental (e.g., their exploitation by criminal and terrorist groups). therefore research into the interaction of social and engineered networks is also a nationalpriority.recommendationsthe statement of task asks the committee to recommendinvestments the army should make in network science. theimpact of networks on society transcends their impact onmilitary applications, although both are vital aspects of thetotal picture. the current state of knowledge about networksis insufficient to support the design and operation of complex global networks for military, political, and economicapplications. advances in network science are therefore essential for developing adequate knowledge for these applications.recommendation 1.the federal government shouldinitiate a focused program of research and developmentto close the gap between currently available knowledgeabout networks and the knowledge required to characterize and sustain the complex global networks on whichthe wellbeing of the united states has come to depend.this recommendation is buttressed by increasing evidence that disruptive social networks (e.g., terrorists, criminals) learn to exploit evolving infrastructure networks (e.g.,communications or transportation) in ways that the creatorsof these networks did not anticipate. the global war onterrorism, which is a main driver of military transformation,is only one recent manifestation of this general pattern.addressing problems resulting from the interaction of socialand engineered networks is an example of a compellingnational issue that transcends the transformation of the military and that is largely untouched by current research onnetworks.within this broad context, recommendations 1a, 1b, and1c provide the army with three options:recommendation 1a. the army, in coordination withother federal agencies, should underwrite a broad network research initiative that includes substantial resources for both military and nonmilitary applicationsthat would address military, economic, criminal, andterrorist threats.the army can lead the country in creating a base of network science knowledge that can support applications forboth the army and the country at large. maximum impactcould be obtained by a coordinated effort across a variety offederal agencies, including dod and the department ofhomeland security, to create a national program of r&dfocused on network science to develop applications that support not only networkcentric operations but also countermeasures against international terrorist and criminal threats.alternatively, if the army is restricted to working justwith the dod, it should initiate a focused program to createnco capabilities across all the services.recommendation 1b.if the army wants to exploit fullyapplications in the information domain for militaryoperations in a reasonable time frame and at an affordable cost, it should champion the initiation of a highpriority, focused dod effort to create a realizable visionof the associated capabilities and to lay out a trajectoryfor its realization.finally, if the army elects to apply the insight from thecommittee primarily to its own operations, then it can stillprovide leadership in network science research.recommendation 1c.the army should support anaggressive program of both basic and applied researchto improve its nco capabilities.specific areas of research of interest to the army areshown in table es1. this table expresses the committeeõsassessment of the relative priorities for these areas, the timeframes in which one might reasonably expect them to beconsummated as actionable technology investment options,and the degree of commercial interest in exploiting promising options. the committee notes that both trained personneland promising research problems exist in many of these areas, so that the army should be able to create productiveprograms readily.regardless of which options are adopted, however, armyinitiatives in network science should be grounded in basicresearch as follows:recommendation 1d.the initiatives recommended in 1,1a, 1b, and 1c should include not only theoretical studiesnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5table es1network research areasprioritytimecommercialfor armyresearch areakey objectiveframeinterestinvestmentmodeling, simulating, testing, and prototyping verypractical deployment tool setsmid termhighhighlarge networkscommand and control of joint/combined networkednetworked properties of connected heterogeneousmid termmediumhighforcessystemsimpact of network structure on organizationaldynamics of networked organizational behaviormid termmediumhighbehaviorsecurity and information assurance of networksproperties of networks that enhance survivalnear termhighhighrelationship of network structure to scalability andcharacteristics of robust or dominant networksmid termmediummediumreliabilitymanaging network complexityproperties of networks that promote simplicity andnear termhighhighconnectivityimproving shared situational awareness ofselfsynchronization of networksmid termmediumhighnetworked elementsenhanced networkcentric mission effectivenessindividual and organizational training designsfar termmediummediumadvanced networkbased sensor fusionimpact of control systems theorymid termhighmediumhunterprey relationshipsalgorithms and models for adversary behaviorsmid termlowhighswarming behaviorselforganizing uav/ugv; selfhealingmid termlowmediummetabolic and gene expression networkssoldier performance enhancementnear termmediummediumbut also the experimental testing of new ideas in settingssufficiently realistic to verify or disprove their use forintended applications.by selecting from recommendations 1a through 1c anoption that is ambitious yet achievable, the army can leadthe country in creating a base of knowledge about networkscience that is adequate to support applications on whichboth the army and the country at large depend.the army has another investment scenario that it couldpursue: òbuilding the baseó for network science by funding asmall program of basic research in network science. thisinvestment of small amounts of army risk capital fundswould create a base of knowledge and personnel from whichthe army could launch an attack on practical problems thatarise as it tries to provide nco capabilities.if the army is limited to modest changes in the funding ofits r&d portfolio and incremental changes to the way that itmanages these investments, funding only a small program ofbasic research in network science could still have a significant effect. but the committee wants to be crystal clear thatinvestments in basic (6.1) research in network science haveno immediate prospects of impacting the design, test, evaluation, and sourcing of nco capabilities.the main values created by a basic research investmentwould include access to thought leaders (principal investigators) in the university community, the training of studentsthrough their work on university projects, the developmentof a community that the army can access to address its practical problems, and the efficient use of research dollars toimpact multiple areas of application. to exploit these opportunities, the committee offers the following two recommendations:recommendation 2.the army should make a modestinvestment of at least $10 million per year to support adiverse portfolio of basic (6.1) network research thatpromises high leverage for the dollars invested and isclearly different from existing investments by otherfederal agencies like the national science foundation(nsf), the department of energy (doe), and thenational institutes of health (nih).this modest level of investment is compatible with thearmyõs current r&d portfolio. there is an adequate supplyof promising research topics and talented researchers to makethis investment productive. additionally, it can be implemented within the armyõs current r&d management workprocesses.to identify the topics in basic network science researchthat would bring the most value to nco, the committee recalls that the open system architectures for computer netnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6network scienceworks consist of layers, each of which performs a specialfunction regarded as a òserviceó by the layers above. it isuseful to distinguish among the lower (physical and transport) layers of this architecture, the higher (applications) layers that are built on top of them to offer services to people,and the cognitive and social networks that are built higherstill, on top of the servicestohumans layers.research on the lower layers of the network architectureis relatively mature. improving these levels is more of anengineering problem than one requiring basic research. themost immediate payoffs from network science are likely toresult from research associated with the upper levels of thenetwork architecture and the social networks that are built atan even higher level. this is where the committee thinks thatarmy investments are most likely to create the greatest value.an area of particular promise that has little or no currentinvestment is the social implications of nco for the organizational structure and command and control. basic researchcould provide valuable insight into how military personneluse advanced information exchange capabilities to improvecombat effectiveness. for example, one might study howtroops in combat could use these capabilities to make betterdecisions. additional basic research in the core content ofnetwork science might help to determine how the army canmost productively utilize the capabilities of its advanced information infrastructure.recommendation 3.the army should fund a basicresearch program to explore the interaction betweeninformation networks and the social networks that utilize them.the army can implement recommendations 2 and 3within the confines of its present policies and procedures.they require neither substantial replanning nor the orchestration of joint army/university/industry research projects.they create significant value and are actionable immediately.the committeeõs recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2,and 3 give the army an actionable menu of options that spanthe opportunity space available. by selecting and implementing appropriate items from this menu, the army can developa robust network science to òenable progress toward achieving network centric warfare capabilities,ó as requested inthe statement of task.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71introductiondemonstrate its soundness as a science on which to base useful applications. the purposes of this report are to assess thescope and content of network science and to envision howits pursuit can create value for the united states in generaland for the u.s. army in particular. semantics aside, theopportunity is historic. the unrelenting drop in the costs ofcomputing, symbolized by mooreõs law, has made massivecomputation a commodity, cheap and available to industryand individuals alike (rheingold, 2002).the benefits of connectivityñas quantified, for instance,by metcalfeõs law and first recognized in the rail and telephone networksñmake it irresistibly attractive (rheingold,2002). the value of communityñasserted, for example, inreedõs lawñelevates connectivity to an economic imperative (rheingold, 2002). the linkage of information networkshas led to a global information grid, to which the majority ofthe worldõs population is likely to be connected within thenext decade. this situation is unparalleled in human history.it will lead to social institutions and human behaviors neverbefore seen or anticipated (ronfeldt, 2005). its initial consequences already are being reported in the popular press(business week, 2005). it renders the study of networks andtheir effectsñthe pursuit of network scienceña social, scientific, and technological imperative for the 21st century.why should the military in general and the army in particular care? aside from the fact that the u.s. military isembedded in this wave of technological and social change,the exploration of network science promises insights andtools that are indispensable to improving its combat effectiveness in the new world of likely conflicts.the development of the armyõs future combat systems(fcs) is experiencing cost and schedule overruns because ofthe immense complexity of the effort (weiner, 2005). giventhe committeeõs findings about the immaturity of networkscience, this is hardly surprising. designing and testing thefcs communications network alone is like trying to designand test a modern jet aircraft without the benefit of the science of aerodynamics or like designing and testing a radio ornetwork effects are found in biologically diverse worlds,at many layers of abstraction from micro to macro. theseinclude molecular biochemical reactions, cellular neural networks, insect swarms, and entire ecologies. they also arefound in such diverse engineered systems as power grids,communications networks, like the internet, and the transportation infrastructure. network effects are, however, mostcommonly associated with human social structuresñwespeak about networking as an essential skill for both doingour jobs and getting new ones. this dimension of networkshas taken on special significance in the past few years as werecognize the powerful influence on society of criminal andterrorist social networks that exploit modern communicationand transportation networks (arquilla and ronfeldt, 2001).in the military, network effects occur in the communication systems that link platforms and soldiers. the concept ofnetworkcentric warfare (ncw) takes the importance of networks for the military even further. in this concept dynamicbattlefield command and control networks are built in realtime, relying on more static networks such as physical communications, weapons systems platforms, and military organizational structure. the differences between static and dynamic networks are, however, not clearly understood, andour understanding of dynamic network effects is primitive.networks also build upon each other in layersñfor example, a network of business process applications is built ona communications network that is, in turn, built on a physical network.despite the tremendous variety of complex networks inthe natural, physical, and social worlds, little is known scientifically about the common rules that underlie all networks.this is even truer for interacting networks. ideas put forth byscientists, technologists, and researchers in a wide variety offields have been coalescing over the past decade, creating a new field of thinkingñthe science of networks (seebox 11).does a science of networks exist? opinions differ. but ifit does, network science is in its infancy and still needs tonetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8network sciencetv without the benefit of the fundamental knowledge ofelectromagnetic waves.the engineering of complex physical networks, like thatof the fcs, is not predictable because the scientific basis forconstructing and evaluating such designs is immature. thisis even more the case for characterizing, modeling, andevaluating modern criminal and terrorist networks that arebuilt on a physical communications network infrastructure(arquilla and ronfeldt, 2001). the office of force transformation (oft) has advanced the concepts of networkcentric warfare (cebrowski and garstka, 1998) and networkcentric operations (garstka and alberts, 2004) to definewarfare in the 21st century. both concepts involve multipleinteracting networks built one on top of the other. neitherhas a firm empirical and analytical base. thus, getting a gripon the fundamental science of networksñtheir structure anddynamicsñis a topic of pressing concern for military as wellas political and economic interests.scope of the studyrecognizing the urgency of this situation, the nationalresearch council (nrc) board on army science and technology (bast) formed the committee on network sciencefor future army applications. the statement of task for thecommittee consists of four charges (box 12). this document is the report of that committee.study approach and constraintsspecial care was devoted to the composition of the committee. biographies are given in appendix a. three representative groups of members were selected. the first groupincluded individuals from the physical sciences, engineering, biological sciences, and social sciences research communities. in order to sample the breadth of intellectual efforton network science, committee members were selected whohave recent firsthand experience in the subject matter asreflected in their recent books or research and teaching assignments. thus, committee membership includes the authors of six degrees: the science of the connected agebox 11network science: foundation of ourconnected agethe first thing you see in the room on your right as you enterbostonõs museum of science is a vertical peg board about 8 feetsquare. sticking out of a checkerboard square pattern are pegs at thecorner of every square. pingpongsize balls drop from the centertop of the board and carom crazily off various pegs on the way downto the bottom. there is no way to predict which way a ball will zig orzag at each row or where any one ball will land in the bottom row.the pathway of each drop is completely random. yet, despite thechaos at the beginning, the balls collect at the bottom in a perfectnormal curve distribution. within moments, the system changesfrom totally random individual actions to a completely symmetricaland predictable aggregateñorder emerges out of chaos. similarphenomena are exhibited by human social networks, like the complex web of traders and investors on the new york stock exchange(bernstein, 1992) or the operation of any large city (johnson, 2001;watts, 2003). why? such is the mystery of selforganization in large,complex networks.similarly, what accounts for how birds flock and fish school?why do accumulated grains of sand build to a mound or dune untilfinally one grain proves to be a grain too many and an avalancheoccurs? and why do electrical systems crash when they reach comparable tipping points? why are we all connected by the famous sixdegrees of separation? what do epidemics, earthquakes, computerviruses, religious fundamentalism, and the òfriends of kevin baconógame all have in common?the common element in the answers to these questions is thatthings are connected. connections create networks, networks operate by rules and probably laws, and a new science of networks isemerging to determine and explain what these are. nations, species,corporations, and armies will all be affected by this new science.box 12statement of taskthe assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics, andtechnology) has requested the national research council (nrc)board on army science and technology (bast) conduct a study todefine the field of network science. the nrc will:¥determine whether initiation of a new field of investigationcalled network science would be appropriate to advance knowledgeof complex systems and processes that exhibit network behaviors. ifyes, how should it be defined?¥identify the fields that should comprise network science. whatare the key research challenges necessary to enable progress innetwork science?¥identify specific research issues and the theoretical, experimental, and practical challenges to advance the field of networkscience. consider such things as facilities and equipment that mightbe needed. determine investment priority, time frame for realization,and degree of commercial interest.¥given limited resources (and likely investments of others), recommend those relevant research areas that the army should investin to enable progress toward achieving networkcentric warfarecapabilities.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction9(duncan watts); linked: the new science of networks(albertlaszlo barab⁄si); the future of work (thomasmalone); and itõs alive: the coming convergence of information, biology and business (stan davis); and the editor ofcontrol in an information rich world: report of the panelon future directions in control, dynamics and systems (richard m. murray), a report of the society for industrial andapplied mathematics (siam). the committee also includesthe organizer of the new systems biology curriculum atharvard university (pamela a. silver) and a contributor tothe world technology evaluation centerõs assessment ofsystems biology (adam arkin). thus, active players in thediverse communities engaged in creating the science of modern networks are represented on the committee.the second representative group comprises both the command and the research and development (r&d) communities of the military, including retired flag officers and experts with experience at the defense advanced researchprojects agency (darpa) (ronald j. brachman), thenational defense university (robert e. armstrong), andmitre (norval l. broome). paul van riper, who firstapplied the concepts of network science to the articulation ofthe commandandcontrol doctrine in the u.s. marine corps,is among the flag officers, as are william hilsman, formerchief information officer of the army and jack pellicci, aretired army brigadier general who is now an executive forthe oracle corporation.the third group includes representatives from the academic and industrial management worlds. two deans (richard demillo, georgia institute of technology, and john e.hopcroft, cornell) played a major role in defining the scopeof the study. dr. demillo also has served as chief technology officer of hewlettpackard. the committeeõs outreachefforts were led by richard murray (california institute oftechnology) and by will e. leland, chief scientist, telcordiatechnologies. the committee chair charles duke, has beenan r&d manager for 22 years at xerox and was chief scientist and deputy director of the pacific northwest nationallaboratory.clearly, the committee membership spans the diverseconstituencies of network science: military commanders,business managers, program managers, research managers,and active researchers. together, the members had the skillsand experience needed to assess the content of network science; its prospects for advancing engineering, social, andbiological technologies; and the potential for selected research efforts to impact the u.s. military in general and theu.s. army in particular over different timescales.initially the committee was divided into three workingteams. team i devoted its attention to assessing the impactsof past network science and technology and to extrapolatingthis record to project future impacts. team ii focused ondefining the scope of network science. its members identified the core elements of network science underpinning thediverse array of applications and technologies in the social,economic, engineering, and biological arenas. team iii concentrated on outreach to communities that currently practicenetwork science and technology. it identified communitymembers via literature studies, interviews, and email inquiries. it constructed and circulated a webbased questionnaire.from the responses, it extracted the recognized core contentof network science, research activities in which communitymembers are engaged, and their perception of the major research challenges.the three streams of activity carried out by the teams werebrought together midway though the committeeõs deliberations with the writing of a fullmessage draft. consensus wasreached on the findings pertinent to charges (1) and (2) in thestatement of task. then, in response to charges (3) and (4)the committee was reconstituted into three new teams, whichdeveloped scenarios of how network science could add valuefor the army. the committeeõs findings, conclusions, andrecommendations were then refined and ratified at the finalmeeting.report organizationthis report documents the study approach, findings, conclusions, and recommendations. it is organized in accordwith the statement of task in box 12 and the study approachdescribed above. where the committee conducted researchand discovered factual information, the information is reported as a finding. multiple findings combine as the basisfor conclusions, some òoverarchingó and the rest òspecificóconclusions pertinent to specific requests in the statement oftask. the conclusions are contained in chapter 8 along withthe committeeõs recommendations.the bulk of the committeeõs results are reported as findings in chapters 2 through 7. some of the details that support these findings are presented in the appendixes; othersmay be found in the references cited in the text.chapter 2 characterizes the pervasive impact of networksand network research in the 21st century. chapter 3 describestheir significance for the military in general and the army inparticular. chapter 4 offers a provisional definition of ònetwork scienceó and notes the promise afforded by developinga science of networks. chapter 5 describes the potentialscope and content of network science, as determined froman analysis of courses at academic institutions worldwide.the contents of these courses are indicated in appendix c.chapter 6 discusses the current status of network scienceand identifies associated research challenges. this materialis based on an analysis, presented in appendix d, of theresults of a questionnaire sent to over 1,000 researchersworking on various topics pertaining to networks. chapter 7presents findings concerning how the army can create valuefrom investments in network science. it is based on the investment scenarios presented in appendix e. finally, asnoted above, chapter 8 contains the committeeõs conclusionsand recommendations.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10network sciencereferencesarquilla, j., and d. ronfeldt. 2001. networks and netwars: the future ofterror, crime and militancy. santa monica, calif.: rand.bernstein, p.j. 1992. capital ideas: the improbable origins of modern wallstreet. new york, n.y.: free press.business week. 2005. the power of us. pp. 74ð82.cebrowski, a., and j. garstka. 1998. network centric warfare. proceedingsof the united states naval institute 24: 28ð35.garstka, j., and d. alberts. 2004. network centric operations conceptualframework version 2.0. vienna, va.: evidence based research, inc.johnson, s. 2001. emergence: the connected lives of ants, brains, citiesand software. new york, n.y.: scribner associates, inc.rheingold, h. 2002. smart mobs: the next social revolution. cambridge,mass.: ma basic books.ronfeldt, d. 2005. a long look ahead: ngos, networks, and future socialevolution. in environmentalism and the technologies of tomorrow, r.olson and d. rejeski, eds. washington, d.c.: island press.watts, d.j. 2003. six degrees: the science of a connected age. new york,n.y.: w.w. norton.weiner, t. 2005. drive to build hightech army hits cost snags. new yorktimes, march 28, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112networks and network research in the 21st centuryif there is one word to describe society in the early 21stcentury, it surely must be òconnected.ó we have grown uptaking for granted the vast interlinked networks that bringelectricity, water, gas, and cable tv to our homes and thatallow us to be in personal contact with others almost anywhere in the world by telephone, email, and other communications means. the internet, especially the world wideweb (www), is thoroughly ingrained in our everyday lives.the defense of our nation is heavily dependent on electronicnetworks for communication, command and control, collaborative decision making, intelligence gathering, and othercritical functions.while less obviously ònetworks,ó many other richly connected systems play crucial roles in our lives. when diseasesare transmitted by persontoperson contact, their spread patterns and ultimate effect are highly dependent on connections that can be described as a network. when cells divideand transform under the influence of minute amounts of biochemical elements in the body, they trigger a network ofinfluences and dependent reactions. human organizationsare networks, often captured graphically with organizationcharts. in our daily lives we encounter healthcare providernetworks, purchase goods from companies that acquiredthem from supply networks, and pay for them using networks of banks and credit card companies. our brains areimmense networks of highly interconnected nerve cells, responsible for our ability to see and hear, make decisions,remember and learn, and act.in order to get a sense of the scope and character of thesenetworks, the committee classified them into biological (e.g.,metabolic pathways), physical (e.g., the power grid and telephone system), and social (e.g., governments and churches).this taxonomy is developed in table 21, which identifiessome important physical, social, and biological networks andgives an indication of their global impact. this table illustrates clearly the utter pervasiveness of networks in everyaspect not only of human existence but also of the existenceof all living entities on planet earth. connectivity is an essential ingredient of life as we know it.not only are networks pervasive, they are astonishinglydiverse. moreover, they can be characterized by figures ofmerit that indicate how large, how complicated, how robust,and how important they are. this aspect of networks is illustrated in table 22, which shows the characteristics of a diverse sampling of networks. the figures of merit for the columns are defined in the footnotes. this table is worthy ofclose examination because it reveals the wide diversity ofthe scales, structures, states of maturity, technological intensity, benefits, and consequences of failure of some of thenetworks that we encounter daily. it also illustrates how complex some of the networks are, leading one to wonder if theirdesigners and operators can control their behaviors.inspection of tables 21 and 22 leads to the committeeõsfirst finding:finding 21.networks enable the necessities and conveniences of modern life.the tables illustrate how vital networks are to modernlife. we see from them that networks underlie nearly everyaspect of the infrastructure that supports daily life. electricity, water, transportation, telephone service, internet connection, health care, banking, shopping, education, and government all are brought to us by physical or social networks.our bodies and minds are also manifestations of networks. the natural world in which we live is a vast array ofecological networks. networks are ubiquitous in daily life.they also are central to the global economic infrastructure.the failure of any of these networks impacts society.finding 22.engineered networks are a major driver ofthe increasingly global economy and can be of benefit toboth the united states and its competitors.it can be seen from these tables that modern communications and transportation networks are the drivers of the global economy. they provide the fundamental connectivity onwhich global banking, product design, tourism, supply chainnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12network sciencemanagement, and customer relationship management depend. from overseas manufacturer to walmart, productsare ordered electronically, produced on demand, shippedaround the globe by shipping networks, and delivered to local stores by rail and truck networks. heralded by some pundits as the century of biology and nanotechnology, the 21stcentury is in fact an era of networks and is called by othersòthe age of information and telecommunicationsó (perez,2002).finding 23.social and biological networks bear important similarities to engineered networks.one might infer from table 21 that biological and socialnetworks are similar to engineered networks. indeed, muchrecent literature has been devoted to documenting just howthis is the case (barab⁄si, 2002; bower and bolouri, 2001;dorogovtsev and mendes, 2003; newman, 2003; watts,2003). the important point for this study is that many methods and models are applicable to networks of all kinds: biological, physical, and social. (these commonalities are explored in chapter 5 and appendix c.)finding 24.advances in computerbased technologiesand telecommunications are enabling social networksthat facilitate group affiliations, including terroristnetworks.an important property of networks is that they may bebuilt on top of each other. for example, a social networkmay be formed based on an information network built on acommunications network that utilizes a physical network oftransmission equipment. this property enables experimentation in the social network realm using commercial comtable 21representative networksbiological networksaphysical networkssocial networkstype of networkglobal impacttype of networkglobal impacttype of networkglobal impactdisease transmittingspread of disease,distribution gridsefficient distributionaffiliation/efficient collaborationnetworks (hiv,epidemics(electric power, waterof goods oracquaintance networksand activityinfluenza, tb, malaria,supply, businesscommodities(terrorist, community,coordinationcholera)supply chains)business, religious,clubs)ecological networkssurvival of selectedtelecommunicationsinstantaneousbroadcast networksdissemination of(food webs, riverspecies; globalinfrastructure (cellular,worldwide information(radio, tv networksidentical informationbasins, rain forest)weather andpstn, cable tv,distributionlike nbc, cbs, cnn)to large groupstopographyinternet)metabolic networkssustenance of life fordod globalnetworkcentricinformation exchangecheap, convenienta given generation ofinformation gridwarfare and networknetworks (u.s. mail,long distance pairliving entities(sensors,enabled operationslocal and longdistancewise communicationscommunications, andtelephone service)weapons)community networkssurvival of selectedtransportationrapid movement ofgroup formingeasy, convenient(insect societies,speciesnetworks (airports,goods from supplier tonetworks (ebay,formation of groups ofanimal herds, birdhighways, railways,market; modern travelcorporate intranets)likeminded peopleflocks, schools of fish)shipping)who have never metgene expressiontransmission andelectronic financialelectronic cashlesssupply chains andcoordination ofnetworksevolution of lifetransaction networkstransactionsbusiness networksmultiple players tobetween generations(banking, credit cards,achieve commonatms)goals, global costreductionsocial servicesefficient delivery ofnetworks (socialgovernment servicessecurity, familyto large, distributedservices, medicare,constituenciesmedicaid)note: pstn, public switched telephone network; dod, department of defense.aincludes biochemical and other networks that are natural rather than manmade.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks and network research in the 21st century13table 22maturity, structure, characteristics, and impacts of some networksrelativetechnologysocietalmaturityanetwork structurebintensitycimpact of(high,(high,representativecatastrophiccatastrophicmedium,numbertopologymedium,networksocietalfailureefailuresample networklow)of nodescomplexityscalinglow)scopedimpacts/benefits(high, low)descriptionu.s. electrichighhighlownmediumnationalelectric lighting,highcontinentpowerappliances,spanningdistribution gridand electronicsblackoutair transportationhighmediummediumn**2highregional/rapid globallowmajornetworknational/transport ofweatherglobalpeople andrelatedcargodelaysintegrated circuitsmediummediummediumn**2highlocalubiquitouslowdevice(chip level)computing andfailure orotherrecallelectronicdevicescellular networkhighhighlownhighnational/instantaneoushighsurgeand publicglobalmobilecausedswitchedworldwideoutagetelephonecommunicationsduring anetworkcrisissexual networksn/alowlownn/amostly local,large segmentshighonset of(e.g., thosebut withof populationgloballeading to ormodernafflicted withpandemicspreading hiv ortransportationaids insexual diseases)can beunderdevelopedregional,worldnational, orglobalinternet datalinkhighmediumhighn**2highglobalenabler of weblowmajorlayer (router)and electronicdenialoftopologycommerceserviceattacksapplications layermediummediummedium2**nhighglobalsupport forlowcomputerinternet topologygroupformingviruses,networksspyware,andidentificationtheftbank of americamediummediumlown**2highnational/cashlesshighglobalfinancial andglobalretailing anddisruption ofbanking networkelectronicelectroniccurrencyfinancialexchangestransactionswalmartlikelowlowmedium2**nmediumnational/justintimelowstock itemsbusiness supplyglobalsupply andnot in storeschaininventory controlsmall (50,000 orhighlowmedium2**nmediumlocalroads, water,low (asloss of localless) townsewage, zoning,individualorder, e.g.,governmentspolicegovernments)lootingathe networkõs position on a scale starting from first generation (at emergence, a low state) and ending with a high state of maturity, by which time thenetwork has gone through multiple subsequent iterations.bnetwork structure is characterized by number of nodes, topology complexity, and scaling. the number of nodes ranges between low (<1,000), medium(1,000 to 10,000,000), and high (>10,000,000). topology complexity describes the diversity of interconnections from varied and complex to simple andcontinuesnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14network sciencemunications and information networks. the implications ofthis fact for criminal, terror, protest, and insurgency networkshave been explored by arquilla and ronfeldt (2001) and area common topic of discussion by groups like the highlandsforum, which perceive that the united states is highly vulnerable to the interruption of critical networks.finding 25.the high value attached to common engineered networks makes their design, scaling, and operation a topic of national priority.it seems selfevident from the ubiquity of networks in ourdaily lives, as well as from the potential for massive civildisruption if they fail, that the design, scaling, and operationof networks is a national priority. failures and threats of failure caused by terrorist action add urgency to the strategicimperative to design, deploy, and operate robust networkswhose behaviors are predictable. yet as we shall see later inthis report, fundamental (as opposed to empirical) knowledge about how to do this is primitive. the current state ofknowledge about network design and characterization isroughly analogous to the state of knowledge about metallurgy in europe in the 16th century. the empirical steelforming technology of the day was sufficiently advanced toenable europe to conquer most of the world but providedonly a pale indication of the materials designs that wouldbecome possible in the 20th century based on the science ofmetallurgy (diamond, 1999). as the committee looked atthe current state of network technology and research in relation to our near total dependence on networks, it was amazedat the abundance of interest in network applications and thelack of fundamental scientific research that might advancethe development of an underlying network science to support the study of networks in general.finding 26.interest in network research has explodedduring the past 5 years.research on networks has become highly visible duringthe past 5 years. a number of the measures that normallyaccompany the emergence of a new field document thisheightened interest. for example, the number of publicationsfocusing on complex networks increased significantly duruniform. scaling means economic or social value of that network as a function of n (the number of nodes). a linear value of n means that service is aimed atindividual users. n**2 is the value that results from persontoperson transactions, and 2**n, the value that results from the establishment of group affiliations(rheingold, 2002, p. 58).cnetwork topology that is enabled by or highly dependent on modern computertocomputer communications technologies. the high, medium, and lowranges are determined by the approximate number of computers in the networkñfor example, high range indicates >106 computers in the network, mediumis 106 to 103, and low is <103.dgeographical scope of the network: global, national, regional, or local.epotential consequences for society at large of a failure that is extremely destructive yet highly improbable. high range means >$100 million and low means<$100 million.table 22continueding that time. a òcomplex networkó is one that exhibits emergent behaviors that cannot be predicted a priori from knownproperties of the networkõs constituents (boccara, 2004).this is not limited to a single discipline, but it is stimulatedby simultaneous interest in communication systems (like theinternet or the web), biological systems (like metabolic orprotein interaction networks), and social systems (like collaboration or email networks). as shown in figure 21, thenumber of publications with òcomplex networksó in theirtitle has increased fourfold over the past 5 years without signsof saturation. the two most cited papers on complex networks have been cited more than 1,500 times, according togoogle scholar (watts and strogatz, 1998; barab⁄si andalbert, 1999). fueled by this increasing interest, major scientific journals have devoted special issues, reviews, or editorials to the promise of networks. for example, nature haspublished several reviews on the subject (strogatz, 2001;ottino, 2004; koonin et al., 2002). science and the proceedings of the national academy of sciences devoted specialissues to it (jasny and ray, 2003; pnas, 2004). two majorphysics review journals, reviews of modern physics andadvances in physics, have each published highly cited reviews on networks (albert and barab⁄si, 2002; dorogovtsevand mendes, 2002). so have major engineering, appliedmathematics, and sociology journals, like ieee control systems magazine, siam review, and annual review of sociology (amin, 2002; watts, 2004; newman, 2003). furthermore, several of the most prominent biology journals, likenature reviews genetics, nature immunology, naturestructural biology, and nature reviews systems biology,have published highprofile reviews and editorials, oftenhighlighting them on the cover of the journal, as shown infigure 22.another sign of the emergence of a network science community is the organization of meetings devoted to networkresearch. indeed, during the past 5 years more than 20 international conferences and workshops and summer schoolshave focused exclusively on network research, some drawing close to 400 participants. electrical engineering and computer science conferences have for many years devoted entire sessions to networks. in addition, major physics andbiology meetings devote many focus sessions to networks.for example, the march 2004 and march 2005 meetings ofnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks and network research in the 21st century15the american physical society (aps), the largest annualphysics meeting in the world, had more than 10 networkrelated sessions. similarly, the american association for theadvancement of science (aaas) regularly features symposia devoted to network science and its applications.the number of books on network science has exploded.four generalaudience books, translated into over 10 languages and making the bestseller list in several countries,introduced the promise of network science to the generalpublic (barab⁄si, 2002; buchanan, 2002; watts, 2003;huberman, 2001). box 21 also lists over 15 monographsfocusing either on network science in general or on its applications to specific fields.in 2004, responding to the publicõs fascination with networks, the new york hall of science opened a major exhibitentitled òconnections: seeing the world in a differentway.ó the exhibit focused on the impact of networks onscience, technology, and the arts.finally, as is discussed in chapter 5 and appendix c,most major u.s. universities have developed courses on various aspects of network science. these are offered in a variety of departments, including electrical engineering, physics, computer science, biology, economics, and sociology.the european union recognized the potential of research innetworks early on under its sixth framework program1 byinvesting several million euros per year in flagship programs,such as cosin, evergrow, delis, and exystence,which focus on complex networks and their applications(amaral et al., 2004).in addition to providing the knowledge underlying thedesign and operation of many of the global communications,transportation, and power infrastructures noted in tables 21and 22, network research is leading to the creation of newbusinesses. the poster child of the benefits of network thinking is google and all the secondgeneration search enginesbuilt after google. indeed, googleõs phenomenal success andwhat sets it apart from its early competitors is its revolutionary algorithm, which used the topology of the web to rankthe obtained search results. google is a wonderful exampleof how a piece of published research by two graduate students on random walks on networks, an academic exercise,1for further information, see http://www.cordis.lu/ist/fet/co.htm. accessed august 19, 2005.figure 21number of papers with the term òcomplex networkó in the title. source: introduction to complex networks: modeling,control and synchronization. briefing by guanrong chen, director, centre for chaos control and synchronization, city university of hongkong, to the first chinese conference on complex networks, wuhan, china, april 2005.year2,3102,4082,6032,7853,0873,7014,82019981999200020012002200320045,2004,8004,4004,0003,6003,2002,8002,4002,000network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16network scienceled in less than a decade to a multibilliondollar company(brinn and page, 1998).search engines are not the only new business spawned bynetwork research. a rapidly evolving industry has developedaround social networks. products are developed based oninformation gleaned from mapping out peopleõs social links.the businesses range from facilitating business contacts toproviding dating services. some of the companies aim torevolutionize the sales process by identifying the shortestacquaintance path from a salesperson to a target person. inthe past 3 years more than 20 companies have emerged thatuse some aspects of social networks to provide benefits toconsumers.small companies are springing up to apply an understanding of network structure to practical concerns. one exampleis the work by internet perils, inc., to improve the robustnessof a companyõs internet connectivity by identifying bottleneck hubs that lie on seemingly diverse paths. the interest innetwork research has resulted in a number of network analyfigure 22magazines and journals with articles on networks.sis tools. the majority of these tools focus on network visualization; some are free, others can be purchased.in an intermediate time frame, biology is likely to benefitfrom advances in network research (barab⁄si and oltvai,2004), and a rush is on to capitalize on applications of thegenomics revolution. it is increasingly apparent that the design of successful drugs for complex diseases like cancer ordepression depends on mapping out the interactions betweencell components. several companies are involved in commercializing this mapping process, and developing tools thattake advantage of network representations of a cell. for example, genomatica, a sandiegobased company, has developed a series of tools: starting with knowledge of thestructure of a metabolic network, genomatica generates predictions useful in a range of ways, from developing drugs todeveloping strains of bacteria with special metabolic characteristics.all in all, the committee finds that research on networksnot only underlies the affordability and reliability of the glonetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks and network research in the 21st century17box 21books relevant to network sciencegeneral audiencealbertl⁄szlš barab⁄si, linked: the new science of networks.cambridge, mass.: perseus publishing, 2002.mark buchanan, nexus: small worlds and the groundbreakingscience of networks. new york, n.y.: w.w. norton, 2002.bernardo a. huberman, the laws of the web: patterns in the ecologyof information. cambridge, mass.: mit press, 2001.duncan j. watts, six degrees: the science of a connected age. newyork, n.y.: w.w. norton, 2003.monograph and proceedingseliben naim, hans frauenfelder, and zoltan toroczkai, complexnetworks (lecture notes in physics). springerverlag, october 16,2004.s.n. dorogovtsev and j.f.f. mendes, evolution of networks: frombiological nets to the internet and www. oxford, england: oxforduniversity press, 2003.s. bornholdt and h.g. schuster, eds., handbook of graphs andnetworks: from the genome to the internet. weinheim, berlin:wileyvch, 2003.pedro l. garrido and joaqu™n marro, eds., modeling complexsystems, seventh granada lectures, spain 2002. americaninstitute of physics conference proceedings, vol. 661. melville,n.y.: aip, 2003.duncan j. watts, small worlds: the dynamics of networks betweenorder and randomness. princeton, n.j.: princeton universitypress, 1991.graph theory/algorithmsb”la bollobas, random graphs, 2nd ed. cambridge, england:cambridge university press, 2001.clifford w. marshall, applied graph theory. new york, n.y.: wileyinterscience, 1971.joel spencer, the strange logic of random graphs: algorithms andcombinatorics. new york, n.y.: springerverlag, 2001.internet/wwwromualdo pastorsatorras and alessandro vespignani, evolution andstructure of the internet: a statistical physics approach. cambridge, england: cambridge university press, 2004.pierre baldi, paolo frasconi, and padhraic smyth, modeling theinternet and the web: probabilistic methods and algorithms.england: john wiley & sons, 2003.martin dodge and rob kitchin, mapping cyberspace. new york, n.y.:routledge, 2001.martin dodge and rob kitchin, atlas of cyberspace. england:addisonwesley, 2001.social networksstanley wasserman and katherine faust, social network analysis:methods and applications. cambridge, england: cambridgeuniversity press, 1994, reprint 1999.malcolm gladwell, the tipping point: how little things can make abig difference. boston, mass.: little, brown and company, 2000.per hage and frank harary, island networks: communication, kinshipand classification structures in oceania. cambridge, england:cambridge university press, 1996.manfred kochen, the small world. norwood, n.j.: ablex publishingcorporation, 1989.r.r. mcneill and william h. mcneill, the human web: a birdõseyeview of world history. new york, n.y.: w.w. norton, 2003.peter r. monge and noshir s. contractor, theories of communicationnetworks. new york, n.y.: oxford university press, 2003.wayne e. baker, networking smart: how to build relationships forpersonal and organizational success. available online at http://backinprint.com.wayne e. baker, achieving success through social capital: tappinghidden resources in your personal and business networks.josseybass, 2000.economic systems/political networksmanuel castells, the internet galaxy. new york, n.y.: oxford universitypress, 2001.ross dawson, living networks: leasing your company, customers,and partners in the hyperconnected economy. upper saddle river,n.j.: prentice hall, 2003.dirk messner, the network society: economic development andinternational competitiveness as problems of social governance.frank cass publishers, 1997.chris westland, financial dynamics: a system for valuing technologycompanies. new york, n.y.: john wiley & sons, 2003.networks in the arts and culturealistair reynolds, òglacieró in the yearõs best science fiction 2001,gardner dozois, ed. new york, n.y.: st. martinõs griffin, 2002.mark lombardi, robert hobbs, and judith richards, mark lombardi:global networks. independent curators, august 2003.mark c. taylor. the moment of complexity: emerging network culture.chicago, ill.: university of chicago press, 2002.other books discussing various aspects of networksfritjof capra, the web of life: a new scientific understanding of livingsystems. new york, n.y.: anchor books/randomhouse, 1996.geoff mulgan, connexity: how to live in a connected world. cambridge, mass.: harvard business school press, 1998.steven strogatz, sync: the emerging science of spontaneous order.new york, n.y.: hyperion, 2003.judy breck, connectivity: the answer to ending ignorance andseparation. lanham, md.: rowman & littlefield, 2004.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18network sciencebal communications, transportation, and power infrastructures but also is an important source of economic growth viathe creation of new commercial endeavors.finding 27. recent network research is leading to newand growing businesses.in summary, human understanding of networks has thepotential to play a vital role in the 21st century, which iswitnessing the rise of the connected age. there is an enormous demand for information on how to design and operatelarge global networks in a robust, stable, and secure fashion.in subsequent chapters, the committee discusses the dearthof fundamental scientific knowledge that would ensure thatoutcome. in chapter 3, the committee looks at the use ofnetworks in the military, and the special attention given inthe statement of task to their role in networkcentric warfare.referencesalbert, r., and a.l. barab⁄si. 2002. statistical mechanics of complex networks. reviews of modern physics 74(1): 47ð97.amaral, l.a.n., a. barrat, a.l. barab⁄si, g. caldarelli, p. de los rios, a.erzan, b. kahng, r. mantegna, j.f.f. mendes, r. pastorsatorras, anda. vespignani. 2004. virtual round table on ten leading questions fornetwork research. the european physical journal b 38(2): 143ð145.amin, m. 2002. modeling and control of complex interactive networks.ieee control systems magazine 22(1): 22ð27.arquilla, j., and d. ronfeldt. 2001. networks and netwars. santa monica,calif.: rand.barab⁄si, a.l. 2002. linked: the new science of networks: the future ofterror, crime, and militancy. cambridge, mass.: perseus.barab⁄si, a.l., and r. albert. 1999. emergence of scaling in random networks. science 286(5439): 509ð512.barab⁄si, a.l., and z.n. oltvai. 2004. network biology: understanding thecellõs functional organization. nature reviews: genetics 5(2): 101ð114.boccara, n. 2004. modeling complex systems. new york, n.y.: springer.bower, j.m., and h. bolouri. 2001. computational modeling of geneticand biochemical networks. cambridge, mass.: mit press.brinn, s., and l. page. 1998. the anatomy of a largescale hypertextualweb search engine. computer networks and isdn systems 30(1ð7):107ð117.buchanan, m. 2002. nexus: small worlds and the groundbreaking scienceof networks. new york, n.y.: w.w. norton.diamond, j. 1999. guns, germs and steel: the fates of human societies.new york, n.y.: w.w. norton.dorogovtsev, s.n., and j.f.f. mendes. 2002. evolution of networks. advances in physics 51(4): 1079ð1187.dorogovtsev, s.n., and j.f.f. mendes. 2003. evolution of networks: frombiological nets to the internet and www. oxford, england: oxforduniversity press.huberman, b.a. 2001. the laws of the web: patterns in the ecology ofinformation. cambridge, mass.: mit press.jasny, b.r., and l.b. ray. 2003. life and the art of networks. science301(5641): 1863.koonin, e.v., y.i. wolf, and g.p. karev. 2002. the structure of the proteinuniverse and genome evolution. nature 420(6912): 218ð223.newman, m.e.j. 2003. the structure and function of complex networks.siam review 45(2): 167ð256.ottino, j.m. 2004. engineering complex systems. nature 427(6973): 399.perez, c. 2002. technological revolutions and financial capital: the dynamics of bubbles and golden ages. cheltenham, england: edwardelgar publishers.proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states(pnas). 2004. mapping knowledge domains. 101(suppl.1).rheingold, h. 2002. smart mobs: the next social revolution. cambridge,mass.: ma basic books.strogatz, s. 2001. exploring complex networks. nature 410(6825): 268ð276.watts, d.j. 2003. six degrees: the science of a connected age. new york,n.y.: w.w. norton.watts, d.j. 2004. the ònewó science of networks. annual review of sociology 30(1): 243ð270.watts, d.j., and s. strogatz. 1998. collective dynamics of òsmallworldónetworks. nature 393(6684): 440ð442.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.193networks and the militaryas the army, in fact all of the services, the joint staff,and the department of defense (dod) look to the future, anew vocabulary dominates the planning as well as the strategic and tactical direction of the entire military process: doctrine, organization, training, materiel, leadership/education, personnel, and facilities. òinformation dominance andsuperiority,ó ònetcentricity,ó ònetworkcentric warfare,óand ònetworkcentric operationsó are frequently used termsthat have become part of the lexicon associated with transformation to a future military force.networks and the armyfrom its earliest days, the army has moved through doctrine, training, and equipping the forces relying on some formof networked communications. for the most part this was anarmy signal corps function satisfied by switches, radios,satellites, and cable. army leadership wanted to be sure itcould talk to whomever it needed and left decisions aboutthe network to technically competent òcommunicators.óthis paradigm has shifted dramatically. leaders of allmilitary services and dod have become aware that a successful doctrine for warfare in the information age demandsthat they engage network issues at many different levels.force transformation is seen to depend on the developmentof a coherent system of interacting networks using rapidlyevolving enabling technologies.the ability of joint and coalition units to integrate andmaintain òconnectionó has been essential to operations iniraq and afghanistan. joint network nodes (jnn) allow fordirect connectivity between warfighters of different servicesand the global information grid (gig), thus enabling armybrigade and battalion units to stay connected to the jointtask force (jtf) in support of their mission. blue forcetracker (bft), which allows warfighters on the ground toanswer the questions where am i? where are my buddies?was a great success in iraq. jnn and bft were rapidly followed to the afghanistan and iraq battlefields by joint combat identification (jci) systems, improvised explosive device (ied) countermeasure systems, artillery locating systems, persistent surveillance and dissemination systems,mine detection systems, and longrange scout surveillancecapabilities (day/night and allweather), all coming togetherto provide what the army calls òbattle command on themove.óone only has to examine the key suite of technologies forcommand, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance systemsñc4isrsystemsñto realize that none of the systems can be effectivestanding alone. to win the battles of the future, the integration and networking of c4isr systems is essential, from concept development to combat in the field.at the same time as these c4isr technologies and systems provide a manifold improvement in combat capabilities they provide a manifold problem of complexity. none ofthe systems stands alone on the battlefield. most c4isr systems were developed in separate òstovepipeó programs byhardworking, imaginative, and productive engineeringteams; yet all must interoperate to varying degrees. furthercomplicating the issue will be adapting the highly centralized and hierarchical command structures of the army (andother service forces) and accommodating both old and newgenerations of technology. particularly vexing, for example,will be requirements to network unmanned vehicles, including remote sensors and weaponry, while keeping responsibleand accountable human beings in the loop.networkcentric warfare and networkcentric operationsthe leadership of dod has believed for some time thatglobal communications technology, epitomized by theinternet and the world wide web, will fundamentally transform the conduct of war in the 21st century just as airpowertransformed it between world wars i and ii. this belief isembedded in two strategic assumptions of profound signifinetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20network sciencecance to the army. first, that better situational awarenessand communication in combat situations will result in highercombat effectiveness. this implies facile and highbandwidth communications between elements of all the servicesin combat operations as well as shared information in a common format. second, it is assumed that better situationalawareness will make forces more mobile by virtue of allowing heavy armor to be replaced by agility. these assumptions underlie the notion of a transformation of u.s. militaryforces by bringing them from the industrial age into theinformation age. they are captured in the strategic conceptof networkcentric warfare (ncw), which has four main tenets (garstka and alberts, 2004):¥a robustly networked force improves informationsharing and collaboration.¥such sharing and collaboration enhance the quality ofinformation and shared situational awareness.¥this enhancement, in turn, enables further selfsynchronization and improves the sustainability andspeed of command.¥the combination dramatically increases missioneffectiveness.in dod today, the network is seen as perhaps the mostpotent aspect of this change. it captures the essence of theongoing transformation and is a central element in improving combat effectiveness. according to ltg steve boutelle,u.s. army chief information officer, the secretary of defense has said that the single most transforming thing in ourforce will not be a weapons system, but a set of interconnections (military information technology, 2003). thus, earlyin its deliberations the committee developedfinding 31.dod and all the military services have a visionof the future in which networks play a fundamental role.definition and implementation of the concept of ncw isthe goal of the dod office of force transformation (oft).information about the initiative may be found on the oftweb site,1 where the concept is described as òan emergingtheory of war in the information ageó that òbroadly describes the combination of strategies, emerging tactics, techniques, and procedures, and organizations that a networkedforce can employ to create a decisive war fighting advantage.ó it is said to have òapplicability for the three levels ofwarfareñstrategic, operational, and tacticalñand across thefull range of military operations from major combat operations to stability and peacekeeping operations.ó but the devilis in the details. defining and implementing the concept hasproven to be a huge challenge.as dod has worked to come to grips with the definitionof ncw, the concept has evolved into a more encompassingnotion, ònetworkcentric operationsó (nco). the latter isalso described on the oft web site.2 nco is based on revised tenets that are designed so that the hypotheses underlying them can be tested experimentally based on field dataacquired in case studies. relative to the tenets of ncw, thetenets of nco emphasize the use of shared information bysocial networks. this evolution is documented in networkcentric operations conceptual framework version 2.0(garstka and alberts, 2004) posted on the web site, whichcontains the most current definitions of both ncw and nco.ncw encompasses three domains of activity: physical,information, and cognitive. nco adds a fourth, the socialdomain, and in addition emphasizes policies and proceduresin the cognitive and social domains that lead to effective useof the information provided by the physical and informationdomains (garstka and alberts, 2004).finding 32.dod has recognized the value of cognitiveand social domains in nco.òthe physical domain is where strike, protect and maneuver take place across the environments of sea, air and space.it is where the physical infrastructure that supports force elements exists. the key elements of the physical domain are(1) the network and (2) netready nodesó (garstka andalberts, 2004, p. 49). òthe information domain is where information is created, manipulated, valueadded and shared.it can be considered the ôcyberspaceõ of military operations.the key elements of the information domain are (1) data and(2) informationó (garstka and alberts, 2004, p. 49).òthe cognitive domain is where the perceptions, awareness, understanding, decisions, beliefs, and values of theparticipants are locatedó (garstka and alberts, 2004, p. 23).a key process in this domain is òsensemaking,ó which requires the participants to construct effective mental modelsof a situation in which they find themselves. the militaryhas formulated a model of how sensemaking occurs and howit can be influenced by information technology (gartska andalberts, 2004, pp. 29ð37).finally, òthe social domain is where people, organizations, practices and cultures intersectó (garstka and alberts,2004, p. 26). conceptual framework version 2.0 identifiesthe attributes of networked structures and cultures, of networkcentric people, and of how they collaborate, heavilyemphasizing the dependence of combat effectiveness on performance in the cognitive and social domains.finding 33.current dod investments in networkresearch include no activity in the cognitive and socialdimensions of nco, specifically in the vital area of decision making in an informationrich environment.1at http://www.oft.osd.mil. accessed september 1, 2005.2at http://www.oft.osd.mil/initiatives/ncw/ncw.cfm. accessed september 1, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks and the military21box 31case studies in netcentric operationsthe office of force transformation commissioned a series of case studies to evaluate the value of networkcentric operations. in one studyñu.s./u.k. coalition combat operations during operation iraqi freedomñan attempt was made to judge the valueadded for the force xxi battle commandbrigade and below (fcbc2)/blue force tracker (bft) system used in conjunction with existing c4 capabilities.the final analysis of the case study noted the following four points:¥fbcb2/bft improved coalition operations, although in a somewhat limited way, by giving coalition units situational awareness of one another.¥the limited deployment, training, usage, and operation of fbcb2/bft with the u.k. units constrained its contribution to overall situationalawareness.¥the perception that u.s. forces did not use fbcb2/bft in interfacing with u.k. forces discouraged subsequent use of the system betweencoalition forces.¥anecdotally, the greater benefits appeared to be at the operational and strategic levels of command, where blue force feeds from multiple sourceswere aggregated to provide a coalition common operational picture (cop).specific combat actions extracted from the case study provide a clear view of the conclusions of the analysis:1at one objective when the u.s. forces were attempting to secure a bridge on the river euphrates, 1 brigade combat team (bct) wasto secure the bridgehead to allow 2 bct to be the breakout force. when forward elements of 1 bct were reaching the objective the plan wasthat lead elements of 2 bct should be four hours behind them. it should be noted that the formations were out of radio contact. in fact,elements of 2 bct were up to eighteen hours behind according to the time and space calculations made by units of 1 bct based on thesituational awareness afforded by fbcb2/bft. hence, the assault on the objective became a hasty defense until such time as the operationcould be conducted. this demonstrates the utility of fbcb2/bft to allow a unit to synchronize its actions with the operational context andconform to the collective scheme of maneuver. furthermore it demonstrates how the 1 bct commander was provided time to consider newcourses of action.interviews with personnel from 1 (uk) armored division highlighted that planning that had been undertaken prior to crossing the lineof departure regarding the use of fbcb2/bft had not resulted in the system being used as agreed between unit commanders....apparently,when the u.s. forces were engaged by iraqi forces southwest of baghdad, the system was disregarded and the relief in place conductedthrough the more familiar use of liaison officers on the ground.in both of these extracted vignettes we see that the focus is solely on the relay of information. thus, the network is nothing more than a network oflinked communications devices. granted that provides a commander with increased situational awareness; but, despite that increased situational awareness, the commander does not derive a new approach to warfare. for example, the 1 bct commander conducted a hasty defense, which is exactly whathe would have done when faced with the delay of 2 bct. while it could be argued that increased use and familiarity with the fbcb2/bft system wouldhave resulted in greater reliance on the system, it is noteworthy that the forces portrayed in the second vignette resort to direct human contact with liaisonofficers.the fourth point of the analysisñthat the systemõs greatest benefit may be at operational and strategic levelsñis particularly revealing. it suggestsa return to a more traditional perspective, when an overall commander could assume an overview of the battlefield from a nearby hillside. (this impliesthat the scope of the battle may be more geographically distributed in modern warfare, but there are no new elements to the mission of defeating theopposing force.)a similar case study was conducted in which u.s. air force war games were evaluated to examine the difference in the kill ratios of fighter planesequipped with voiceonly communications and those with link16 data communication capabilities. the study demonstrated that aircraft sharing thegreater amount of informationñlink 16ñhad kill ratios more than twice those of aircraft that were equipped voice only. the significance of this findingis that the metric used is not something derived from a new theory of warfare; kill ratios are as old as warfare itself.source: adapted from garstka and alberts (2004).1garstka and alberts, 2004, p. 55.the value of ncw is said to be greatest at the intersection of the four domains. analysis of recent military operations in iraq and afghanistan suggests, however, that onlythe information domain is represented (oft, 2005). box 31contains observations from an analysis of two of a numberof case studies commissioned by oft to evaluate the valueof nco. what seems clear from battlefield reports and analyses is that the present systems used by the army and otherservices need to be improved and integrated into a solutionencompassing the physical, cognitive, and social domains,network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22network scienceas well as the information domain. this is an elusive objective that involves both near and farterm efforts in networkresearch, and includes efforts that go beyond research per se.finding 34.current dod investments in networkscience and technology are almost exclusively in theinformation domain of nco.challengesupon assuming his post, the secretary of the army focused on issues of immediate concern to the army: òa networkcentric capable force is one that is robustly networked[and] fully interoperable and shares information and collaborates by means of a communications and information infrastructure that is global, secure, real time, reliable, internetbased, and userdriven.ó3 this vision of nco cannot bedelivered with the knowledge or technology available today.challenges associated with presentday military information networks can be found at the tactical, operational, andstrategic levels (garstka and alberts, 2004). they includethe following:¥lack of overall integrating architectures and systemsengineering for enterprise networks;¥inadequately trained, educated, and certified personnel and network users;¥network management and lack of joint network configuration management;¥network security and information assurance;¥requirements to model, simulate, and test large networks before deployment;¥fusion of multiple sensors and sensor types across thenetwork for realtime decision making;¥design of individual service networks and synthesiswith the dod gig;¥understanding the relationship between network structure and complexity and its impact on organizationaldesign and individual and unit behaviors; and¥energyefficient electronics to reduce soldier loads andsimplify logistics support.these challenges cannot be met with current technologyalone. while significant resources have been expended todevelop networkcentric capabilities, most of the improvements are based on existing technology rather than on newresults from network research. even today, given all the resources that have been devoted to creating a networked force,there are no scientifically based guidelines for either thespecification of the infrastructure needed or its design.bandwidth availability is often cited as the central issue.during operation iraqi freedom, only the strategic level wastruly bandwidthenabled. it is possible that network researchwould lead not merely to advances in bandwidth utilizationbut also to efficient applications that would better supportthe networked force at the operational and tactical (warfighter) levels of combat. dod is projected to spend $30billion to $50 billion over a relatively short time frame totransform and develop a networkcentric force. it is possiblethat benefits could be realized faster and at lower cost withappropriate research in key areas.planning and experimentation for nco focuses on relatively narrow scenarios taken from past war experience andfails to reflect the reality of determined 21st century adversaries. presentday information technologies on which military networks depend are extremely vulnerable to attack andmanipulation. more importantly, by limiting the focus ofnco to the physical, information, cognitive, and social domains, technologies based on networks in nonc4isr domains likely to be of importance in the future are being overlooked.finding 35.although no specific biological domain isidentified for emphasis in nco, the army is responsiblefor critical defense operations in this domain that involvemultiple interacting networks.a military operation consists of a myriad of activitiesoccurring in sequence and parallel, with each activity associated with one or more networks that bear on the outcome. abiological attack on the united states, perhaps the òmotherof all nightmares,ó is an extreme but excellent example. themultiplicity of networks involved in such a realworld contingency illustrates the armyõs central role, as well as thewide applicability of benefits likely to ensue from investments in network research. box 32 describes how armyunits, not necessarily girded for combat, would be requiredto lead the nation in reacting to a biological attack. such anattack would provide a true test of the effectiveness of netcentric operational principles.optimizing warfighting organizationsa number of times in history, the deployment of newweapons (from cannons to armored tanks to nuclear bombs)has conferred a decisive military advantage. but at othertimes, the most important military advantages have comenot from new weapons but from new ways of organizingfighting forces. the greek phalanx, the armored cavalrysquadron, and a unit of action such as the modular brigadeare all examples of military organizations that, when theywere first used, conferred decisive military advantages. today, the dramatically reduced costs of communication allowed by new information technologies are making it possible to organize military forces in very different ways. this3s.w. boutelle, chief information officer, department of the army, òremarks by the honorable francis j. harvey, secretary of the army, december, 2004, as quoted in slide 5: the way ahead,ó briefing to the committeefebruary 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks and the military23box 32dependence of army operations on networks: an examplewhereas the future combat system emphasizes physical networks, future army operations will actually depend on many other types of networks.figure 321 shows a highly simplified version of specific networks that might be involved in the response to a biological attack against the united states.the national response quickly diverges into civilian and military chains. on the civilian side, the first task is to identify the causative agentña procedureinvolving biological networks. the public health response then relies on various types of social networks to track the disease and control its spread, aswell as prepare for a potential followon attack.on the military side, the response is shown across the staff areas used by the military. (the òjóñfor jointñnumbers are standard military designators for the respective staff areas of responsibility shown.) the schematic illustrates how in future army operations all the network types described in table21ñphysical, social, and biologicalñwould be involved. for this simplified schematic, only two network types per staff area are shown. clearly, as withthe civilian response discussed above, each task would be supported by many subtasks, most relying on various additional network types.to illustrate the potential power of networks in combat operations, figure 321 draws on some futuristic concepts. for example, under j3 operations, note the use of òcommunity networks,ó derived from biology. this example is drawn from theoretical work currently being pursued by numerousresearchers on the adaptation of animal behavior algorithms to support autonomous swarms of unmanned aerial vehicles (uavs). using algorithms fromflocking/swarming behavior and ant path determination, a flock of uavs could be launched on a mission. if some of them were destroyed en route, theflock could selforganize and reform to continue the mission.in the case of j5 strategic plans and policy, there is the suggested use of òecological networks,ó also derived from biology. in this instance, onecould envision the use of information taken from our understanding of ecology to develop plans and policy for warfighting in areas where we have littlespecific knowledge of the terrain or environment. knowledge about how networks influence the terrain or environment could improve war planning.similarly, knowledge about groupforming networks could speed the establishment of coalitions needed for coalition campaigns. it is evident that whilenot necessarily even realizing it, the military draws on networks and network theories that have been developed in various fields. a fuller understandingof these underlying fields thus holds considerable potential.telecommunicationsinfrastructurebiological attack against the united statestreatmentcontacttracingcivilian responsemilitary responseidentification ofagentgeneexpressionnetworkspersonnel(j1)socialservicesnetworksaffiliation/acquaintancenetworkspubliceducationinformationexchangenetworksbroadcast networksbiologicalnetworkssocial networksphysical networksintelligence(j2)operations(j3)logistics(j4)strategic plans and policy(j5)communications(j6)social services networksinformation exchangenetworksaffiliation/ acquaintance networksdisease transmitting networksbroadcast networkscommunity networkssupply chains and business networkstransportationnetworksecological networksgroup forming networksdodglobal information gridkey:figure 321representative activities and networks involved in responses to a bioterrorist attack.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24network sciencetable 31network research areasprioritytimecommercialfor armyresearch areakey objectiveframeinterestinvestmentmodeling, simulating, testing, and prototyping verypractical deployment tool setsmid termhighhighlarge networkscommand and control of joint/combined networkednetworked properties of connected heterogeneousmid termmediumhighforcessystemsimpact of network structure on organizationaldynamics of networked organizational behaviormid termmediumhighbehaviorsecurity and information assurance of networksproperties of networks that enhance survivalnear termhighhighrelationship of network structure to scalability andcharacteristics of robust or dominant networksmid termmediummediumreliabilitymanaging network complexityproperties of networks that promote simplicity andnear termhighhighconnectivityimproving shared situational awareness ofselfsynchronization of networksmid termmediumhighnetworked elementsenhanced networkcentric mission effectivenessindividual and organizational training designsfar termmediummediumadvanced networkbased sensor fusionimpact of control systems theorymid termhighmediumhunterprey relationshipsalgorithms and models for adversary behaviorsmid termlowhighswarming behaviorselforganizing uav/ugv; selfhealingmid termlowmediummetabolic and gene expression networkssoldier performance enhancementnear termmediummediumpossibility already has been realized in the concept ofònetwaró (arquilla and ronfeldt, 2001).twentyfirst century communications technology makesit possible for every battlefield element to be connected withevery other battlefield element, including individual warfighters, sensors and weapons, and vehicles and aircraft,manned and unmanned. such connectivity has been shownto enable realtime situational awareness and a common operational picture of the battlefield. these and other connections to such things as remote artillery or an aerial weaponsplatform, greatly extend the capabilities of the individualwarfighter.but increased situational awareness alone is likely to beof limited value if nothing else changes in the military command and control structure. for instance, soldiers who areaware of their situation but unable to make decisions usingthat information are unlikely to be much more effective thansoldiers without such situational awareness. on the otherhand, the vastly increased amount of battlefield informationthat is now potentially shareable makes possible radicallynew forms of organization such as loose networks of highlyautonomous soldiers who swarm over promising targetswithout any centralized authority telling them to do so(arquilla and ronfeldt, 2001).finding 36.with the increasing importance of terroristnetworks, information warfare, and other unconventional means of combat, the decisive advantages in 21stcentury wars may arise not from superior weapons butfrom superior ways of organizing warfighters.developing such new organizational concepts, however,requires more than incremental improvements to existingmilitary doctrine. it demands substantial creativity and invention, applied in this case not to creating new physicaldevices but rather to new organizational forms. and this invention is greatly helped by a rigorous understanding of organizational possibilities in other kinds of systemsñfor example, businesses, social networks, and biological systems(malone et al., 2003; malone, 2004; olson et al., 2001).network research of special interestto the militarytable 31 summarizes major challenges identified by boththe army and the committee during the course of its study. itlists research areas and objectives in all categories of military operations and highlights the broad potential of networkresearch to support c4isr and other advances and developnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.networks and the military25ments of interest to the army and dod. the time frame forrealization, the likely degree of commercial interest, and thevalue to the army (priority) of the challenges reflect theknowledge and estimates of the committee at the time of thestudy. the time frames are for the basic research activities innetwork science necessary to produce actionable technologyinvestment options and are not for completion of technological implementations.finding 37.there are many challenges associated withimplementing nco in the army that can be identified,classified, and prioritized to create an investment strategy for network science.the transformation of the army and other services intoan effective networkcentric force requires disciplined studyand research in practically all areas involving networks. today, there is no coherent discipline for the study of networks.a welldefined science of networks would provide a muchmore efficient path to a fully capable networkcentric force.finding 38.to exploit the full potential of networks, aviable science of networks is required.referencesarquilla, j., and d. ronfeldt. 2001. networks and netwars: the future ofterror, crime, and militancy. santa monica, calif.: rand.garstka, j., and d. alberts. 2004. network centric operations conceptualframework version 2.0. vienna, va.: evidence based research, inc..malone, t.w. 2004. network the future of work: how the new order ofbusiness will shape your organization, your management style andyour life. cambridge, mass.: harvard business school press.malone, t.w., r.j. laubacher, and m.s. morton, eds. 2003. inventing theorganizations of the 21st century. cambridge, mass.: mit press.military information technology online edition. 2003. interview withmajor general steven w. boutelle. available at http://www.militaryinformationtechnology.com/article.cfm?docid=33. accessed june 21,2005.office of force transformation (oft). 2005. the implementation of network centric warfare. document 387. available at http://www.oft.osd.mil/initiatives/ncw/ncw.cfm. accessed june 21, 2005.olson, g.m., t.w. malone, and j.b. smith, eds. 2001. coordination theoryand collaboration technology. mahwah, n.j.: lawrence erlbaumassociates.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.264the definition and promise of network sciencein preceding chapters the committee demonstrated the importance of networks to society in general and the army inparticular. it documented that there is interest in research onthe properties of networks in any number of civilian andmilitary applications. the committee also established that apressing national demand exists for òthe creation of a newfield of investigation called network science to advanceknowledge of complex systems and processes that exhibitnetwork behavior,ó as expressed in the statement of task. inthis chapter it addresses the question of how network scienceshould be defined and positioned.what is network science?the first item in the statement of task (box 12) asks howthe new field of investigation called network science envisioned by the committee should be defined. the committeeõsresearch into this seemingly simple question created a surprisingly complex response.logically, the notion of network science is straightforward. it is the organized knowledge of networks based ontheir study using the scientific method. this notion is immediately valuable in that it distinguishes science from technology. throughout human history technology often evolvedfar earlier than the scientific knowledge on which it is based.a classic example is the creation of advanced technologiesfor the production of metal tools and weapons far in advanceof the science of metallurgy.this is the case today for networks. although the technologies underlying the design, construction, and operationof the global physical communications, information, and distribution networks described earlier are quite advanced, theunderlying scientific knowledge has remained rather rudimentary, according to the experts and literature surveyed bythe committee. developing the metallurgy analogy further,the current state of knowledge about physical communication and information networks is similar to the knowledge ofmetallurgy for weapons and tools in 16th century europe(diamond, 1999). quite sophisticated steel swords and, ultimately, guns were made by entirely empirical processes forcreating and forming the steel, without knowing anythingabout atomic structure, grain boundaries, or the influence ofprocessing on grain boundaries and dislocations. the development of atomiclevel metallurgy in the 20th century enabled a quantum leap in the engineering of lightweight, highstrength materials (e.g., for turbine blades and aircraft).however, the weapons created using the empirical technology of the 16th through 19th centuries enabled europeans toconquer the world during that period, just as modern communications and information technology can and will transform the battlefields of the 21st century. the components ofmodern communication and information networks are theresult of technologies based on fundamental knowledge emanating from physics, chemistry, and materials science. theirassembly into networks, however, is based largely on empirical knowledge rather than on a deep understanding of theprinciples of network behaviors gained from an underlyingscience of networks.in this report the committee examines the state of fundamental knowledge emanating from research on the scienceof networks rather than the state of empirical knowledgeemanating from research on the technologies that go into theconstruction of physical networks. this is a profound andfundamental distinction that must be appreciated to understand the report. its flavor may be illustrated by contrastingthe concepts of discovery and invention. in a scientific studypursuing new fundamental knowledge, discoveries are madeabout how the objects of study behave. for example, in thestudy of the complex threedimensional network formed bymagnetic atoms in solid atomic lattices, the emergent behavior of phase transitions to various ordered states was discovered experimentally and predicted by sophisticated analysesof network models that describe the interactions between thespins on nearby lattice sites (binney et al., 1992). this is adiscovery in the science of networks that illustrates whatsorts of network structures and dynamics are required to prenetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the definition and promise of network science27dict such behaviors. contrast this to the invention of the protocol stacks used in the open systems interconnection (osi)and transmission control protocol/internet protocol (tcp/ip) reference models for the internet (tanenbaum, 2003).these models were invented to produce reliable connectionsbetween computers under some assumed conditions. theywork when these conditions are satisfied but are not necessarily suitable for substantially different network structureslike those needed for interplanetary communications (jackson, 2005). they do not address such issues as whether thereexist conditions under which the networks on which they runmight exhibit emergent behaviors, i.e., behaviors not predictable from the known behaviors of their components. thisreport is devoted to an assessment of the current state andfuture prospects of scientific discoveries about networksrather than of the improvement of the technologies of thecomponents of physical networks or the invention of methodologies for integrating these components into networks tosolve specific problems.the fact that network science is logically conceivabledoes not imply, however, that the concept has been realizedin practice. the term ònetwork scienceó evokes dramaticallydifferent images in the minds of workers in different applications domains. the communications engineer envisagesthe knowledge needed to design a complex communicationsnetwork like the internet or the telephone system. the sociologist thinks of networks of influence, like boards of directors or certain social organizations. the business person visualizes the study of informal human networks that enablefirms to function, like supply networks and influence networks within large organizations. the physicist thinks of thetheory of complex systems, focusing on how order emergesfrom the apparently random interactions between the nodesthrough phase transitions or selforganization. the powerengineer envisages the knowledge underlying the design andcontrol of the electric power grid. the cell biologist contemplates models of genetic and metabolic networks that enablecell function. and so it goes.the committee addressed this situation by conducting twoinquiries. first, it inquired whether there was a body ofknowledge widely thought of as being the content of network science that was taught in universities. the results ofthis inquiry are reported in chapter 5 and appendix c. second, it asked the practitioners of various applications of networks about their notions of network science. the results ofthis second inquiry are reported in chapter 6 and appendixd. what the committee discovered was that practitioners ineach major applications area had their own local nomenclatures to describe network models of the phenomena in whichthey were interested and their own notions of the content ofnetwork science. these notions overlap, but are not identical.finding 41.today there is no encompassing science ofnetworks reflected in the practices and perceptionsofpractitioners of network research and development.that is, the committeeõs research validated the implication in the statement of task that such a ònew field of investigationó has yet to be codified. the committeeõs point ofview is that the operational definition of network science iswhat the community of researchers who view themselves asworking in this field of investigation actually do. because acoherent community does not exist across the various applications areas, an opportunity exists for the army to nucleatesuch a field by its leadership and funding policies. this opportunity is real rather than virtual because a modest consensus exists among network researchers as to what a core ònetwork scienceó might encompass. the committee developedthe substance of this consensus in chapters 5 and 6. networkscience will evolve into whatever its practitioners create.those two chapters therefore describe the current state ofthis rapidly evolving area of investigation.finding 42.the notion of a science of networks is evolving, and there is limited understanding of its ultimatescope and content.the communities from which network science is expectedto emerge encompass many disciplines and applications areas. today these communities are characterized by a diversity of nomenclature, models, and opinions about which aspects of the topic are most important. new terms andconcepts proliferate. some are common across many fieldsñfor example, across statistics, economics, sociology, andbiology. others are found in only one or a few subfieldsñfor example, molecular biology, neurology, epidemiology,and ecology, all within biology. some are given differentlabels in different fields while meaning essentially the samething. as documented in chapter 5, there seems to be a widespread realization that codifying a common nomenclatureand body of core knowledge would be useful, but this hasnot yet occurred. this is why the task statementõs concept ofa ònew field of investigation called network scienceó is bothsensible and timely.describing the communities of practice from which thescience might emerge does not suffice to provide an operational definition of network science. in addition we mustdescribe its scope and content. given the rapid evolution ofresearch in this area, this must be done at a high level ofabstraction. the details will change significantly over time.the notion of a network is abstracted from the physical,biological, or social realities that are experimentally observed. as discussed in chapters 5 and 6, a network is described by its structure (e.g., nodes and links), its dynamics(the temporal attributes of nodes and links), and its behaviors (what the network òdoesó as a result of the interactionsamong the nodes and links). thus, a network is always arepresentation or model of observable reality, not that realityitself. this creates interesting questions about the uniqueness of a specific network representation of a particular phenomenonñfor example, the network model of a metabolicnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28network scienceprocess. it is difficult to establish that a successful networkmodel of a social or biological process is unique in the sensethat maxwellõs equations uniquely describe the propagationof electromagnetic waves independent of the details of theassociated physical environment.the statement of task asks how a new field of investigation called network science should be defined. given theevolving notion of a science of networks, any answer to thisquestion will be ephemeral, and the scope and content ofnetwork science will evolve as its practitioners develop it.proposing a formal definition entails two additional risks.first, since the various network application communitiesperceive this topic in different ways, some of them are likelyto criticize, even reject, any definition offered. second, inlight of this possibility, differences of opinion over the definition may become a rationale for discounting the contentsof this report. nevertheless, in the spirit of providing thearmy with a framework for thinking about what networkscience might become, the committee offers the followingtentative definition:finding 43.network science consists of the study ofnetwork representations of physical, biological, andsocial phenomena leading to predictive models of thesephenomena.by focusing on the development of models and propertiesof the underlying representations, this new area of scientificinvestigation offers the promise of developing tools, techniques, and models that apply to multiple applications areas.it also offers the happy prospect of simplifying and codifying a variety of nomenclatures and lexicons. thus, one mayreasonably expect that creation of a field called network science will not only provide a body of rigorous results thatimprove the predictability of the engineering design of complex networks, but also speed up basic research in a varietyof applications areas. (the defining characteristics of a network and its behaviors are explored further in chapter 6.)positioning of network sciencescience tells us how the world operates, and technologygives us practical applications of the resulting insights. thesemake their way into various sectors of society: into the medical tools, procedures, and remedies of our healthcare sector,into the products and services of our economy at large, intothe texts and classrooms of our educational centers, into thelaws and administration of our government, and into theweapons and communications systems of our military. pathsleading to military strength, healthcare excellence, a trainedlabor force and economic vibrancy all follow the flow fromscience to technology to institutional forms and applicationsin their plentiful variety.these paths all have beginnings and endings, with specific tasks and characteristics at different points along theway. they begin in gestation, reach an inflection point andgrow rapidly, mature when their application is readily understood and widespread, then ultimately age and decline.the quarters of a life cycle are gestation, growth, maturity,and decline. they control not only biological life, but thelives of nations and economies as well (perez, 2002).we see this in a seed that sprouts, flowers, and dies; in aproduct that passes through research and development(r&d) into the marketplace and then into every home; andin an army that pioneers systems that spread throughout themilitary, then on into society at large, passing from the arcaneto ubiquity and, ultimately, to obsolescence. ultimately, allcycles are surpassed by another cycleñbe it of organism,product, or weapons systemñthat is better adapted to theextant surroundings. in this life cycle context, networkscience is somewhere near the end of its gestation, poised fortakeoff and growth in the decade ahead.when new paradigms first appear, the scientific communities that pertain have little or no social organization. in thegrowth phase of their cycle, groups of collaborators and òinvisible collegesó characteristic of a more mature science develop around their bodies of knowledge. network science isready to complete this first phase but is not yet ready to enterits growth stage. the army can play a crucial role in facilitating the transition now.indeed, truly surprising results might arise from a systematic study of network science. for example, it is widelyheld that a revised military paradigm is needed to addressevolving threats and opportunities associated with terrorismat home and abroad. these threats arise from network behaviors, specifically the adaptation of social networks to theincreasing capabilities of communication and informationnetworks (arquilla and ronfeldt, 2001; berkowitz, 2003).this adaptive phenomenon has been observed over the centuries. typically, engineered networks designed with one setof social behaviors in mind are, over time, exploited by disruptive elements (e.g., criminals and terrorists) for their ownpurposes. this is a general historical pattern, examples ofwhich include disruption of commercial naval shipping bypirates in the 18th century, train robberies in the 19th century, airplane hijackings in the 20th century, and terrorismand cybercrime in the 21st century, including the destructionof the world trade center on september 11, 2001. largeinfrastructure networks evolve over time; society becomesmore dependent on their proper functioning; disruptive elements learn to exploit them; and society is faced with challenges, never envisaged initially, to the control and robustness of these networks. society responds by adapting thenetwork to the disruptive elements, but the adaptations generally are not totally satisfactory. this produces a demandfor better knowledge of the design and operation of both theinfrastructure networks themselves and the social networksthat exploit them. this demand cannot be met by existingknowledge, because the circumstances that create it were notanticipated when the networks were designed and built.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the definition and promise of network science29finding 44.a gap exists between currently availableknowledge about networks and the knowledge requiredto characterize, design, and operate the complex globalphysical, information, biological, and social networks onwhich the wellbeing of our citizens has come to depend.closing this gap is an urgent matter, because society hasbecome dependent on the reliable, robust operation of complex global communication, information, transportation,power, and business networks. the disruption or exploitation of these networks by adversarial social networks of terrorists or criminals is a demonstrated threat, making an investment in network science not only strategically sound butalso politically urgent.finding 45.advances in network science can addressthe threats of greatest importance to the nation’s security.in summary, the committee finds that although there isnot universal agreement on what network science is today,there is an emerging consensus on what it can become tomorrow. moreover, there is a pressing demand for the fundamental knowledge that can be expected to emanate fromsuch a science. thus, network science is positioned as anemerging new field of investigation at the beginning of itsgrowth curve and of compelling national interest and onethat the army has a unique opportunity to nucleate. in chapters 5 and 6, the committee turns to an exposition of theresults of its research on the content, status, and challengesof this emerging field. then, in chapter 7, it articulates howthe army can create value by nucleating the new field andsupporting its growth.referencesarquilla, j., and d. ronfeldt. 2001. networks and netwars: the future ofterror, crime, and militancy. santa monica, calif.: rand.berkowitz, b. 2003. the new face of war: how war will be fought in the21st century. new york, n.y.: free press.binney, j.j., n.j. dowrick, a.j. fisher, and m.e.j. newman. 1992. thetheory of critical phenomena. oxford, england: clarendon press.diamond, j. 1999. guns, germs and steel: the fates of human societies.new york, n.y.: w.w. norton.jackson, j. 2005. the interplantery internet. ieee spectrum online. available at http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/webonly/publicfeature/aug05/0805inte.html. accessed august 22, 2005.perez, c. 2002. technological revolutions and financial capital: the dynamics of bubbles and golden ages. cheltenham, england: edwardelgar publishers.tanenbaum, a.s. 2003. computer networks, 4th edition. upper saddleriver, n.j.: prentice hall ptr.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.305the content of network sciencein this chapter, the committee determines topics forinclusion within the boundaries of network science and network science research as a ònew field of investigation.ó thechapter describes the activities conducted to help definethescope and content of network science and presents thecommitteeõs factual findings.how do we know?to arrive at a definition of network science and identifythe topics that it might encompass, the committee undertooktwo activities. first, a team of committee members expert inthe domains of engineered, physical, biological, and socialnetworks reviewed available academic courses to determinetheir topical contents. the common elements of the courseswere extracted and taken to be a provisional de facto specification of the topics contained in the core science spanningthese diverse applications areas. the teamõs proposal wasthen circulated to selected academicians for suggestions andrefinement, and the results of this effort are collected in appendix c.second, the questionnaire described in appendix d wascirculated to over 1,000 experts in applications areas pertinent to network science asking them for their definitions ofthe term and their notions of appropriate topical content. theresults from the questionnaire, described in chapter 6 andappendix d, confirmed the results of the first effort and assisted the committee to elaborate a working definition ofnetwork science (finding 43).the results from both efforts further revealed that the termònetwork scienceó evoked different mental models in different individuals and communities. what follows is an articulation of the common elements of these mental models.contentas discussed in chapter 4, network science means different things to different people. it does not exist today as acoherent field of investigation. the committee was chargedwith assessing whether turning it into a new field with thisname would be feasible and useful. one test of the utility ofdoing so would be to examine the extent to which currentresearch on networks exhibits a core content that cuts acrossthe diverse applications areas.the questionnaire results discussed in chapter 6 revealthat there are common elements in these diverse applicationsthat can help to create an operational definition of the fieldpertinent to the committeeõs statement of task. specifically,there seems to be widespread agreement that the commoncore of network science is the study of complex systemswhose behavior and responses are determined by exchangesand interactions between subsystems across a welldefined(possibly dynamic) set of pathways. the central point is thatthe behavior of a network is determined both by the pathways (structure) and by the exchanges and interactions (dynamics). moreover the structure itself may be (and usuallyis) dynamic. this is a flexible definition that allows flexibleinterpretation in the various applications domains. it is elaborated upon and extended in chapter 6.a central outcome of the committeeõs work is the realization that network ideas span an enormous range of disciplines and applications domains. as might be expected, researchers in each domain have their own terminologies andlexicons, so communication among them is not alwaysstraightforward. there is a growing notion that these dialects mask an underlying commonality, but the nature of thiscommonality remains fluid.finding 51.network science is an emerging disciplinewhose boundaries are evolving.for network science to be regarded as a science, it mustencompass core principles that can be taught to students.these core principles, generally embedded in quantitativemodels, should enable predictions of network behaviorsgiven the structure and dynamics of the network as inputs.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the content of network science31these predictions must be testable experimentally so theycan either be verified or proven false. moreover, the coreprinciples and their associated models and tests will need tobe captured in a core curriculum that can be communicatedto students. the committee found broad agreement amongexperts in diverse applications domains on a set of core topics that would need to be mastered to pursue a disciplinelabeled as ònetwork science.ófinding 52.there is broad agreement among expertson topics necessary for inclusion as the core content ofnetwork science.the specific topics included in the core content are described in appendix c. the central notion is that a networkis described by its structure and dynamics, which combine toprovide a complete specification of its properties (includingfunctions and behaviors).the structure of a network is specified by indicatingwhich nodes are linked to which other nodes and whetherthe links are unidirectional or bidirectional. from this information a number of figures of merit characterizing the structure of the network can be determined. textbooks and majorreview articles have been written on this topic (albert andbarab⁄si, 2002; dorogovtsev and mendes, 2003; newman,2003; watts, 2004). the calculation of these figures of meritfor various classes of structural models for networks is astaple of courses on networks and an essential core ingredient of network science.the specification of the dynamics of a network is lessstraightforward because the dynamics tend to be rather different in the various applications areas. one example is theanalysis of phase transitions in physical systemsñfor example, magnetic atoms in solids. here the dynamics arespecified by the interactions between the spins of the magnetic atoms, which typically vary as a function of the distance between them (binney et al., 1992). in chemistry andbiology, network models are used to describe sequences ofchemical reactions. the nodes are typically the reactants andproducts, with the links being their chemical reactions. thedynamics can be specified by logical models, by rate equations, or by stochastic models of individual reactions (bowerand bolouri, 2001). in sociology, the nodes are typicallypeople and the links are their interactions. the dynamics areoften specified by state models in which the state of oneperson depends on the states of the other persons with whomshe/he interacts as well as on some internal predisposition,often specified statistically (watts, 2004). thus, the modeldynamics that are introduced in a core course typically depend on the classes of applications that the instructor has inmind.the essence of network science is making testable predictions about the properties of a network once its structureand dynamics have been specified. a body of knowledgeabout the standard models and tools for analyzing networkshas accumulated over time, as indicated in appendix c. because these models and tools constitute knowledge that isoften reused in multiple applications areas, they are the remaining elements in the core content of network science.the core content of network science is basic science, currently consisting of simplified models and of techniques thatare appropriate for the analysis of small networks that exhibit low topological complexity in the terminology of table22. the analysis of network structure is more advanced thanthat of network dynamics. if adequate structural data areavailable, structure analysis techniques can be applied tolarger and more complex networks using available computertools. the outputs of model analyses in the core content areinsight and qualitative understanding, not engineering design.the specification of architecture and the design of thephysical type networks described in tables 21 and 22 arethe province of engineering applications domains. the structure, dynamics, and function of the biological and social typenetworks mentioned in the tables are the subjects of basicresearch. the application of electromagnetic theory to thedesign of the power grid affords a useful analogy. even agraduate physics course in electromagnetism is of little direct use in designing the power grids noted in tables 21 and22. the material in the core content of network science isanalogous to that taught in graduate and undergraduatecourses in electromagnetism.finding 53.research contributing to the core contentof network science is basic research (6.1) in the dodclassification scheme.when the demands on network science imposed by itsdesired applications are compared with the current state ofthe knowledge about the science described in appendix c, ayawning gap appears. the applications require validatedtheories that allow predicting the properties of globalscalenetworks under stress conditions. current knowledge consists of simplified models and tools for analyzing relativelysmall and simple networks. it seems clear to the committeethat substantial development of the core content of networkscience is required for it to become adequate for its intendedapplications.finding 54.significant investment in the developmentof the core content of network science is required in orderto create adequate knowledge to meet current demandsfor the characterization, analysis, design, and operationof complex networks.the networks described in chapter 2 tend to be both largeand complex. they are large if they have many interactingcomponents, typically millions or more for physical networks like the internet, regional power grids, or transistorson a chip. they are complex if their components exhibitnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32network scienceknown behaviors, but our knowledge of these behaviors doesnot suffice to predict the behaviors of the network as a whole(boccara, 2004). such complex networks are said to exhibitemergent behavior if the behaviors of their components leadto unanticipatedñthat is, òemergentóñbehavior of the network as a whole in the absence of a centralized controllerthat creates this behavior by design. as an example, the network of transistors on a computer chip is not normally regarded as exhibiting emergent behavior, whereas an antcolony or the world wide web is (boccara, 2004).it seems to be widely accepted that investment in basicresearch will be required to describe the behaviors of socialand biological networks. a similar call for investment inbasic research might appear counterintuitive for technologically advanced physical networks like the internet or regionalpower grids. a few moments of reflection reveals, however,that these physical networks, too, exhibit emergent behaviors. the internet is robust against expected noises but fragile against unexpected ones, like computer viruses (doyle etal., 2005). regional power grids fail infrequently but inevitably, under circumstances not anticipated by grid designersand not adequately dealt with by grid power control systems(ieee spectrum, 2004). contrary to the efforts and hopes ofthe implementers of advanced technologies, the behaviors ofcomplex physical networks are not yet completely predictable. moreover, spending to improve the technologies intheir components will not remedy this situation. just like thedevelopment of radar awaited the basic science of electromagnetism and that of nuclear weapons awaited the discovery of nuclear fission, the ability to control the complex networks in our lives awaits as yet unforeseen discoveries in thescience of networks.because committees are notoriously inept at developingcurricula or specifying the research content of a science discipline, this committee makes no attempt to do either. it offers the analysis given in appendix c and discussed aboveas a test of the proposition that network science be regardedas a coherent area of investigation worthy of investment bythe army. the committee believes that network science fullypasses this test.referencesalbert, r., and a.l. barab⁄si. 2002. statistical mechanics of complex networks. reviews of modern physics 74(1): 47ð97.binney, j.j., n.j. dowrick, a.j. fisher, and m.e.j. newman. 1992. thetheory of critical phenomena. oxford, england: clarendon press.boccara, n. 2004. modeling complex systems. new york, n.y.: springer.bower, j.m., and h. bolouri. 2001. computational modeling of geneticand biochemical networks. cambridge, mass.: mit press.dorogovtsev, s.n., and j.f.f. mendes. 2003. evolution of networks: frombiological nets to the internet and www. oxford, england: oxforduniversity press.doyle, j.c., d. alderson, l. lun, s. low, m. roughan, s. schalunov, r.tanaka, and w. willinger. 2005. the òrobust yet fragileó nature of theinternet. proceedings of the national academy of sciences (pnas)102(41): 14497ð14502.ieee spectrum. 2004. the unruly power grid. ieee spectrum august2004: 22ð27.newman, m.e.j. 2003. the structure and function of complex networks.siam review 45(2): 167ð256.watts, d. 2004. the ònewó science of networks. annual review of sociology 30(1): 243ð270.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.336status and challenges of network sciencealthough no universal consensus exists in the researchcommunity that a field of investigation called network science exists today, many researchers describe their work aspotentially related to such a field. many techniques for designing and analyzing networks exist in a variety of application domains, as explored in chapter 5. in this chapter, thecommittee draws upon responses to a questionnaire to identify a suite of common characteristics and concerns that spanthese domains. the questionnaire was circulated to activeresearchers, identified from literature studies, recursive tracing of collaborative ventures, conference attendance, mailing lists, and interviews with the authors of recent books andreviews. first, the committee describes the questionnaireprocess and the respondents. then it summarizes the respondentsõ assessments of the existence, nature, and challengesof a possible field of network science. further analysis anddiscussion are provided in appendix d.key messagesfrom an analysis of over a thousand questionnaire responses, the committee extracted four messages:¥there is no universal consensus among researchersthat an identifiable field of network science now exists, in part because there is no accepted definition ofwhat the discipline of network science might be.¥analysis of the definitions put forth and the researchinterests of the respondents reveals a suite of input attributes and output properties that could constitute acommon core of topics underlying network science.¥researchers across diverse domains share an implicitunderstanding that a network is more than topologyalone. it also entails connectivity, resource exchange,and locality of action.¥of seven major challenges identified, the most criticalinvolve characterization of the dynamics and information flow in networked systems; modeling, analysis,and acquisition of experimental data for extremelylarge networks; and rigorous tools for the design andsynthesis of robust, largescale networks.questionnaire processthe questionnaire was developed through an iterative process, starting with an analysis of the statement of task. aftera betatest phase, the final version of the questionnaire wasposted on the web from december 20, 2004, to may 31,2005. the complete text of the questionnaire is contained inappendix d. it asked for information about the respondents,their work, and their views on ònetwork scienceó as a field.it also gave respondents the opportunity to provide as muchfurther information as they wished.the goal of the ensuing questionnaire invitation processwas to reach as large, diverse, and representative a sample ofthe many relevant research communities as feasible withinthe studyõs resources. overall, the findings that surfacedfrom the responses and that are presented here are consistentwith views held by the committee members. this helped toovercome concerns about the depth and breadth of coverageor other limitations in the questionnaire process. issues suchas reaching beyond the basic snowballing effect, detectinghoax responses, and determining the degree of coverage ofthe researcher community are discussed further in appendixd.the respondentsfinding 61.responses to the questionnaire show adiverse and worldwide network research communitywith shared concepts and concerns.finding 62.the results of analyzing the questionnaireresponses are consistent across diverse subgroups ofrespondents.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34network sciencethe responding community is diverse in terms of bothgeographic distribution and the breadth of interests represented. responses were received from 29 countries and from39 states in the united states. fourteen fields were selectedby at least 10 percent of the respondents, and, on average,each respondent selected 3.6 fields. the findings presentedin this report do not depend significantly on the field of studyor the locale of the respondents but could be limited by thefact that most of them (72 percent) are in the academic community. further details are given in appendix d.dissenting voicesfinding 63.seventy percent of the responses to thequestionnaire accept the idea that network science is adefinable field of investigation.the questionnaire analysis reveals a widespread but notuniversal consensus among the respondents that a definablefield of network science exists. when the reasons for sayingthere is no such field as ònetwork scienceó are analyzed,they break down into five kinds of concern: the phrase hasno coherent definition; it is broad to the point of vacuity; it istoo early to define such a field; it is merely a new name foralready existing fields; or, defining such a field is the wrongapproach. in addition, respondents also indicated that thefield suffered from excessive hype. the distribution of theseresponses is shown in figure 61.of the responses, 70 percent were affirmative to questionq3a: òis there an identifiable field of network science?ótwentythree percent of respondents answered no, and7percent did not answer. these percentages show littledependence on the backgrounds of the respondents.the pervasiveness of dissenter concerns across the responding communities reinforces the need for a clear definition of the field of network science, anchored in the expressed approaches of the researchers involved. it alsoreinforces the idea that care must be taken not to overstatewhat is achievable in such a field. more positively, articulating an explicit definition of the term ònetwork scienceó mayaddress some of these concerns.defining the fieldthe first question in considering a possible field of network science is this: what are its contents and scope? questions 3a and 3b directly address this issue and provide empirical data on the nature of network science as practiced bycurrent researchers. the responses to four other questionsproved highly relevant. further analysis is presented in appendix d.the committee structured its analysis in terms of two basic questions: what are the defining attributes of a network?what are the derived properties of interest? if these questions have answers that are common across many application domains, then network science might be identified asthe insights, lexicon, measurements, theories, tools, and techniques that allow one to map between desired output properties of a given network and its input attributes. mapping isneeded in both directions: (1) determining the output properties that arise from specific input attributes and (2) determining the input attributes that could be designed into a newnetwork or achieved by intervention in an existing networkin order to realize particular output properties.if network science is to exist in a meaningful way, theseapproaches also must be effective over many applicationdomains, with wellunderstood techniques to apply generaltools, methods, and models to specific domains. as a hypothetical example, one might envision a simulation tool thatdeals with network models across a wide range of size scalesand timescales, with a growing suite of model libraries customized to specific application domainsñfor example, ecological networks, metabolic networks, transportation networks, and so on.attributes of a networkfinding 64.analysis of the responses reveals three common attributes of networks: (1) they consist of nodesconnected by links, (2) nodes exchange resources acrossthe links, and (3) nodes only interact through direct linkage.few responses captured all three attributes, but all threeappear consistently, either explicitly or implicitly (in moredomainspecific entries), across a wide range of subjectdomains. the percentage of responses in which an attributewas mentioned explicitly is indicated in figure 62. forbrevity, these attributes are designated òconnectivity,óòexchange,ó and òlocalityó:¥connectivity. a network has a welldefined connection topology in which each discrete entity (ònodeó ingraphtheoretic terminology) has a finite number ofdefined connections (òlinksó) to other nodes. in general, these links are dynamic.¥exchange. the connection topology exists in order toexchange one or more classes of resource amongnodes. indeed, a link between two nodes exists if andonly if resources of significance to the network domain can be directly exchanged between them.¥locality. the exchanged resource is delivered, and itseffects take place, only in local interactions (node tolink, link to node). this locality of interaction entailsautonomous agents acting on a locally available state.these attributes are discussed in more detail in appendixd.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.status and challenges of network science3505101520253035wrong approachtoo broadother field(s)emergingunclear, no corefraction of òwhy notó responses citing a reason (%)figure 61reasons for saying there is no field of network science.0102030405060localityexchangeconnectivityfraction of responses to question 3b citing an attribute (%)figure 62share of responses that mention an attribute.derived properties of networksfinding 65. respondents expressed a need for networkscience to provide tools that answer a common set ofquestions across a broad range of applications.thirtythree percent of the responses provided definitionsrelating to the output properties of networks. analysis of theproposed definitions identified six output properties thatspanned a wide range of application domains: characterization, cost, efficiency, evolution, resilience, and scalability.however, only 7 percent of the responses explicitly mentioned classes of tools to address the derivation of these properties. the most frequently mentioned were modeling, simulation, and optimization. these themes also appear in therespondentsõ research challenges, discussed below.the responses that proposed driving applications for network science pointed to a highly disparate set of applications, generally tightly bound to five major communities ofresearch: technological, biological, social sciences, interdisciplinary, and physical sciences and mathematics. the distribution of these responses is indicated in figure 63.the analysis of the questionnaire responses also identified three significant problem dimensions that account forthe difficulty of many associated challenges and of theresearch effort required to address them: complexity, thewide range of interacting scales, and networktonetworkinteractions.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36network sciencefuture evolution of the definition of network sciencenetworks and their associated research programs couldbe classified and analyzed based on any one of three descriptive categories: input, output, or problem dimension. it isalso possible that the categories could become the basis formore precise formal definitions of network science. thequestionnaire responses provide evidence that there is a recognizable, coherent common core to the research alreadybeing done on network science, and that the scope of thenascent field is both narrow enough to study and deep enough010203040506070physical sciences and mathinterdisciplinarysocialbiologicaltechnologicalfraction of responses to question 3c citing an application (%)figure 63responses identifying driving applications.to capture concerns that recur across a diverse range of application domains.research challengesfinding 66. respondents identified seven major challenges requiring substantial future work (figure 64).¥dynamics, spatial location, and information propagation in networks. better understanding of the relationdynamicsmodelingdesignrigorcommonconceptsexperimentsrobustnessfigure 64major research challenges.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.status and challenges of network science37ship between the architecture of a network and its function is needed.¥modeling and analysis of very large networks. tools,abstractions, and approximations are needed that allow reasoning about largescale networks, as well astechniques for modeling networks characterized bynoisy and incomplete data.¥design and synthesis of networks. techniques areneeded to design or modify a network to obtain desired properties (such as the output properties discussed in the section òderived properties of networksó).¥increasing the level of rigor and mathematical structure. many of the respondents to the questionnaire feltthat the current state of the art in network science didnot have an appropriately rigorous mathematical basis.¥abstracting common concepts across fields. the disparate disciplines need common concepts definedacross network science.¥better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. current data sets on largescale networkstend to be sparse, and tools for investigating their structure and function are limited.¥robustness and security of networks. finally, there isa clear need to better understand and design networkedsystems that are both robust to variations in the components (including localized failures) and secureagainst hostile intent.the social structure of network sciencethe questionnaire data were provided to katy bırner,associate professor of information science at indiana university, for analysis of the visible social structure of research49966340invitedcompleted questionscollaborated784147188110figure 65relationships among invitees, respondents, and collaborators. source: visualization prepared at the committeeõsrequest by k. bırner and w. ke, infovislab at indiana university.figure 66network science researchers network. source: visualization prepared at the committeeõs request by k. bırner and w. ke,infovislab at indiana university.node colororange = not submittedbrown = submittednode size (area)no. of times mentionednode labelscholar idlink colororange = collaboratorsgreen = invitednetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38network science1katy bırner, associate professor, indiana university, òmapping theexpertise and social network of network science researchers,ó briefing tothe committee on april 13, 2005.in network science. her analysis considered the 1,241 uniquenames of network science researchers identified during thecourse of the questionnaire and citation studies.1 names werereplaced by unique identification numbers to preserve theanonymity of the respondents. relationships among the initial invitees, respondents, and identified collaborants are depicted in figure 65.figure 66 shows the major components (connectedgraphs of size greater than or equal to 10 nodes) of the resulting network science researcher network (nsrn). thepajek shows exactly 630 of the 1,241 unique researchers andtheir association with collaborations and invitations to complete the questionnaire plot (batagelj and mrvar, 1997). eachresearcher is represented by a node. the nodes are colorcoded to identify researchers who submitted (brown) or didnot submit (orange) questionnaires. the size of the circle(node) reflects the number of times the researcher is mentioned by other researchers.the details of the visualization analysis are provided inbox d1 of appendix d. upon reviewing the results of theanalysis, the committee agreed to include the following twofindings on the empirical state of the proposed field of network science:finding 67. analysis of the social and collaborationnetworks of the respondents provides additional evidencethat network science is an emerging area of investigation.finding 68. analysis of the social and collaboration networks of the respondents provides additional evidence ofthe multidisciplinary nature of network science.referencebatagelj, v., and a. mrvar. 1997. pajek: program package for large network analysis. university of ljubljana, slovenia. available at http://vlado.fmf.unilj.si/pub/networks/pajek/. accessed august 18, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.397creating value from network science:scope of the opportunityin earlier chapters the committee discussed the definition, content, and research challenges of network science. inthis chapter it focuses on how investments in network science can create value for the nation in general and for thearmy in particular.creating economic value from researchknowledgeinvestments in basic and applied researchñthat is, inòscienceóñcreate new knowledge. they also producetrained research personnel, and they may generate intellectual property (e.g., patents). they do not generate economicvalue delivered directly to an end customer or user. rather, along value chain of activities separates the creation of newknowledge at the beginning of the chain from useful commercial or military applications at the end of the chain (duke,2004). therefore, knowing how the results of research mightbe used is central to assessing the ultimate value the armycan derive from supporting research in network science.the concept of real options analysis is helpful here(amram and kulatilaka, 1999; boer, 2002; mun, 2002).applying options analysis to research activities allows forresearch to be viewed as creating the opportunity but not theobligation (here is where the term òoptionó comes in) to usethe knowledge generated to create a final capability that acustomer, in this case the army, is willing to pay a supplierto create and deliver. these options can be valued using standard techniques of real options analysis (mun, 2002).many commercial firms plan their r&d investments using this methodology (boer, 1999). while the committeedoes not pursue the full financial analysis discipline in thisreport, the underlying concepts allow it to assess the scopeof opportunity available to the army as it evaluates its investment alternatives for creating a new science of networks.this assessment is presented below.scenarios for value creationto explore the opportunity for different kinds of optionsthat the army might decide to create, the committee assumedthat the army will make finite investments in research toadvance networkcentric warfare (ncw) capabilities andconstructed three scenarios that represent fundamentally different levels of investment. after briefly describing thesethree distinctly different scenarios, the committee presentsits findings about how the army can create value by supporting the development of network science. since networkscience does not now exist, the committee had to make someassumptions about its future evolution in order to assess itspotential value. all three scenarios involve moving targets,but the nature of these targets differs from one scenario toanother. the descriptions that follow provide a sense of thedirection dictated by each scenario and the choices availableto the army. details of the scenarios are provided in appendix e.scenario 1, building the basescenario 1 involves a modest level of funding (~$10 million per year) that fits into the armyõs current scheme for 6.1basic research. small amounts of army risk capital funds areinvested to create a knowledge and personnel base fromwhich it can attack the practical problems that arise whentrying to provide ncw capabilities. it is for this reason thescenario is called òbuilding the base.óbecause the anticipated investment is too small to fundsignificant interdisciplinary efforts, it should be focused onleveraging existing research in areas related to network science. as discussed in chapters 5 and 6, the core of networkscience is rapidly evolving, and scenario 1 would help it tocrystallize.the committee envisions that the research efforts wouldbe located at major research universities. an important asnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40network sciencepect of the program might be a onceayear conference at anarmy laboratory or facility, where the principal investigators (pis) would report on accomplishments during the year.the program needs enlightened management to support interdisciplinary work accomplished through the interactionof a diversity of pis. the essence of the program would bethe achievement of fundamental advances in network research based on, among other things, statistical physics, applied mathematics, and the development of mathematicalmodels of social phenomena by generously funding onlyexceptionally talented individuals who are collectively organized into a national network.such a program would be the first to address the needs ofnetwork science per se. it would be devoted to the study ofnetworks as coherent entities characterized by their architecture, structure, and dynamics. by deliberately adopting abroad theoretical and methodological focus, the programwould encourage the creation of fundamentally novel ideas.a wide diversity of approaches can be a key feature of longterm success. keeping the goals broad and flexible wouldallow the army to cultivate such diversity, whereas narrowlydefining the program would eliminate much of the creativepotential for breakthroughs and new ideas.the armyõs needs are broad and fundamental in nature:it must learn how to approach the creation of a predictivedescription of large, interacting, layered networks. a basicscience program is the first step toward building the criticalmass of talent needed to address specific army problems inthis area. this modest approach would allow the army toidentify the relevant research community and organize it sothat, in time, it could be called upon to address more specificneeds.the proposed approach differs from existing programs inagencies such as the national science foundation (nsf) andthe national institutes of health (nih) in that it focuses onnetwork science per se. while a significant amount of research is taking place in communities addressing the applications of networks, almost none of this research is fundedby dedicated network science programs.as a consequence of its discussions with army and dodrepresentatives, the committee has come to realize that thefundamental problems underlying effective networkcentricoperations (nco) lie in the social domain. yet how peopleinteract and utilize technology or make decisions based onshared knowledge are areas almost unexplored in the armyõscurrent basic research portfolio. applications to biology,engineering, and the physical sciences are also essential toarmy applications, but the army is already funding researchin these areas. the committee suggests that, on the margin,the most significant problem is not how to build better satellites, tanks, or medicines, but rather how to organize millionsof individuals to collect intelligence, deliver supplies, andprosecute wars over an increasingly global and constantlyshifting geographical and political playing field (garstka andalberts, 2004). this is a monumental problem that has not,however, traditionally been the province of science. ratherit has been managed through a mixture of intuition, experience, and tradition. a significant fraction of the proposedprogram should address this organizational problem the wayscientific problems are addressed: through a combination oftheoretical modeling, data analysis, and controlled experimentation.in scenario 1 (appendix e) the committee indicatespromising research topics in four broad areas: network structure, network dynamics, network robustness and vulnerability, and network services. each area has theoretical, empirical, and experimental components. a basic researchinvestment in each of these areas of network science wouldprovide value for the army. the committee also offers suggestions for improving the return on investment by modestchanges in the way that basic research in network science ismanaged.scenario 2, nextgeneration r&dscenario 2 envisages applying best practices in industrialr&d management to the armyõs investments in projects thatcombine basic and applied network science. specifically, thecommittee expects the objective of these projects to be thearticulation of technology investment options that could beexercised by the army and its vendors to provide a desiredcapability. the amount of this investment is envisaged to bebetween $25 million and $100 million annually, roughly$25million per project. there are expected to be investmentsin the university community for the basic research and inboth army inhouse activities and commercial firms for theapplied research. the committee envisages, however, thatthe r&d projects would be managed in a way profoundlydifferent from the way in which current army inhouse andexternal centers are managed.the selection of projects to be funded would be marketdriven and controlled by a toplevel army team. it is expected that connections between the basic and applied portions of the research will be much more intimate. moderninternet collaborative tools would be used to manage the daytoday work in rough analogy to the global design of industrial products. the activities are managed in small, intimategroups devoted to specific subprojects that are integrated intothe overall project in a looser networked fashion. people flowfrom one small group to another over time. the entire teammakes up a social network consisting of smaller, more tightlycoupled social networks. in short, this scenario envisagesthe application of modern communications networks andtools and the insights of modern social network theory totransform the management of army r&d projects.in appendix e the committee provides details for marketdriven management of such projects. the nextgenerationr&d model is a new and different approach similar to thatof networked organizations like ebay, intel, and ge. it isbased on principles that have worked for many successfulnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creating value from network science: scope of the opportunity41companies that needed to get quality products and capabilities to market quickly: think big, start small, scale fast,and deliver value. it is this type of nextgeneration modelthat can deliver the knowledge, research, and technology thatwill enable our warfighters to win the nationõs wars.the marketdriven approach requires strong commitmentfrom the army and dod senior leadership, and from theirpartners in industry and academia, to make it work. it will beled by a small team of the best and brightest armyòwarfighting r&d specialistsó committed for a period of 3or 4 years, highly motivated, and working closely withindustry and academia.the army has an opportunity for leadership in developing and implementing this new model. at dod, nco mustbe a joint effort, and so should be the new r&d modelñafter it has been proved in the army. by moving ahead aggressively to implement this model, the army can establishitself as the lead for dod and seize the opportunity to contribute significantly to the improvement of joint networkcentric warfighting capability.the statement of task requests the committee to òidentifyspecific research issues and theoretical, experimental, andpractical challenges to advance the field of network science.óbriefly stated, three such issues were discussed in chapters3ð6:¥current military concepts of ònetcentricityó are basedon applications of computer and information technology that are far removed from likely results of basicresearch in network science.¥current funding policies and priorities are unlikely toprovide adequate fundamental knowledge about largecomplex networks that will advance networkcentricoperations.¥a basis for a network science is perceived in differentways by the communities concerned with engineered,biological, and social networks at all levels of complexity.a fourth issue, and major challenge as well, will be toobtain value from the investments that the army does maketo advance network science. in the case of basic research(6.1) alone, the relevant challenges are identified in scenario1. in the case of the combined basic and applied research(6.1ð6.3) projects envisaged in scenario 2, the challengesdepend sensitively on the topics of the research.to illustrate the scope and scale of nextgeneration r&dprojects with marketdriven management, three projects involving the sociological, engineering, and biological areasof network applications were developed by members of thecommittee as sample projects for scenario 2 and are contained in appendix e. these projects were selected in diverse areas to underline the committeeõs belief that researchwill be equally necessary in all areas to advance networkscience.the sample project in the social sciences domain outlinesa study of local decision making in combat environments. ituses advanced information technology of the sort envisagedfor nco, with the goal of improving the quality of localdecisions.the second project in the engineering domain proposesthe design, construction, and testing of a largearea (roughlythe size and complexity of a small city) monitoring networkfor both people and vehicles.the third describes the construction and testing of a prototype biological surveillance system to detect emerging biological threats. such a system could also analyze the resultsof the surveillance and direct appropriate responses.while all of the sample projects have the potential to advance network science, they should not be construed as aòshopping list,ó and the committee does not recommend theirimplementation without careful comparison of their costsand benefits with those of other research projects.scenario 3, creating a robust networkcentric warfare/operations capabilitythe statement of task instructs the committee to òrecommend those relevant research areas that the army should invest in to enable progress toward achieving networkcentric warfare capabilities.ó when the committee examinedthe literature on this topic, it discovered that the concept ofncw has been superseded in the literature from the dodoffice of force transformation (oft) by an expanded concept, nco, as described in a conceptual framework document published on the oft web site1 (cebrowski andgarstka, 1998; garstka and alberts, 2004). when membersinterviewed representatives from the army and dod, theyfound that opinions on ncw and nco varied widely withregard to both nomenclature and substance. moreover, theliterature on the topic is dynamic, with many new reportsand publications. since this report is intended as an archivaldocument, the committee elected to utilize the publishedconceptual framework description version 2.0 (garstka andalberts, 2004) as point of reference.scenario 3 adopts a national point of view. its purpose isto ask what the nation must do if the strategic vision of ncois to be implemented. the committee was not tasked to resolve the issues raised in this scenario, but considers theirresolution of paramount national urgency.the committee has stressed that the knowledge of networks that we possess today is not adequate to allow thedesign of predictable, secure, robust global networks. members heard presentations and read reports of how the òtransformationó to a future force capable of nco is not likely tobe achieved by traditional approaches to creating technology. the committee came to recognize that the policies and1for further information, see http://www.oft.osd.mil. accessed onaugust 19, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42network sciencepractices currently used to procure these capabilities do nottake into consideration the uncertainties inherent in the current state of understanding the design and implementation ofcomplex networks. the purpose of this brief scenario, then,is to emphasize that the task of designing, testing and operating the envisaged nco capabilities is of an exceedinglyhigh order of complexity and should be approached as seriously as the manhattan project or nasaõs race to the moon.the committee would be remiss in its responsibilities if itfailed to note the essential urgency and profound difficultyof this task. the chances of delivering nco capabilities in atimely and affordable way would be greatly increased by afocused national initiative, combining the initiatives of allservices under central leadership, to respond successfully tothe diverse challenges of future warfare. transforming theu.s. military from its current state to that envisaged for ncoas described in the published conceptual framework version2.0 is the probably the most complex undertaking in the history of the u.s. government (garstka and alberts, 2004). itis comparable to the successful pursuit of world war ii andthe cold war with the soviet union. it is a longterm, difficult, costly, and risky undertaking.start by thinking about the task of designing the mostcomplex weapons system built to dateñsay, a large aircraftcarrier. add to this the complications in the physical domainassociated with, for example, secure, reliable wireless communications via satellite to soldiers on a mobile battlefield.in the information domain, add the hardware and softwarechallenges associated with storage, search, and retrieval oforders of magnitude more data in real time, as well as thechallenges associated with ensuring the security and reliability of these data. in the cognitive domain, add the issuesassociated with a junior officer at a local (mobile) workstation processing information from sources at multiple levelsin all military services. in the social domain, add the complications of orchestrating the decisionmaking process in thisinformationrich, realtime environment and the issues associated with tactics and training to use all this informationprocessing capability. the committee regards it as highlyunlikely that existing methods of designing and procuringweapons systems will be adequate to accomplish this monumental task. current experience in the services themselvessupports this point of view (brewin, 2005). further, the committee regards the task of converting the current state of theu.s. military to the vision articulated for nco as vastly morechallenging than seems to be appreciated.not only is the task dauntingly complex, the knowledgenecessary to accomplish it does not even exist. in similarcasesñthe manhattan project and the initial days of nasacome to mindña focused, longterm national initiative wasrequired, and it seems likely that something similar will berequired in this case also. thus, scenario 3 is one in whichthe united states undertakes a focused national initiative,comparable in scope to the manhattan project, to design anddeploy nco capabilities as described in the conceptualframework document 2.0 in all the military services duringthe coming decade.implication of the scenariosthe main implication of the three scenarios is that thereare multiple ways in which the army can create value bysupporting the creation of a science of networks. which wayit selects will depend on circumstances that the committeecannot know.finding 71.the army can create value in many different ways from a significant investment in the emergingfield of network science.findings from scenario 1in chapter 5 the committee discussed the rudimentarycontents of network science. as is often the case, the empirical technology and engineering of large physical networksprecede the scientific underpinnings of the technology. thisis common throughout history. humans were making toolsand weapons from metals thousands of years before the science of metallurgy was developed. the situation is subtlydifferent for biological and social networks, where the science is devoted to comprehending how these networks function. tinkering with their natural engineering lies mostly inthe future. the òtechnologyó is well developed, but by nature rather than man. in all three casesñphysical, biological,and social networksñthe technology far outpaces the scientific understanding of what the technology hath wrought.finding 72.because network science is at an early stageof its development, a broad portfolio of basic and appliedresearch is expected to create greater value than a morefocused portfolio.finding 73.if there is only a limited amount of funding(e.g., $10 million per year or less), a broad portfolio ofbasic research is the most promising approach to creating value for the army.the main values created by a basic research investmentinclude access to thought leaders (pis) in the university community, training students through their work on universityprojects, the development of a community that the army canaccess to address its practical problems, and efficient use ofresearch dollars to impact multiple areas of application.pursuing research in new ways also can generate value.in order to tackle complex problems, coordination is required. yet individual insights gained by creative people areusually at the root of the solution of such problems. howdoes the army get both at the same time? network researchsuggests that small coherent groups associated with exceptional talents can be collected into loosely coupled networksnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creating value from network science: scope of the opportunity43that interact productively without sacrificing the creativepotential of individual contributors (malone, 2004; watts,2003). creating, testing, and refining such an approach tonetwork science by the army would have farreaching consequences in other domains.the armyõs network research portfolio must differ fromthe portfolios of nsf, nih, and doe (department of energy). this can be done if the army focuses on the networkper se, rather than on specific applications. perhaps moreimportant, the army can explore new network approaches tocomplex problems along the lines indicated above. this notion is distinctly different from that of the centers of researchcurrently pursued by the army and nsf, among others. anessential element of the network approach, not normallypresent in centers, is the coherent, coordinated actions of adiverse group of different domain experts to address a precisely formulated, complex problem. this is not just the support of interdisciplinary and collaborative research. it further requires intensely focused attention on a prespecifiedproblem by diverse groups of domain experts working inconcert. suitable reference models include product development in large firms or the manhattan project rather than theefforts that take place at a typical army lab, nsf center, ordoe user facility.the conceptual framework for nco consists of interacting networks in four distinct technology domains: physical,information, cognitive, and social (garstka and alberts,2004). the army is currently investing primarily, if not exclusively, in r&d associated with a network communications infrastructure and a limited portfolio of applicationsbuilt upon a network communications infrastructure.2,3,4 inother words, the current army r&d portfolio spans only two(the physical and the information domains) of the fourdomains essential to the implementation of nco.whether investments in physical and information infrastructure improve fighting effectiveness, however, dependson what warfighters do with the information available fromthe infrastructure. their decisions and actions lie in the cognitive and social domains, which remain unexplored in thecurrent dod r&d portfolio. the good news is that existingknowledge in these domains could benefit applications intheir respective domains of nco. the bad news is thatknowledge in these areas is rudimentary and generic. theinsights are qualitative in nature and often not useful formaking precise predictions (malone, 2004; watts, 2004).5serious investment in both basic and applied research is required before the associated models and concepts can beapplied in a predictive way for the development of ncocapabilities for the army.finding 74.since the shift to networkcentric operations raises many social and behavioral issues, thearmyõs network science portfolio should stress developing basic knowledge that could enable applications ofnetwork thinking to address the social and cognitivedomains.because the state of network science is so primitive, thecentral problems of the field are neither well recognized norprecisely posed. at this stage of its evolution, network science is basic research in the most profound sense: the fundamental questions are still being framed (watts, 2003). previous experience in other disciplines (e.g., einsteinõscontributions to relativity and quantum theory) suggests thatthis is a playing field best suited for talent of the highestorder, not individuals doing nextstep research. for the armyto create value from investments in this area, it must recruitand retain exceptional talent, a difficult task.finding 75.the army must find a way to attract thebest researchers in network science. this will requirestability of funding, the opportunity to interact with adiversity of interesting colleagues, and flexibility to followthe funded research wherever it leads.finding 76.to attract the best researchers in networkscience, the army should fund them to do work that alsohas applications in nonmilitary areas.finding 77.to attract the best researchers in networkscience, the army must avoid putting restrictions on publications and on foreign nationals.the committee is well aware that these three findings mayappear to be as uncontentious as òmotherhood and apple pie.ósadly, this is not the case. in todayõs global economy, outstanding technical talent has extensive international opportunities. many of the worldõs most talented people no longerwish to come to the united states. many talented peoplehere do not wish to work for the u.s. military. plentiful opportunities exist for both elsewhere. to create value frombasic network research, the army must attract top talent. thecommittee believes that for the army to have a good chanceof success in this endeavor, it must heed the three findings.2s.w. boutelle, chief information officer, department of the army, òtheway ahead,ó briefing to the committee on february 1, 2005.3j. garstka, assistant director, concepts and operations, osd office offorce transformation, òfighting in the networked force: insights from network centric operations case studies,ó briefing to the committee on april14, 2005.4j. gowens and a. swami, army research lab, òarmy research in network science,ó briefing to the committee on february 1, 2005.5c.f. sabel, professor of law and social science, columbia law school,òtheory of a realtime revolution,ó briefing to the 19th egos colloquium,copenhagen, july 2003.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44network sciencefindings from scenarios 2 and 3valuing technology and managing risks to extract economic value became hot topics in the business literature during the past decade (boer, 1999; branscomb and auerswald,2001; chesbrough, 2003; cooper et al., 2001). it is widelyrecognized in industry that product development is an inherently nonlinear process, full of feedback loops and surprises(branscomb and auerswald, 2001; reinertsen, 1997). indeed, these same notions apply to dod basic research (nrc,2005). thus, it is plausible to apply the notions developed inthe business context to the management of research in network science by the army.finding 78.the army can learn about r&d bestmanagement practices from the business sector.r&d managers in commercial organizations couple theirbasic research activities with known or anticipated applications. this provides focus and enables a much more rapidtime to market (branscomb and auerswald, 2001; chesbrough, 2003; cooper et al., 2001). the committee believesthat the army could benefit from studying such practicesand adapting analogous ones.finding 79.additional value can be extracted from thearmyõs 6.1 basic research investments in network scienceby coupling them to downstream applied research and totechnology development efforts.finding 710.the results of basic research in networkscience are more likely to be rapidly put to use to meetarmy challenges if the army also devotes significantresources to related applied research.these findings are the basis for scenario 2 in appendixe, where the committee describes a management process andthree sample research projects in the social, engineering, andbiological spheres. all are based on and illustrative of current models and tools used for r&d management in the business sector, including software projects (poppendieck andpoppendieck, 2003). the material presented in scenario 2 inappendix e describes how the army might usefully experiment with new r&d management practices and new waysof integrating its 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 r&d programs. the threesample projects developed in the scenario also serve to illustrate the truths of findings 79 and 710.although they can improve the performance of the frontend r&d of the armyõs network design processes, commercial r&d best management practices must be supplementedby more fundamental change if dod is to acquire nco capabilities. r&d is only one step in a complete value chain.the military procurement value chain is more complexthan the chains in commercial firms. cases in which largecommercial firmsõ best practices for r&d management areknown to work well are those in which (1) the science ismature and (2) the market requirements can be determinedwith fair accuracy. neither is true in the case of applying theoutputs of network science to the procurement of an ncocapability for the army. commercial best practices are mostlikely to succeed when they are applied to the sourcing ofinformation infrastructure. even here, however, prospects forsuccess are not certain.there is no òscienceó at this time that can predict the performance of wireless and wireline communications infrastructures integrated into the architecture for the global information grid (gig). science can predict the performanceof individual components (e.g., of radios or computers) butnot that of the overall system of networks. at best, the applications that warfighters are likely to develop for such a system are almost certain to be surprises conceived and testedin the field before they are embedded into tactics anddoctrine.the current state of sociological models is too rudimentary for them to be applied reliably to simulate uses of sucha network a priori. even the use of simulation to determinethe òmarketó requirements for the physical network is risky,because it lies beyond the scope of current knowledge.dod faces a major challenge as it tries to determine howto design a set of interlocking networks of the complexityand scope envisaged for nco. the committee captured itsconcerns about the total endtoend sourcing process in thefollowing finding:finding 711.the design, testing, and deployment of theoverlapping and interacting physical, information, cognitive, and social networks envisioned for networkcentric operations concepts are currently beyond thearmyõs capability. they require a concerted nationaleffort to be achieved in a timely and affordable fashion.this finding motivated a third scenario, for creating a òrobust networkcentric warfare/operations capability.ó it is aresponse to the committeeõs hypothesis that the design andprocurement of large, complex networks, such as those envisaged for implementing nco, cannot be done in an affordable fashion using the current practices.the united states has faced similar challenges in thepastñfor example, the design of nuclear weapons in the1940s (lanl, 1986). responding effectively to such challenges required a focused, coherent, and sustained nationaleffort involving government, industry, and academic partners and the investment of hundreds of millions of dollarsannually over a decade or more.moreover, recent insights on network organizations suggest that such a national effort must be organized and managed rather differently than a large engineering project(malone, 2004). scenario 3 is explored in appendix e, butonly in broad outline, because the committee was not constinetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.creating value from network science: scope of the opportunity45tuted to provide expert advice on this topic. current knowledge on the organizational implications of network researchleads the committee to suggest that the scenario illustratesthe direction in which the military should head to obtain thebiggest and most certain payoff from investments in networkscience (malone, 2004).6referencesamram, m., and n. kulatilaka. 1999. real options: managing strategicinvestment in an uncertain world. boston, mass.: harvard businessschool press.boer, f.p. 1999. the valuation of technology: business and financial issues in r&d. hoboken, n.j.: wiley.boer, f.p. 2002. the real options solution: finding total value in a highrisk world. hoboken, n.j.: wiley.branscomb, l.m., and p.e. auerswald. 2001. taking technical risks: howinnovators, managers, and investors manage risk in hightech innovations. cambridge, mass.: mit press.brewin, r. 2005. dod mulls network coordination. available at http://www.fcw.com/article88939052305print/. accessed may 31, 2005.cebrowski, a., and j. garstka. 1998. network centric warfare. proceedingsof the united states naval institute 24: 28ð35.chesbrough, h. 2003. open innovation: the new imperative for creating6c.f. sabel, professor of law and social science, columbia law school,òtheory of a realtime revolution,ó briefing to the 19th egos colloquium,copenhagen, july 2003.and profiting from technology. boston, mass.: harvard businessschool press.cooper, r.g., s.j. edgett, and e.j. kleinschmidt. 2001. portfolio management for new products, 2nd edition. reading, mass.: perseus books.duke, c.b. 2004. creating economic value from research knowledge. industrial physicist 10(4): 29ð31.garstka, j., and d. alberts. 2004. network centric operations: conceptualframework version 2.0. vienna, va.: evidencebased research, inc.los alamos national laboratory (lanl). 1986. los alamos 1943ð1945:the beginning of an era. lasl7978 reprint.malone, t.w. 2004. network the future of work: how the new order ofbusiness will shape your organization, your management style andyour life. cambridge, mass.: harvard business school press.mun, j. 2002. real options analysis: tools and techniques for valuingstrategic investments and decisions. hoboken, n.j.: wiley.national research council (nrc). 2005. assessment of department ofdefense basic research. washington, d.c.: the national academiespress.poppendieck, m., and t. poppendieck. 2003. lean software development:an agile toolkit. boston, mass.: addison wesley.reinertsen, d.g. 1997. managing the design factory: a product developerõs toolkit. new york, n.y.: free press.watts, d.j. 2003. six degrees: the science of a connected age. new york,n.y.: w.w. norton.watts, d.j. 2004. the ònewó science of networks. annual review of sociology 30(1): 243ð270.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.468conclusions and recommendationsin this chapter the committee combines its findings intoconclusions and offers recommendations. first, it collectsthe factual findings presented in chapters 27 into threeoverarching conclusions concerning the importance of networks and the current state of knowledge about them. next,it articulates specific conclusions that are directly responsive to items 1 through 3 of the statement of task. finally, inresponse to item 4, the committee provides its recommendations, including for research initiatives. box 81 summarizeshow the report responds to the statement of task.overarching conclusionsconclusion 1.networks are pervasive in all aspects oflife: biological, physical, and social. they are indispensable to the workings of a global economy and to thedefense of the united states against both conventionalmilitary threats and the threat of terrorism.conclusion 1 was developed in chapters 2 and 3 and summarized in tables 21, 22, and 31 and the discussions surrounding them. it sets the stage for the committeeõs inquiryinto the state of knowledge about these networks.conclusion 2.fundamental knowledge about the prediction of the properties of complex networks is primitive.given the pervasiveness and vital importance of networks, one might assume that a lot is known about them. asdocumented in chapters 5 and 6, however, this is not thecase. although the technology for constructing and operating engineered physical networks is sophisticated, criticalquestions about their robustness, stability, scaling, and performance cannot be answered with confidence without extensive simulation and testing. for large global networks,even simulations are often inadequate. the design and operation of network components (such things as computers,routers, or radios) are based on fundamental knowledgegleaned from physics, chemistry, and materials science.however, there is no comparable fundamental knowledgethat allows the a priori prediction of the properties of complex assemblies of these components into networks. indeed,such networks are expected to exhibit emergent behaviorsñthat is, behaviors that cannot be predicted or anticipated fromthe known behaviors of their components. in the case of social and biological networks, even the properties of the components are poorly known. a huge gap exists between thedemand for knowledge about the networks on which ourlives depend and the availability of that knowledge.the committee learned that developing predictive models of the behavior of large, complex networks is difficult.there are relatively few rigorous results to describe the scaling of their behaviors with increasing size. surprisingly, thisis true for common engineered networks like the internet aswell as for social and biological networks.simulation rather than analysis is the research tool ofchoice. in the case of social networks, even simulation isvastly complicated by the diversity and complexity of theagents that are the nodes of the networksñhumans or groupsof humans òin the wild.ó which of their many properties arerelevant for developing mathematical models of a particularphenomenon? existing models of social networks, moreover,represent highly simplified situations and not necessarilyones that are relevant to the army or networkcentricwarfare.finally, the notion of using network models in biology isrelatively new. controversy swirls around their utility, indeed around that of systems biology itself. in spite of a burgeoning literature on the structure of simple networks, theadvancement of the field to allow relating basic scientificresults to applications of societal and military interest stilllies mostly in the future.conclusion 3.current funding policies and priorities areunlikely to provide adequate fundamental knowledgeabout large complex networks.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations47fundamental knowledge is created and stockpiled in disciplinary environments, mostly at universities, and then usedas required by (vertically integrated) industries to providethe products and services required by customers, includingthe military. this fundamental knowledge is different in kindfrom empirical knowledge gleaned during the developmentof technology and products. you get what you measure. suppliers of fundamental knowledge measure publications, presentations, students supervised, awards received, and othermetrics associated with individual investigators. the knowledge accumulates along traditional disciplinary lines becausethis is where the rewards are found. large team activities arebox 81summary of responses to the statement of taskthe assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics, and technology) has requested the national research council (nrc) board on armyscience and technology (bast) conduct a study to define the field of network science. the nrc will:1.determine whether initiation of a new field of investigation called network science would be appropriate to advance knowledge of complexsystems and processes that exhibit network behaviors. if yes, how should it be defined?a working definition of network science is the study of network representations of physical, biological, and social phenomenaleading to predictive models of these phenomena. initiation of a field of network science would be appropriate to provide a bodyof rigorous results that would improve the predictability of the engineering design of complex networks and also speed up basicresearch in a variety of applications areas (chapter 4).2.identify the fields that should comprise network science. what are the key research challenges necessary to enable progress in network science?general consensus exists among practitioners of network research in diverse application areas on topics that constitute network science (chapter 5). there are seven major research challenges (chapter 6).3.identify specific research issues and the theoretical, experimental, and practical challenges to advance the field of network science. consider suchthings as facilities and equipment that might be needed. determine investment priority, time frame for realization, and degree of commercialinterest.current military concepts of ònetcentricityó are based on applications of computer and information technology that are farremoved from likely results of basic research in network science. table 81 lists current areas of network research of interest to thearmy, including priority, time frames, and commercial interest (chapter 3).current funding policies and priorities are unlikely to provide adequate fundamental knowledge about large complex networksthat will advance networkcentric operations. besides the information domain, there are social, cognitive, and physical technology domains in the current conceptual framework for networkcentric operations; there is no òbiologicaló domain (chapters 2ð4).a basis for network science is perceived in different ways by the communities concerned with engineered, biological, andsocial networks at all levels of complexity. basic research efforts are totally incoherent (chapters 5 and 6).options for obtaining value from investments in network science include scenarios ranging from building a base of basicresearch, to leveraging business practices for marketdriven r&d in specific areas of network applications, to creating a robustcapability for networkcentric operations (chapter 7).4.given limited resources (and likely investments of others), recommend those relevant research areas that the army should invest in to enableprogress toward achieving networkcentric warfare capabilities.recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2, and 3 provide the army with an actionable menu of alternatives that span the opportunities accessible to it. by selecting and implementing appropriate items from this menu, the army can develop a robust networkscience to enable the desired progress (chapter 8).note: the statement of task is in lightface; the summary of responses is in boldface.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48network sciencerelatively rare (except in medicine and largescale physicsexperiments) and are mostly left to the consumers of thefundamental knowledge, who must supplement the fundamental knowledge generously with empirical knowledge toconvert it into the goods and services desired by the payingcustomer.this scheme worked marvelously for more than a half acentury, when the united states dominated the world andindustries were vertically integrated. with the onset of theglobal economy in the 1990s, however, the situation beganto change dramatically, for a number of reasons. first,knowledge, investment capital, technology, and technicallabor are becoming globally available commodities. second,economic activity, including r&d, is becoming global inscale. third, these two trends are making the networks onwhich we depend ever larger and more complex and theirsusceptibility to disruption ever greater.this traditional scheme does not work well for generatingknowledge about global networks, because focused, coordinated efforts are needed. thus, there is a huge differencebetween the social and financial arrangements needed to gainfundamental knowledge about large, complex networks in aglobal environment and the arrangements that worked sowell to provide such knowledge for the design and production of smaller, less complex entities in a national environment. any successful effort to create the knowledge necessary to secure robust, reliable scalable global networks mustcome to grips with this reality.overall, the committee is led to a view of networks aspervasive in and vital to modern society, yet understood onlyas well as the solar system was understood in ptolemyõs time.the military has made networks the centerpiece of its transformation effort without a methodology to design networksin the physical and information domains in a predictive wayfor networkcentric operations (nco). further, according tothe dod office of force transformation, research in thecognitive and social domains has yet to yield advances comparable to the technological developments in the information domain. at the same time, current efforts by academiato describe networks are fragmented and disjointed. relatively little of the current research on networks promises tocreate a science of networks that will generate knowledgeadequate to meet the demand.in short, there is a massive disconnect between the importance of networks in modern society and military affairs onthe one hand and, on the other, the support of coherent r&dactivities that would raise current network technologies andcapabilities to the next level. the army alone cannot transform this situation, but it can make a beginning.specific conclusionsitems 1 and 2 in the statement of task inquire into theappropriateness of a field of investigation called networkscience and its definition, content, and the research challenges that would characterize it. elements of a field of network science have begun to emerge in different disciplinesspanning engineering, biological, and social networks. theemerging field is concerned with the development and analysis of network representations to create predictive models ofobserved physical, biological, and social phenomena.the remarkable diversity and pervasiveness of networkideas renders the study of network science a highly leveraged topic for both civilian and military investment. the provisional consensus around its core content clearly definesthe notion of network science. by making an investment innetwork science, the army could forge a single approach toa diverse collection of applications.conclusion 4.network science is an emerging field ofinvestigation whose support will address importantsocietal problems, including the armyõs pursuit ofnetworkcentric operations capabilities.although the boundaries of network science are fuzzy,there is broad agreement on key topics that should be included within the field, the types of tools that must be developed, and the research challenges that should be investigated.these were documented in chapters 3 and 4.conclusion 5.there is a consensus among the practitioners of research on networks for physical, biological,social, and information applications on the topics thatmake up network science.responses to its questionnaire greatly assisted the committee in determining òthe key research challenges to enableprogress in network science.ó these responses establish thatthere is a fair degree of consensus on these challenges acrosspractitioners in diverse applications areas.conclusion 6.there are seven major research challengesthe surmounting of which will enable progress in network science:¥dynamics, spatial location, and information propagation in networks. better understanding of therelationship between the architecture of a networkand its function is needed.¥modeling and analysis of very large networks.tools, abstractions, and approximations are neededthat allow reasoning about largescale networks, aswell as techniques for modeling networks characterized by noisy and incomplete data.¥design and synthesis of networks. techniques areneeded to design or modify a network to obtaindesired properties.¥increasing the level of rigor and mathematicalstructure. many of the respondents to the questionnaire felt that the current state of the art in networknetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations49science did not have an appropriately rigorousmathematical basis.¥abstracting common concepts across fields. thedisparate disciplines need common conceptsdefined across network science.¥better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. current data sets on largescale networks tend to be sparse, and tools for investigatingtheir structure and function are limited.¥robustness and security of networks. finally, thereis a clear need to better understand and design networked systems that are both robust to variationsin the components (including localized failures) andsecure against hostile intent.these challenges are elaborated in terms of specific research issues and their theoretical, experimental, and practical difficulties in chapter 7 and appendix e within theframework of exploring various investment scenarios. thescenarios respond to item 3 in the statement of task.although all the military services have a vision of thefuture in which engineered communications networks play afundamental role, there is no methodology for ensuring thatthese networks are scalable, reliable, robust, and secure. ofparticular importance is the ability to design networks whosebehaviors are predictable in their intended domains of applications. this also is true in the commercial sphere. creationof such a methodology is an especially pressing task becauseglobal commercial networks can also be exploited by criminal and terrorist social networks.conclusion 7.the high value attached to the efficientand failurefree operation of global engineered networksmakes their design, scaling, and operation a nationalpriority.recommendationsthe statement of task requests investment recommendations from the committee. options for these recommendations are explored in chapter 7 and appendix e. the committee documents in chapters 2 and 3 that the impact ofnetworks on society transcends their impact on military applications, although both are vital aspects of the total picture. chapters 3 and 4 explain that the current state of knowledge about networks does not support the design andoperation of complex global networks for current military,political, and economic applications. advances in networkscience are essential to developing adequate knowledge forthese applications.recommendation 1.the federal government should initiate a focused program of research and development toclose the gap between currently available knowledgeabout networks and the knowledge required to characterize and sustain the complex global networks on whichthe wellbeing of the united states has come to depend.this recommendation is buttressed by centuries of evidence that disruptive social networks (e.g., terrorists, criminals) learn to exploit evolving infrastructure networks (e.g.,communications or transportation) in ways that the creatorsof these networks did not anticipate. the global war on terrorism, which is a main driver of military transformation, isonly one recent manifestation of this general pattern. society has the same need in other areas, such as control of criminal activities perpetrated using the global airline and information infrastructures. addressing problems resulting fromthe interaction of social and engineered networks is an example of a compelling national issue that transcends thetransformation of the military and that is largely untouchedby current research on networks.within this broad context, recommendations 1a, 1b, and1c provide the army with three options:recommendation 1a.the army, in coordination withother federal agencies, should underwrite a broadnetwork research initiative that includes substantialresources for both military and nonmilitary applicationsthat would address military, economic, criminal, andterrorist threats.the army can lead the country in creating a base of network knowledge that can support applications for both thearmy and the country at large. maximum impact could beobtained by a coordinated effort across a variety of federalagencies, including the dod and the department of homeland security, to create a focused national program of network research that would develop applications to supportnot only nco but also countermeasures against internationalterrorist and criminal threats.alternatively, if the army is restricted to working justwith the dod, it should initiate a focused program to createan achievable vision of nco capabilities across all theservices.recommendation 1b.if the army wants to exploit fullyapplications in the information domain for militaryoperations in a reasonable time frame and at an affordable cost, it should champion the initiation of a highpriority, focused dod effort to create a realizable visionof the associated capabilities and to lay out a trajectoryfor its realization.finally, if the army elects to apply the insight from thecommittee primarily to its own operations, it can still provide leadership in network science research.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50network sciencerecommendation 1c.the army should support anaggressive program of both basic and applied researchto improve its nco capabilities.specific areas of research of interest to the army areshown in table 81. this table expresses the committeeõsassessment of the relative priorities for these areas, the timeframes in which one might reasonably expect them to beconsummated as actionable technology investment options,and the degree of commercial interest in exploiting promising options. specific research problems and sample projectsare given in appendix e. the committee notes that bothtrained personnel and promising research problems exist inmany of these areas, so the army should be able to create aproductive program readily.by selecting from among recommendations 1a through1c an option that is ambitious yet achievable, the army canlead the country in creating a base of knowledge emanatingfrom network science that is adequate to support applications on which both the army and the country at large depend. regardless of which option (or options) are adopted,army initiatives in network science should be grounded inbasic research.recommendation 1d.the initiatives recommended in 1,1a, 1b, and 1c should include not only theoretical studiestable 81network research areasprioritytimecommercialfor armyresearch areakey objectiveframeinterestinvestmentmodeling, simulating, testing, and prototyping verypractical deployment tool setsmid termhighhighlarge networkscommand and control of joint/combined networkednetworked properties of connected heterogeneousmid termmediumhighforcessystemsimpact of network structure on organizationaldynamics of networked organizational behaviormid termmediumhighbehaviorsecurity and information assurance of networksproperties of networks that enhance survivalnear termhighhighrelationship of network structure to scalability andcharacteristics of robust or dominant networksmid termmediummediumreliabilitymanaging network complexityproperties of networks that promote simplicity andnear termhighhighconnectivityimproving shared situational awareness ofselfsynchronization of networksmid termmediumhighnetworked elementsenhanced networkcentric mission effectivenessindividual and organizational training designsfar termmediummediumadvanced networkbased sensor fusionimpact of control systems theorymid termhighmediumhunterprey relationshipsalgorithms and models for adversary behaviorsmid termlowhighswarming behaviorselforganizing uav/ugv; selfhealingmid termlowmediummetabolic and gene expression networkssoldier performance enhancementnear termmediummediumbut also the experimental testing of new ideas in settingssufficiently realistic to verify or disprove their use forintended applications.recommendations 1, 1a, 1b, and 1c span only part of theinvestment opportunity spaceñnamely, those segments ofthe space described in scenarios 2 and 3 in chapter 7 andappendix e. they will involve substantial changes in howthe army invests its r&d dollars and in how it plans andmanages these investments.the army also has the opportunity associated with scenario 1 in chapter 7, which involves funding a small program of basic research in network science. this investmentof relatively small amounts of army risk capital funds wouldcreate a base of knowledge and personnel from which thearmy could launch an attack on practical problems that ariseas it tries to provide nco capabilities.investments in basic (6.1) research in network sciencecan generate significant value; however, the committeewants to be crystal clear that such investments have no immediate prospects of impacting the design, testing, evaluation, or sourcing of nco capabilities. they would createadditional knowledge that builds the core content of networkscience, and they would train researchers who could also berecruited by the army for later efforts. while the knowledgegenerated would probably be less valuable than in the casenetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.conclusions and recommendations51of scenarios 2 and 3, the cost is less and implementation canbe immediate.if the army elects to exploit scenario 1, the committeeoffers the following two further recommendations:recommendation 2.the army should make a modestinvestment of at least $10 million per year to support adiverse portfolio of basic (6.1) network research thatpromises high leverage for the dollars invested and isclearly different from existing investments by otherfederal agencies like the national science foundation(nsf), the department of energy (doe), and thenational institutes of health (nih).this modest level of investment is compatible with thearmyõs current r&d portfolio. there is an adequate supplyof promising research topics and talented researchers to makethis investment productive. additionally, it can be implemented within the armyõs current r&d management workprocesses, although some enhancements along the linesnoted in chapter 7 and appendix e would improve the return on this investment.to identify the topics in basic network science researchthat would bring the most value to nco, the committee recalls that the open system architectures for computer networks consist of layers, each of which performs a specialfunction regarded as a òserviceó by the layers above. it isuseful to distinguish among the lower (physical and transport) layers of this architecture, the higher (applications) layers that are built on top of them to offer services to the people,and the cognitive and social networks that are built higherstill, on top of the servicestohumans layers.research on the lower layers of the network architectureis relatively mature. improving the services offered at theselevels is more of an engineering problem than one requiringbasic research. the most immediate payoffs from networkscience are likely to result from research associated with theupper levels of the network architecture and the social networks that are built at an even higher level upon their outputs. this is where the committee thinks that army investments are most likely to create the greatest value.an area of particular promise that has little or no currentinvestment is the social implications of nco for the organizational structure and command and control. basic researchcould provide valuable insight into how military personneluse advanced information exchange capabilities to improvecombat effectiveness. for example, one might study howtroops in combat could use these capabilities to make betterdecisions. additional basic research in the core content ofnetwork science might help to determine how the army canmost productively utilize the capabilities of its advanced information infrastructure.recommendation 3.the army should fund a basicresearch program to explore the interaction betweeninformation networks and the social networks that utilize them.the army can implement recommendations 2 and 3within the confines of its present policies and procedures.they require neither substantial replanning nor the orchestration of joint army/university/industry research projects.they create significant value and are actionable immediately.the committeeõs recommendations 1, 1a through 1d, 2,and 3 give the army an actionable menu of options that spanthe opportunity space available. by selecting and implementing appropriate items from this menu, the army can developa robust network science to òenable progress toward achieving networkcentric warfare capabilities,ó as requested inthe statement of task.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.abiographical sketches of committee members55charles b. duke (nas/nae), chair, is vice president andsenior research fellow in the innovation group of xerox corporation. he was formerly deputy director and chief scientistat the pacific northwest national laboratory. he was founding editor in chief of the journal of materials research, theofficial journal of the materials research society. for a decade he served as editor in chief of surface science and surface science letters. he has served on the governing boardsof the american institute of physics, the american physicalsociety, the materials research society, and the americanvacuum society. he has written a monograph and over 350papers on surface science, materials research, semiconductor physics, the electronic structure of molecular solids, andresearch management. he has edited three volumes on surface science and digital systems integration. he received hisph.d. in physics from princeton university following a b.s.summa cum laude with distinction in mathematics fromduke university. he is chair based on demonstrated leadership of research in electronic structures of physical and biological systems and for his expertise in the network designof distributed systems and in realworld applications of control and communication theory.john e. hopcroft (nae), vice chair, is ibm professor ofengineering and applied mathematics at cornell university. he received his b.s. from seattle university and hism.s. and ph.d. from stanford university, all in electricalengineering. dr. hopcroft is a recipient of the a.m. turingaward of the association of computing machinery andserves on the national research councilõs board on mathematical sciences and their applications. his research centers on the theoretical aspects of computing, especially theanalysis of algorithms, automata theory, and graph algorithms. he has expertise in computer science andengineering.adam p. arkin is assistant professor of bioengineering andchemistry at the university of california at berkeley andfaculty scientist in physical biosciences at the e.o. lawrenceberkeley national laboratory. he is also an assistant investigator at the howard hughes medical institute. his laboratory develops and applies mathematical theory and computational and experimental approaches to the analysis ofcellular function. he was recognized as one of the most innovative young scientists by the mit technology reviewand is a member of the national academiesõ committee onthe frontiers at the interface between computing and biology. dr. arkin received his b.a. from carleton college andhis ph.d. from the massachusetts institute of technology.he has expertise in quantitative biology and the modeling ofcellular networks.robert e. armstrong is a senior research professor in thecenter for technology and national security policy at thenational defense university. dr. armstrong also serves as amember of the advisory council for the agronomy department at purdue university. he is a colonel in the u.s. armyreserve. he received his b.a. from wabash college, hism.a. in experimental psychology from oxford university,and an m.s. (biology) and a ph.d. (plant breeding and genetics) from purdue university. he has expertise in biodefense applications for networks.albert l. barab⁄si is director of the center for complexnetworks research at the university of notre dame. he isalso emil t. hofman professor of physics at notre dameand has previous research experience at the ibm t.j. watsonresearch center. dr. barab⁄si has published extensively oncomplex systems and networks in books, magazines, andjournals. he is a member of the hungarian academy of sciences. dr. barab⁄si received his m.s. from eotvos loranduniversity in budapest and his ph.d. in physics from bostonuniversity. he is author of the book linked: the new science of networks and has published the article ònetworkbiology: understanding the cellõs functional organization.óhis expertise is in biological and physical networks.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56appendix aronald j. brachman is the director of the informationprocessing technology office at the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa). he has previous experience at at&t labs, where he served as the vice president ofcommunication service research as well as director of thesoftware and systems research center. dr. brachman currently serves as the president of the american associationfor artificial intelligence and is a fellow of the associationfor computing machinery. he received his b.s.e. in electrical engineering from princeton university and his s.m. andph.d. in applied mathematics from harvard university. hehas expertise in network applications research.norval l. broome is a consultant for the mitre corporation. he was director of san diego operations and department head of naval communications systems for mitreand is a retired engineering duty officer in the u.s. navy.dr. broomeõs research interests include softwarederivedmultimode, multifunction radios for highdatarate tacticalcommunications. he received his b.s.e.e. and m.s.e.e.from purdue university and the ph.d.e.e. from the california institute of technology. he has published in journals ofthe institute of electrical and electronics engineers (ieee),including those of the antennas and propagation society andthe communications society. his expertise lies in command,control, communications, computers, and intelligence (c4i)systems and network applications.stan davis is writer and consultant on business strategy,organization, and management. he spent 20 years on university faculties, mainly at the harvard business school, andwas a senior research fellow at the cap gemini ernst &young center for business innovation. dr. davis is authorof 13 books, including future perfect, blur, and itõs alive!the convergence of biology, information and business. hehas a ph.d. in social science from washington university inst. louis and has expertise in and knowledge of social andbusiness network applications.richard a. de millo is the john p. imlay, jr., dean of computing in the college of computing at the georgia instituteof technology. before accepting his position at georgiatech he was the chief technology officer for hewlettpackard.dr. demilloõs distinguished technology career spans business, government, and academia, including important positions at the national science foundation (nsf), telcordiatechnologies, and purdue university. he received a ph.d.in information and computer science from georgia tech anda b.s. in mathematics from the college of st. thomas. hisexpertise is in computer science and engineering.william j. hilsman is a retired army lieutenant generaland a consultant to the institute for defense analyses. he isthe chief executive officer of dti international. before that,he was the ceo and chairman of the board of interdigitalcommunications corporation, which pioneered the development of digital wireless networks. as director of the defense communications agency, general hilsman managedthe national communications system for the dod worldwide c3 system. he also was commanding general of thearmy communicationsðelectronics research and development command. he is a graduate of the u.s. military academy and received his m.s. in electrical engineering fromnortheastern university. he has expertise in military applications and communications.will e. leland is chief scientist in the network systemsresearch laboratory of the telcordia corporation. as research scientist for bellcore, dr. leland uncovered fundamental characteristics of network analysis and design basedon the mathematical concept of selfsimilarity. he has published extensively on distributed network performance andis the recipient of the baker and bennett prizes from theieee. he has served as manager of and technical adviser forthe telcordia network management system program for thearmyõs future combat systems and is currently involvedwith telcordiaõs planning and research for the air forceõstransformational communications system. dr. leland received a b.s. in both mathematics and physics from themassachusetts institute of technology (mit) and m.s. andph.d. degrees in computer sciences from the university ofwisconsin. he has expertise in communications networksand knowledge of research in commercial telecommunications networking and military ad hoc wireless networking.thomas w. malone is the patrick j. mcgovern professorof management at the mit sloan school of management.he is also the founder and director of the mit center forcoordination science. dr. malone has published four books,most recently network the future of work, and over 75 research papers; he also holds 11 patents. prior to his work atmit, he was a research scientist at the palo alto researchcenter of xerox. he received a b.a. in mathematicalsciences from rice university, an m.s. in engineeringeconomic systems from stanford university, and an m.a.and ph.d. in psychology from stanford university. hisexpertise is in human networks, coordination theory, and theuse of information technology in organizations.richard m. murray is the chair of the engineering andapplied science division at the california institute of technology. his current research is in the area of dynamics andcontrol of mechanical, fluid, materials, and information systems, with applications in aerospace vehicles, robotics,turbomachinery, and thinfilm processing. he received a b.s.in electrical engineering from the california institute oftechnology and an m.s. and a ph.d. in electrical engineering and computer science, both from the university of california at berkeley. he is an ieee fellow and a member ofthe air force scientific advisory board. he has publishednetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a57work in several journals, including the paper òcontrol in aninformation rich world: report of the panel on future directions in control, dynamics, and systems.ó he has expertisein engineering and network controls.jack pellicci is the group vice president of business development for oracle corporationõs public sector group. heretired from the u.s. army as a brigadier general with 30years of experience as an infantry officer, including serviceas the commanding general of the personnel informationsystems command, deputy director of training for the u.s.army, and brigade commander in the 7th infantry division.he is a graduate of the u.s. army command and generalstaff college, the army war college, and the senior executive seminar in national and international affairs. generalpellicci received a b.s. degree in engineering from the u.s.military academy at west point and an m.s.m.e. from thegeorgia institute of technology. his expertise is in militaryoperations and information system development.pamela a. silver is professor of systems biology at harvardmedical school and a member of the department of cancerbiology at the danafarber cancer institute. she has developed novel genetic and cell biological approaches to studythe movement of macromolecules in eukaryotic cells, first asa faculty member at princeton university and now atharvard. dr. silver received a ph.d. in molecular biologyfrom the university of california and was a postdoctoral fellow at harvard university. she is an expert in the emergingfield of synthetic biology, with a published paper, òthe potential for synthetic biology.ópaul k. van riper is a retired lieutenant general in the u.s.marine corps. he continues to participate in defense andsecurityrelated seminars and lectures frequently at the national defense university and military educational institutions. general van riper consults parttime for darpa andhas participated in numerous war games and experimentsrelated to networkcentric warfare. he has also served on thearmy science board and the national research councilõsnaval studies board. he received a b.a. from californiastate college, in pennsylvania, and is a graduate of the marine corps amphibious warfare school, the u.s. army airborne and ranger schools, the u.s. navy college of command and staff, and the u.s. army war college. he hasexpertise in military applications for networks.duncan j. watts is an associate professor in the department of sociology at columbia university and was postdoctoral fellow at the santa fe institute and the sloan schoolof management at the massachusetts institute of technology. his research and teaching focus on mathematical andcomputational modeling of complex networks as applied toproblems in social network theory, contagion, computation,and the theory of the organization. dr. watts is the author ofsmall worlds: the dynamics of networks between orderand randomness; six degrees: the science of a connectedage; and more than 20 peerreviewed articles, includingòthe ônewõ science of networks.ó he received a b.s. inphysics from the university of new south wales, australia,and a ph.d. in theoretical and applied mechanics fromcornell university. dr. watts has expertise in sociologicalnetworks.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58bcommittee meetings and other activitiesmeetingsfirst committee meeting, november 15ð16, 2004,washington, d.c.bast network science overviewjohn parmentola, director, research and laboratorymanagement, office of the deputy assistantsecretary of the army (research and technology)scope and dimensions of network sciencecharles duke, vice president, xerox innovation group,wilson center for research and technologydimensions of network scienceronald brachman, director, information processingtechnology office, defense advanced researchprojects agencyjoshua epstein, senior fellow, the brookings institutioncoordination science as part of network sciencethomas malone, director and professor, center forcoordination science, massachusetts institute oftechnologynetwork science and networkcentric operations: anindustry perspectivejack pellicci, group vice president, oracle public sectornetworks are ubiquitousjohn hopcroft, jett ibm professor, cornell universitynetwork science first thoughtsrichard demillo, john p. imlay, jr., dean of computing,georgia institute of technologycollective dynamics of small world networkssteven strogatz, professor, cornell universitydimensions of net science: what makes a net?will leland, chief scientist, telcordia technologiessecond committee meeting, february 1ð2, 2005,washington, d.c.army networks for netcentric operationsltg steve boutelle, chief information officer, departmentof the armynational and international views on systems biologyadam arkin, assistant professor, lawrence berkeleynational laboratorynetwork science in the new program in systems biologyat harvard universitypamela silver, professor, harvard universityarmy research in network scienceanathram swami, arl fellow, army research laboratoryapplications of network science in business and militaryorganizationsthomas malone, director, center for coordinationsciences, massachusetts institute of technologythe ònewó science of networksduncan watts, assistant professor, columbia universitythird committee meeting, april 13ð15, 2005,washington, d.c.mapping the expertise and social network of networkscience researcherskaty bırner, associate professor, indiana universitynetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b59fighting the networked force: insights from networkcentric operations case studiesjohn garstka, assistant director, office of the secretary ofdefense, office of force transformationhighperformance computing for army r&d in the biosciences and synergies with c2 networksamado cordova, rand arroyo centernetwork science and netcentric warfareltgen paul van riper, u.s. marine corps (retired)fourth meeting, may 12ð13, 2005, woods hole,massachusettswriting meetingteleconferencesfirst fullmessage draft teleconference, march 31, 2005research initiatives in network science, april 13, 2005participantsjohn doyle, california institute of technologystuart milner, university of marylandresearch initiatives in network science, april 28, 2005participantp.r. kumar, university of illinoisnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60ccontent of network science coursesappendix c offers a detailed account of the results of thesurvey the committee conducted on the core materials taughtin network science courses. to achieve its goal, the committee followed a twostep procedure. first, it searched for currently taught courses on networks, looking in all possibledepartments, from computer science and physics to the social and biological sciences. a representative list of suchcourses is provided in table c1. the committeeõs work wasfacilitated by the fact that many courses post a detailed syllabus on the web, as well as links to other courses on the sametopic. if a syllabus was not available on the web site, a copywas requested from the instructor. after inspecting the collected syllabi, it was possible to discern a set of core concepts that are shared by a wide range of courses and application areas that are often common only within a specific field.the set of concepts was then shared with a number of researchers and educators who are involved in research relatedto network science or who teach related courses. based onthe input provided by these individuals, the committee created the survey of core material in this appendix.the committee faced a significant challenge as it soughtto synthesize the diverse body of material taught in a widerange of disciplines. indeed, as discussed in chapter 2, network science is called on to address problems that not onlycut across disciplines but also represent a vast body of knowledge, from infrastructure networks, such as the power gridand the internet, to pervasive applications running over theseinfrastructure networks, such as the world wide web(www); from networks of gene and protein interactions tosocial and economic networks. the board range of these networks is illustrated in table c2.in what sense can the study of such diverse subjects examples fall under a single unifying domain? the realizationthat despite their diversity, most real networks are characterized by a small set of organizing principles helped answerthis question. for example, the widespread emergence ofscalefree networks is rooted in the role of growth and preferential attachment, mechanisms present in many real systems, from cell biology to computer science. this impliesthat a unified set of tools can be applied to characterize theproperties and behavior of a wide range of real networks.for example, tools developed by mathematicians to understand random networks or measures introduced by sociologists to explore social networks can be applied by biologiststo design new drugs for disrupting the metabolic network orby computer scientists to explore the properties of the worldwide web or the internet. these generic or universal features of real networks and tools are reflected in the coursesthat are currently taught. despite their diversity, most coursescover basic concepts that appear to be common across disciplines. the role of this appendix is to survey these commonconcepts, tools, and methods, identifying the material at thecore of network science.overall organizationeven in established fields of science there is significantroom for diversity of focus and interpretation. for example,a survey of basic courses on, say, quantum mechanics oreconomics would show that while there is broad agreementacross instructors, textbooks, and universities on a small setof topics that must be covered, there are significant variations in the examples used, the application areas covered,and special topics. the committee shows that this is eminently the case for networksciencerelated courses as well.broadly speaking, one can identify a set of core conceptsthat emerges in a wide range of courses in network science,largely independent of their discipline. these core conceptsare typically embedded into applications with different focus. applications can be grouped into three main areas. thefirst and the most dynamically evolving area, biological networks, applies network theory to subcellular (metabolic,regulatory, genetic) networks, neural networks, and ecological networks like food webs and species interactions. thesecond area, social and economic networks, encompasses awide range of topics such as social interactions, collaboranetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c61table c1representative courses on computer sciencecoursesinstitutionname of courseweb addresscorepennsylvania state universitygraphs and networks inhttp://www.phys.psu.edu/~ralbert/phys597/coursessystems biologyuniversity of michigan,network theoryhttp://wwwpersonal.umich.edu/~mejn/courses/2004/cscs535/index.htmlann arborcolumbia universitynetworks and complexityhttp://www.columbia.edu/itc/sociology/watts/w3233/in social systemscolumbia universityscaling in networkshttp://comet.columbia.edu/courses/elene9701/2001/outline.htmluniversity of californianetworks and complexityhttp://eclectic.ss.uci.edu/~drwhite/anthro179a/socialdynamics02.htmlat irvineuniversity of pennsylvanianetworked lifehttp://www.cis.upenn.edu/~mkearns/teaching/networkedlife/university of indiana atstructural data mininghttp://ella.slis.indiana.edu/~katy/l597/bloomingtonuniversity of patras (greece)networkshttp://nicomedia.math.upatras.gr/courses/mnets/indexen.htmlapplicationsuniversity of michigan,information retrievalhttp://tangra.si.umich.edu/~radev/650/and relatedann arborcoursescornell universitystructure of informationhttp://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs685/2002fa/networksmassachusetts institute ofcomplex human networkshttp://web.media.mit.edu/~tanzeem/cohn/cohn.htmtechnologyreading groupvirginia techrecommender systemshttp://people.cs.vt.edu/~ramakris/courses/cs6604rs/outline.htmlboston collegesocial network analysishttp://www.analytictech.com/essex/schedule.htmuniversity of torontosocial network analysishttp://www.chass.utoronto.ca/~wellman/courses/gradnet01.htmtions, social filtering, and economic alliances. the third application area, infrastructure and communication networks,ranges from the internet and the world wide web to powergrids, phone networks, and sensor networks.in the following sections the committee describes in somedetail the core concepts, followed by a short discussion ofthe three application areas. table c3 lists some core material that could be expected in network science courses.network structurethe elementary attributes of all networks are the nodes,which are the basic units of a system, and the links, whichare the connections between the nodes. both the nodes andthe links can widely differ in different fields. for example,the nodes might be humans or scientists in social networks;molecules, genes, or neurons in biology; routers or transformers in infrastructural networks; and web pages or research publications in information networks. similarly, thelinks might be friendships, alliances, reactions, synapses,optical and copper cables, urls, or citations. the totality ofthe nodes and the links defines a network, often representedin graphic form as a connectivity matrix, telling us whichnodes are directly connected to each other. given that thestudy of networks was traditionally part of graph theory, abranch of mathematics with long and distinguished history,most of the language that network theory uses today has itsroots in graph theory. a network map (or connectivity matrix) is typically the starting point for characterizing thestructure or topology of any network.once a network has been mapped, the first priority is tocharacterize its topological and structural features. degreeof connectivity represents the most elementary measure of anode, specifying the number of links a node has to othernodes. much can be learned about a network by inspectingthe degree distribution, which in its simplest manifestationis a histogram of the number of nodes with a given degree.other important measures include the shortest path betweentwo nodes, which plays a key role in identifying smallworldeffects; the diameter, which is the distance between the twomost distant nodes; the subgraphs and communities thatcharacterize the relationship between small subsets of nodeswithin a network; the spectral properties, which help us capture a series of local and global network characteristics; and,network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62appendix ctable c3content of a typical network sciencecoursesubjectcontentcore conceptsrealworld networkscharacterization and classifying networksand their componentsnetwork modelingnetwork interpretationflow and routingand processesaggregation and growthcommunication and coordinationbehavior: networks asperformance and scalingdynamic entitiesrobustnessrouting and congestiondisruptabilityengineering methods innetwork designnetwork sciencenetwork analysisapplications of networkinformation and communication networksciencebiological networkssocial networkscontrol and mechanical systemsindustrial applicationsmilitary applicationstable c2realworld networks appearing in coursesdiscipline/coursetype of networkinfrastructure andpower gridcommunications networksinternetpublic switched telephone networkinformation and contentworld wide webdistribution networksbroadcastsensorssearchsocial networkscollaborationcommunitiessocial filtering and recommendationseconomiclinguisticcomputing networksneural netspetri netscellular automatainteracting intelligent agentsengineering systemscontrol networksintegrated circuitsqueuing networksprocess networkstransportation networkssupply chains and manufacturingresearch networksscientific gridcollaborationsblogs and online journalsmilitary networksterrorist networksintelligence networkslogistics networksbiological networksmetabolismgene and protein interactionsbiomanufacturingregulatory and control networksecological networks and food websviruses and epidemicsfinally, the link strength or weight, which characterizes thenature of the interactions between different nodes.based on these measures, real networks may be classifiedin perhaps two or three major classes. first, there is a classknown as regular networks, or graphs, in which the degreeof all the nodes assumes the same value or only a few discrete values and the underlying network has a regular, repetitive structure. such regular graphs approximate the structure of most crystals, as well as a number of other objects,engineered and natural, from the retina of the eye to the roadsof some large cities (like new york). much attention, however, has focused on random networks, systems in which thenodes are randomly connected to each other. in such networks the degrees follows a poisson distribution. despitetheir important role in network theory, we do not know ofmajor real networks that would be fully random. finally, theavailability of largescale network maps has led to the discovery that many real networks are neither regular nor fullyrandom but, rather, scalefree. they have a heavily taileddegree distributionñthat is, there are significant (order ofmagnitude) differences in the degree of different nodes.scalefree networks describe the cell, the web, the internet,and many collaboration and social and economic networks.while many real networks are intermediate between thesethree classes, this classification captures some of the basicprimitives used in many courses on networks and most networks are characterized in terms of the three classes.an important question surfacing in many networksciencerelated courses is the following: what processes andmechanisms give rise to the network characteristics discussed in the preceding section? a closely related questionis this: how do we generate networks with structural characteristics that mimic the properties of selected real networks?network models, introduced to answer these two questions,are an important part of most network science courses (seetable c4). these models have two main functions. first,some models aim to mimic, in a simplified form, the emergence and evolution of real networks, helping us to understand the mechanism responsible for the formation of realnetworks. second, to test the impact of selected networkcharacteristics on the networkõs behavior, we need to genernetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c63ate synthetic networks with preset properties. given theseneeds, network modeling is one of the most highly studiedcomponents of network science.historically the most studied model is the random network model explored by erdos and renyi, which generatesnetworks by placing the links randomly between the nodes.random networks represent an important reference frame innetwork modeling. despite the fact that we do not know ofreal networks that are captured by this model, given that mostof its characteristics can be calculated exactly, it representsan important theoretical tool against which various real networks and hypotheses can be tested. while scalefree network models represent a recent addition to the network literature, given that many real networks of interest, frombiology to computer science, have scalefree characteristics,in the past few years they have become the most investigatedclass of model. several models are available to generatescalefree networks. the most studied one was introducedby barab⁄si and albert (1999) to capture the formation of areal network. it involves two main ingredients, growth andpreferential attachment. given the diversity of networks, awhole class of models has been introduced that incorporateother mechanisms affecting a networkõs evolution, from fitness to node and link removal and aging. in addition, a number of models do not capture the network formation processbut result in scalefree topologies through either a fitnessdriven or optimization procedure. despite the importanttheoretical role these models play, there is no clear evidencethat real networks would be shaped by these processes. thesmall world model, introduced by watts and strogatz (1998),interpolates between regular and random networks and hasalso generated significant theoretical interest.table c4network models commonly used togenerate network topologies and analytical tools usedto characterize and study the properties of modelsnetwork modelsanalytical toolsrandom networksexact methodserdosrenyi modeldiscrete mathpercolation basedcombinatoricsscalefree modelsgraph theorygrowth and preferential attachmentdynamical systemsstatic modelsmaster and rate equationsoptimizationmean field theorystatic modelsgenerating functionssmallworld modelstochastic networksoptimized topologiesstatistical mechanicsagentbased modelsclustering toolsunderstanding the properties of these networks requires anumber of analytical tools that have been developed by anumber of fields, from discrete mathematics to statisticalmechanics. the study of random networks has a long history, using exact methods developed in graph theory, combinatorics, probability theory, and stochastic processes. scalefree network models, which represent graphs that change intime, are typically studied using methods based on rate andmaster equations capable of precisely predicting the degreedistribution and other characteristics of scalefree networks.in some cases mathematicians have employed exact methods and the tools of dynamical systems and percolationtheory to obtain exact results for these networks. optimization and genetic algorithms have been used to generate optimized networks. finally, in order to identify communitiesand groups in networks there has been a crossdisciplinaryinterest in developing network clustering methods.network dynamicsthe specification of the dynamics that characterize a network is less straightforward because these dynamics tend tobe rather different in the various applications areas. as mentioned in chapter 3, the examples range from phase transitions in physical systems, to chemical reactions governed byrate equations, to sociological interactions between people.here we develop just one example from the computer science discipline.computers in a network must often be able to broadcastmessages to all other computers in the network. the simplistic protocol would require that each computer maintain aview of the addresses of all computers in the entire network.if computers are constantly leaving or entering the network,the significant problem arises of updating and maintaining aconsistent view of the network at each computer. this updating of the views prevented early systems from scaling insize. the solution was for each computer to maintain only asmall partial view of the network. the broadcast protocol isfor a computer to broadcast to each computer in its view andhave computers receiving a broadcast retransmit the message to computers in their views. these more sophisticatedprotocols that are necessary to overcome scaling problemshave lead to sophisticated mathematical techniques and algorithms (demers et al., 1987). this is just one example ofmany directions in which basic theory in network science isemerging in the computer science area and appearing in advanced courses.network functionthe purpose of most networks is to transport information,people, or material. these functions often determine boththe structure and the dynamics of real networks. therefore,the understanding of network function has been a very activearea in a number of research fields, and it is reflected in mostnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64appendix cnetwork courses. the high degree of universality and commonality that is present in network structure largely disappears when it comes to network function, thanks to the diversity of the functions that networks assume in differentdomains. for example, the purpose of the internet is to transfer information in an efficient manner, in contrast to the purpose of the metabolic network, which is to process the chemicals consumed by the cell and to turn them into the cellõsbuilding blocks. therefore, on the top of similar topologiesone can define a wide range of dynamical rules, from flow todiffusion and contagion, that lead to different functions andnetwork behavior. despite this diversity, a number of common and highly studied themes have emerged in the past fewyears.one of the most studied themes focuses on diffusion onnetworks. indeed, networks support a wide range of diffusive processes that can cause serious problems in a numberof application areas. social and informational networks areresponsible for the diffusion of ideas. sexual and contactnetworks are responsible for the spread of infectious diseases and viruses, ranging from acquired immunodeficiencysyndrome (aids) to influenza to severe acute respiratorysyndrome (sars). computer and email networks are responsible for the spread of electronic viruses and worms,generating billions of dollars in damages. finally, social andprofessional networks are responsible for the spread of innovations, ideas, and rumors, playing a key economic and social role. it turns out that the numerical and analytical toolsused by different fields to approach these problems arehighly similar. yet, in the past few years, with the increasingunderstanding of the topology of sexual contact networksand computer networks, we have witnessed significant paradigm shifts. for example, the discovery that in scalefreenetworks diseases do not experience an epidemic thresholdhas had a significant impact on the strategies used for epidemic modeling and on the design of efficient interventions.while these processes are discussed from the perspective ofdifferent fields, they are widely covered in a wide range ofcourses, from biology to business to computer science.network flows, describing mostly the situation whensomething tangible flows from source to destination, are another class of widely studied multidisciplinary problems.they emerge in the internet as the flow of bits along thephysical infrastructure, in the study of metabolic networksas the flux of matter across reactions, or in transportationnetworks as, for example, the flow of cars on the highway.in general, the network structure canalizes these flow processes and to a high degree determines the flow rates and thenecessary capacities on each link and node.another muchstudied interdisciplinary problem is anetworkõs ability to carry on its functions in the face of errors and failures. centered on the question of robustness andresilience, many of these studies explore the networkõs dynamical and topological integrity under node and link loss(dodds et al., 2003). a number of studies have shown thatthere is a strong interplay between a networkõs robustnessand its structure. for example, scalefree networks are veryrobust under random node removal but highly vulnerable tothe systematic removal of their hubs. the situation becomeseven more complex if network flows are considered, whichcould lead to cascading failures, such as the 2003 northeastelectricity blackout, affecting millions of consumers (watts,2002). but robustness studies play a key role in designingnew drugs or in developing systems and network topologiesthat are highly error resistant.another class of muchstudied problems focuses onsearch in networks, leading to algorithms and methods toefficiently locate information in complex networked structures. these studies play a key role in a wide range of problems, from web search algorithms to the identification ofinformation and expertise in an organization.referencesbarab⁄si, a.l., and r. albert. 1999. emergence of scaling in random networks. science 286(5439): 509ð512.demers, a., d. greene, c. hauser, w. irish, j. larson, s. shenker, h.sturgis, d. swinehart, and d. terry. 1987. epidemic algorithms forreplicated database maintenance. in proceedings of the 6th acm symposium on principles of distributed computing. vancouver, b.c.,canada.dodds, p.s., d.j. watts, and c.f. sabel. 2003. information exchange andthe robustness of organizational networks. proceedings of the nationalacademy of sciences of the united states of america 100(21): 12516ð12521.watts, d.j. 2002. a simple model of global cascades on random networks.proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united statesof america 99: 12516ð12521.watts, d.j., and s. strogatz. 1998. collective dynamics of òsmallworldónetworks. nature 393(6684): 440ð442.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.65dquestionnaire datain this appendix, the committee provides more detail onits analysis of responses to the questionnaire that underliesthe results presented in chapter 6, following the same orderof presentation. after describing the questionnaire processand further characterizing the respondents, the committeedraws on the responses to more fully characterize the research communityõs approaches to the possible field of network science: both doubts about the existence of such a fieldand shared notions of what it would encompass. althoughthe full context from the corresponding sections of chapter 6is not repeated, brief summaries introduce specific details.the appendix also contains the analysis by katy bırner, ofindiana university, of the social structure of network science revealed by the questionnaire responses.1network science has reached its present level of visibilityfrom the convergence of two phenomena: the everrising importance of networks for the national wellbeing and security and the achievement of promising formal results (primarily from graph theory) relating aspects of network topologyto network properties such as resilience. but long before thisconvergence, many disciplines studied phenomena arisingfrom recognizable networks in their subject domains. whilesome of the studies inspired increased multidisciplinary research, their sheer diversity also raised significant doubtsabout the coherence and usefulness of an underlying ònetwork scienceó that might investigate further substantivecommonalities across the many specific uses of networks aswe know them. if there are such commonalities, then there isgreat potential benefit in pursuing better theories, tools, andinsights that address the network science core shared acrossso many critical domains, and such a pursuit becomes ofpressing importance.the committee adopted an empirical approach to determining the status of this emerging field, if there is one, toassessing a common core for the disparate fields of application, and to identifying the key challenges the science mightaddress. the committeeõs approach was to solicit the insightsof researchers from the communities doing work in the related domains.the questionnaire processas noted in chapter 6, the questionnaire text was developed by the committee through an iterative process, startingwith the statement of task and continuing through committeediscussion and betatesting. the focus of the committee discussion is clarity and brevity in the questionnaire and consideration of the kinds of information that might reasonablybe elicited from the research community. the betatestingallowed committee members to assess the ease of understanding and responding to the questionnaire text. in its finalform, the questionnaire addressed four broad areas: the respondent, the respondentõs work, the respondentõs view ofthe potential for network science to exist as a discipline, andan openended opportunity to provide further information.to avoid as far as possible prejudging the question ofwhether there exists a field of network scienceñand, if thereis such a field, its natureñthe questionnaire and the varioussolicitations of respondents intentionally did not define theterm ònetwork science.ó the committee initially expectedthat this lack of definition might bring many requests forclarification from the research community; in practice, fewerthan 1 percent of those solicited explicitly made such arequest. of those who responded to the questionnaire, 9 percent indicated that the term was unclear or had no welldefined core (see òdissenting voices,ó below). the committeedid not determine how many of those solicited decided notto respond because the term was not defined in advance.content of the questionnairebox d1 contains the complete online text of the resulting questionnaire, which was posted as a national academies of science (nas) web link on december 20, 2004.1katy bırner, associate professor, indiana university, òmapping theexpertise and social network of network science researchers,ó briefing tothe committee on april 13, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66appendix dbox d1 nrc network science surveythe national research council has commissioned a study of the possibility of identifying “network science” as a crossdisciplinary area of research worthy of enhanced attention and funding. the purpose of this communication is to invite you to contribute to this study. you have been contacted because you have been identified as a leader in an area of research that is pertinent to network science, and hence as an individual who can contribute significantly to the study as well as benefit from its results and consequences. the resulting nrc report will be published by the national academies press and is expected to influence governmental programs and funding to accelerate and to enlarge the benefits that a focus on network science can provide.we ask you to devote 15 minutes to complete the survey’s first two sections. if you have time and interest, please also contribute your insights to the more openended questions in sections 3 and 4.the nrc network science study committee is grateful for your contribution, and encourages you to invite other researchers to contribute at this study site: http://www8.nationalacademies.org/survey/deps/networksci2.htm.for further information, please click here, or contactdr. charles duke, committee chair, cduke@crt.xerox.comdr. john hopcroft, committee vicechair, jeh17@cornell.edubob love, nrc study director, rlove@nas.edu(1) your characteristics1a.name:first:middle:last:suffix: 1b.contact information:email:phone:website: 1c.principal fields of interest (please mark all that apply)biochemistry organizations theory biologyphysicschemistry (other political science network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d67than biochemistry) computer sciences public health, epidemiology ecologypublic policy economics psychologyinformation technologysociologyinternet telecommunications (other than internet) management transportationmathematics utilities medicineothers (please specify): operations research 1d.your position or role:(mark most appropriate one)(click here to choose)if other, please describe:1e.your organization:name of organization: department: type of organization: (mark one)(click here to choose)if other, please describe:(2) your work2a.do you consider some or all of your work potentially part of an emerging network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68appendix dfield of network science?yesnoif yes,2b.please briefly describe your particular interests in this area.2c.please indicate your principal collaborators, using the structure entries below and/or the unstructured text field labeled “other collaborators”. name: contact information (website or email): collaborator 1collaborator 2collaborator 3other collaborators:2d.please briefly describe specific projects under which you are pursuing these interests. use either the structured entries below and/or the unstructured text field labeled “other projects”.projectname:projectwebsite:principalinvestigator(s):funding organization: project 1project 2project 3other projects:network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d692e.if you have other relevant websites, please list:(3) the field of network sciencewe would appreciate any insight you might give us on the broad questions of defining the proposed field: 3a.is there an identifiable field of network science?yesnoif yes,3b.how would you define it? for example, what are the core topics?3c.what are the driving applications?3d.what are the key research challenges? if no,3e.what are the principal reasons for your answer?network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70appendix d3f.should there be such a field of study?(4) additional information we welcome any further information sources you wish to bring to our attention and any material you wish to provide for the committee’s understanding of the field of study. no material will be used in the report without written permission of the copyright holders.4a.other people to whom you suggest we send the survey invitation. please indicate using the structured entries below and/or the unstructured text field labeled “other people to invite”. name: contact information (website or email): invitee 1invitee 2invitee 3other people to invite:4b.pointers to information on network science: books, key papers, websites, conferences, mailing lists, etc.4c.pointers to other programs funding network science, both us and international:network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d71soliciting responses to the questionnairethe goal of the ensuing solicitation was to reach as large,diverse, and representative a sample of the many relevantresearch communities as feasible within the studyõs resources. because both the full range of relevant communities and the populations of researchers within those communities could not be readily defined in advance, the primaryprocess of choice was a snowballing outreach. to begin theprocess, 113 recognized researchers working on topics incandidate areas clearly relevant to the possible science ofnetworks were sent emails asking them to complete thequestionnaire. these solicitations briefly described the nature and purpose of the study, provided the url (uniformresource locator) of the online questionnaire, and invitedthe recipient to forward the announcement to other researchers who might be interested. the solicitation process wasthen continuously iterated, drawing on the responses to identify more peopleñcollaborators, project principal investigators, and so onñto receive a solicitation. the snowballingprocess was stopped whenever it stepped outside the field ofnetwork science as indicated by the respondentsñthat is, ifa respondent explicitly indicated that he or she was not working in ònetwork science,ó the respondentõs list of collaborators and principal investigators was not added to the pool ofnames. as of april 29, 2005, a total of 2,040 people hadbeen directly contacted through the solicitation process.some heuristic sanity checks were performed to catchhoax entries; only three of the responses appeared suspect,and their content did not affect the conclusions of this study.a variety of spot checks were performed. for example, isthe response internally consistent? does it appear to namenonexistent or wildly irrelevant people, programs, or organizations? does a respondent appear as an author in the technical literature (as indexed by google scholar beta). however, such checks were limited and are indicative at best; athorough screening analysis was not attempted.there are many inherent limitations to a snowballing process. for instance, poorly connected members of the underlying communities might be left out, or there could be underor overrepresentation of communities or specific programsowing to differences in willingness to respond to such a questionnaire or to provide information that would allow furthersnowballing. in addition, the committee observed that a fewhighly connected people provided no information on collaborators or projects: instead of listing names and projects,they sent replies such as òtoo many to list.ó the committeewas especially concerned about these outreach limitations,as the ongoing questionnaire analysis quickly demonstratedthat many target communities were weakly interacting.the committee followed several ancillary processes tooffset the limitations of snowball instituted coverage bybringing in additional sources of names throughout the solicitation process: literature citation studies, sequential tracing of collaborative ventures, conference attendance, mailing lists, and personal interviews with the authors of recentbooks and reviews.the citation study and analysis looked at some selectedresearchersõ work and collected the names of coauthors, citedauthors, and authors who cited those researchersõ work. akey goal of this analysis was to improve the coverage ofsubject fields that had not yet seen many questionnaire responses. although resource limitations constrained theamount of citation analysis that could be performed, theamount that was done succeeded in introducing several hundred names that had not been uncovered by the snowballingprocess to that point. spot checks suggest that at least several thousand additional names might have been producedby more intensive citation tracking.4d.additional material the nrc netsci committee should consider (for example: course syllabi, reading lists):submitthe national academies network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72appendix din view of the methodological concern over potentiallyuneven community representation due to systematicallyvarying response rates, it might be worth noting that (1) thenumber of new names provided by each respondent was notstrongly dependent on his or her selfidentified field of studyand (2) the overall rates of response to the committeeõs solicitations were not strongly dependent on the fields of studyof the respondents who provided the names to solicit. similarly, the number of new names provided by respondentswas independent of whether the respondents were from theunited states or not. regardless of field or location, eachrespondent provided a mean of 2.8 names that had not beenpreviously identified in the study.the committee recognizes that it cannot quantify the completeness of the resulting coverage nor the degree to whichthe responses are statistically representative of the underlying communities of researchers (see also the discussion ofcoverage saturation below). for this reason, some classes ofanalysis could not be reliably performed and are not addressed in this report: for example, the committee explicitlychose not to attempt to identify a top100 list of researchers,programs, or institutions. nonetheless, its analysis of the keyresponses relating to the existence and nature of a possiblefield of network science appears solid: the responses arestable across all responses obtained when they are partitionedby such factors as when in the solicitation process the response was received, whether the response was directly solicited or not, whether a solicitation was generated by snowballing or from the ancillary sources, which researchcommunities the respondents selfidentified as their own,and what country the respondents worked in. some distinctdifferences appear between respondents who believe there isa field of network science and those who do not; these differences are described below.the committee is confident that the solicitation process,despite the multiple approaches and continued effort, did notsaturate the population of researchers whose work toucheson the potential field of network science. a variety of heuristic measures contribute to this confidence. the results fromthe limited citation analysis have been mentioned above.another reason for the committeeõs confidence is that newnames (that is, names not previously encountered in questionnaire responses or ancillary sources) continued to be provided by successive increments of responses without letupuntil the end of the study (see figure d1). the latest responses provided essentially as many new names as theearliest ones; in other words, the empirical probability of aresponseprovided name falling outside the set of alreadyknown names did not decrease as the number of responsesgrew from 50 to over 600.a similar conclusion is suggested by the fact that once aname is cited by a respondent, it is unlikely to be cited byany other respondent: 71 percent of cited names are nevercited again. in short, there is no indication of saturation inthe coverage, so one may conclude that the questionnairesolicitation process does not approximate complete coverage of those who would be interested.the respondentsover half of the responses (57 percent) came from peoplewho had been directly invited during the snowballing process; the remaining spontaneous responses are believed tohave largely been induced by individuals forwarding the solicitation note and by its dissemination in online mailing lists(see figure d1). the questionnaire did not ask how the respondent learned of the study, but this substantial proportionof spontaneous responses sheds light on both the limitationsof the committeeõs explicit snowballing and the effectiveness of using additional solicitation mechanisms. in aggregate, names of 2,374 distinct people were provided by theseresponses and the ancillary sources, although valid emailaddresses were identified for only 2,123 of them.figure d1new names by response id.150139143137162159103134133123143129050100150200number of new names15110115015120020125025130030135035140040145045150050155055160010050network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d73geographic localesquestionnaire responses were received from 29 countries;the two most recurrent were the united states (497 responsesrepresenting 39 states) and canada (23 responses representing 6 provinces) (see figure d2).in analyzing each question, the results for individualcountries were compared against the aggregate results (seetables d1 and d2). because most countries had few entries, u.s. responses were compared with the aggregate figures for all nonu.s. responses. no significant differencesappeared. for example, the percentages of those selfidentifying their work as being in network science, of those statingthere is an identifiable field of network science, and of thoseproviding definitions, interests, application, and challengeswere closely comparable. similarly, there were no significant differences in the mean number per response of fieldsselected; collaborators; projects; or new names (or of newnames that later responded). this was also true when u.s.responses were analyzed by state (see figure d3 and tabled3).fields of studythe bestrepresented fields, as identified by the respondents, are computer science (and its closely related areas),other (described in more detail below), math, biology, andphysics (see figure d4).figure d2countries where respondents were located.44445568101419231324970100200300400500600number of responsesbelgiumbrazilkoreaunknownaustraliafranceisraelspainitalygermanygreat britaincanadaall known nonu.s.united statesthe questionnaire was structured to allow each respondent to indicate more than one field of interest, and thisopportunity was heavily used: the mean number of fieldsselected by a respondent was 3.6, and 80 percent of therespondents selected more than one field. for this reason,the responseperfield figures shown in table d4 are3.6times the number of responses.these data also demonstrate the success of the solicitation process in bringing in research communities that hadnot been identified in advance as involved in network science: some 159 (28 percent) of the responses indicated afield other than the fields initially provided by the onlinequestionnaire (see figure d5). analysis of the freeformtext entries describing these other fields shows great diversity, with the most numerous being engineering, geosciences,and human communication. the category labeled òunclassified otheró represents fields with single entries; examplesinclude botany and economic history.the respondents overwhelmingly came from academia;of the 619 respondents (98 percent of all responses) whoindicated the type of organization they worked in, the questionnaire received only 46 (7 percent) from industry and only12 (2 percent) from the military (see table d5). one significant contributor to the low representation from industryand the military was the comparative difficulty of finding email addresses or other contact information for people outside academia. compounding this problem, the effectivenessnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74appendix dtable d2canadian respondent provincespercent ofnumber ofpercent of allrespondentsrespondentsrespondentsin canadawho selectedwho selectedwho selectedprovincethe provincethe provincethe provincealberta10.24.3british columbia71.130.4newfoundland30.513.0nova scotia30.513.0ontario81.334.8quebec10.24.3table d1respondentõs countrynumber ofpercent ofrespondentsrespondentswho selectedwho selectedcountrythe countrythe countryknown nonu.s.13220.9argentina10.2australia50.8belgium40.6brazil40.6bulgaria10.2canada233.6china20.3denmark30.5france50.8germany142.2great britain193.0greece10.2hungary10.2india20.3israel60.9italy101.6japan30.5korea40.6mexico10.2netherlands20.3new zealand10.2poland10.2portugal20.3russia20.3south africa10.2spain81.3sweden30.5switzerland30.5united states49778.5unknown40.6of snowballing was significantly greater for academic respondents: on average, each response from academia provided 3.1 new names, while responses from outside academia provided only 2.1 new names. in turn, the peopleidentified by academic respondents were also 50 percentmore likely to respond. the committee speculates that researchers in academia may perceive more incentive to respond and may attach more importance to influencing thestudy. judging from personal experience and anecdotal evidence, industrial researchers today are under intense pressure to focus on nearterm financial return.the respondents were nearly unanimous in describingtheir own work as related to network science: only 24 respondents (4 percent) did not so describe it. an additional 1percent of the solicitations elicited personal emails to thecommittee indicating that the recipient declined to submitthe questionnaire, usually because he or she did not work inthe area (see table d6). the near unanimity on working innetwork science was independent of the specific fields thatresearchers worked in and of the country where they worked.ninetyseven percent of respondents from academia saidthey worked in network science, as did 93 percent of theother respondents. overall, this result is a reminder that theresults of the questionnaire reflect selfselection on the partof those who responded; it must also be considered in lightof the fact that only 70 percent of these respondents indicated that there was an identifiable field of network science(see òdissenting voices,ó below).dissenting voicesthe questionnaire analysis demonstrates that there is awidespread but not universal belief among the respondentsthat there is an identifiable field of network science. although 95 percent classify their own work as potentially belonging to an emerging field of network science, only 70percent state that such a field is currently identifiable. themain reasons for saying there is no such field are that theterm has no coherent definition, that it is broad to the pointof vacuity, that it is too soon to define the field, that the fieldis merely a new name for an already existing field, or that itrepresents the wrong approach.the lack of consensus is shown clearly in the questionnaire responses: of the responses that had been received asof april 29, 2005, only 442 (70 percent) answered yes toq3a: is there an identifiable field of network science? of theremaining responses, 146 (23 percent) answered no and 45(7 percent) did not answer. these percentages proved stableas the number of responses grew and were only mildly dependent on the field of study of a respondent. table d7 liststhe fields in decreasing order of the proportion of positiveresponses to the question. only political science and publicpolicy are notably more skeptical. many more fields haveyes percentages above the mean for the entire sample thanbelow it: this òlake wobegonó effect primarily arises froma positive correlation between answering yes to this questionand marking oneself in more fields of study.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d75figure d3states where respondents were located.911111212161818202324284566101020406080100120number of responsesnorth carolinafloridatexasmichiganwisconsinindianamarylandnew mexicoillinoisnew jerseyvirginiapennsylvanianew yorkmassachusettscaliforniaalthough 23 percent of the respondents explicitly statedthat there was no such identifiable field, there is some sign inthe results that more than 23 percent felt that the questionwas debatable: 26 percent answered q3e, òif no, what arethe principal reasons for your answer?ó and 33 percent answered q3f, òshould there be such a field of study?óq3e allowed freeform descriptions of the principal reason for saying there was no identifiable field of network science. the committee analysis of the 163 responses to thisquestion indicates five broad reasons; a given respondentoften would offer more than one reason (see figure d6). inaddition, respondents also said that the field suffered fromexcessive hype.the five broad reasons there is no field of network science are these:¥the term is unclear or has no coherent core. for example, ònetwork science combines two words suchthat the resulting pair specifies less information thaneither individual word alone.ó¥the term reflects a field that is still emerging, so it istoo early to tell if it will bear substantive results. thisphrasing may occasionally be a more tactful variationon the preceding wording, but often specific emergingapplication domains are mentioned.¥the work labeled network science is simply part ofsome specific existing fields under a new name. thereis disagreement on just what existing field it is; frequent candidates include graph theory, complexitytheory, systems theory, computer science, and controltheory.¥the phrase is too broad, to the point of being vacuous:anything can be represented as a network, but doing sodoes not provide meaningful insight. for example,ònetwork theories turn out wrong when applied toparticular application areas.ó¥the idea of developing network science as a separatefield is a wrong or barren approach. for example, òtheinteresting questions arise from function, rather thantopology.ó these answers agree that there is work thatcan be called network science but disagree that developing it as a discipline science will benefit the manyother application domains that refer to networks insome form. when these comments indicate what thenetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76appendix dòwrong approachó is, they often mention the use ofconnectivity or topology alone as defining the scopeof network science.the responses also indicate that skepticism about the existence of network science is encouraged by a perceptionthat the term ònetwork scienceó has become trendy, bothoverstated in its claims and overused as a justification forother work. one explicit aspect in the expressions of perceived over claiming and overuse is that if network scienceis defined solely in terms of òanything described as connected,ó there is little that can be excluded from the claimedrealm of application.defining the fieldthe first question in proposing a possible discipline ofònetwork scienceó is this: what are we studying? as hasalready been seen in this report, many domains use the wordònetwork,ó but what are the defining characteristics that letus recognize a network as a subject for study in ònetworkscienceó?two questions on the questionnaire are directly designedto address this issue: question 3a, which asks whether thereis a defined field of network science, and question 3b, whichasks those who responded yes to 3a to define the field asthey see it. the 436 responses received through april 29,2005, to these specific questions (out of 633 total responses)give the committee empirical data on the nature of ònetworkscienceó as practiced by current researchers in the variousdomains. in addition, the responses to four other questionsproved highly relevant to this subsection and were reviewedfor consistency with the conclusions presented here: question 2b, which asks the respondent to describe his or hercurrent research interests (596 responses); question 2d,which addresses specific current research projects (436 responses); question 3c, which asks about the driving applications of network science (427 responses); and question 3d,which asks about research challenges in the area (424 responses). these results must also be viewed taking into account that 30 percent of respondents did not believe such afield is currently identifiable; their concerns are discussedabove.the many definitions and research interests provided bythe research community did allow formulating a potentialcore definition of network science. to organize its description of this core, the committee structured its analysis interms of two basic components that identify any field ofstudy; this initial organization was chosen to be high level,to focus on the information that was needed without prejudging what might actually be found in the questionnaire data:¥the subject being studied. if a welldefined field ofònetwork scienceó is to exist, the defining attributes ofa ònetworkó must be determined. a given network orclass of networks can then be characterized by specificinput values of these attributes. an attribute may havevery complex or dynamic values, defined by statestructures, algorithms, models, or empirical data.¥the derived properties of interest. when one solves aproblem in ònetwork science,ó what does one want toknow? what derived properties or insights arise fromthe input attributes of the networks being studied? hereagain, a proposed network science requires that thesekinds of output properties can be meaningfully identified across the range of application domains.table d3respondent statespercent ofnumber ofpercent of allrespondentsrespondentsrespondentsin the u.s.who selectedwho selectedwho selectedstatethe statethe statethe statealabama20.30.4arizona71.11.4california10116.020.3colorado81.31.6connecticut20.30.4delaware10.20.2district of columbia30.50.6florida111.72.2georgia60.91.2hawaii60.91.2illinois203.24.0indiana162.53.2iowa20.30.4kentucky40.60.8louisiana10.20.2maryland182.83.6massachusetts6610.413.3michigan121.92.4minnesota71.11.4mississippi10.20.2missouri50.81.0new hampshire10.20.2new jersey233.64.6new mexico182.83.6new york457.19.1north carolina91.41.8north dakota10.20.2ohio60.91.2oklahoma10.20.2oregon30.50.6pennsylvania284.45.6rhode island20.30.4south carolina20.30.4tennessee50.81.0texas111.72.2vermont20.30.4virginia243.84.8washington50.81.0wisconsin121.92.4network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d77if these questions have common answers across manyapplication domains, then network science might then beidentified as the insights, lexicon, measurements, theories,tools, techniques, and heuristics that allow one to map between the desired output properties of given networks andtheir input attributes. mapping is needed in both directions:determining the output properties that arise from specificinput attributes, and determining the input attributes thatcould be designed into a new network or achieved by intervening in an existing network to realize particular outputproperties. if network science is to meaningfully be said toexist, these techniques must be effective throughout manyapplication domains, with wellunderstood means to applythe general methods to specific domains. for a hypotheticalexample, one might envision a simulation tool that efficientlydealt with network models across a wide range of size andtimescales, with a growing suite of model libraries customized to specific application domains: ecological networks,metabolic networks, transportation networks, and so on.just as the fundamental concepts of structure and dynamics shape the committeeõs overall discussion, they also provide the key to decomposing the inputs, problem dimensions,and outputs of network science into specific roles within agiven research or engineering study. structure and dynamicsare orthogonal abstractions applicable to each of these factors: indeed, a given input attribute, problem dimension, oroutput property may contribute to both the structural anddynamic aspects of a given study, depending on the focusand intent of the study.figure d4fields selected by respondents.table d4responses per fieldnumber ofpercent ofmean numberrespondentsrespondentsof fieldsfieldwho selectedwho selectedselectedcomputer science23240.84.82information technology18632.75.28internet17831.35.32other15928.03.91math13724.15.51biology13623.94.51physics10318.14.88telecom9817.35.50operations research9015.85.90organization theory8615.16.21sociology8014.15.68ecology7513.25.53economics7413.06.92management6912.16.42public policy6110.76.79biochemistry5910.45.27political science478.36.15medicine447.75.75public health427.46.31psychology366.36.97transportation346.06.35chemistry223.96.73utilities183.26.44overall respondentstotal2,066363.4mean89.8315.83.64median7513.23.00050100150200250300fieldresponses25720519017915414211310810796computerscienceitinternetothermathbiologyphysicstelecomoperationsresearchorganizationnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78appendix dtable d5respondent affiliationsorganization typeresponsesuniversity455other nonprofit38industry46private consultant18military12other governmental30other20total619table d6is your work potentially part of anemerging field of network science?yesnodidnõt sayfieldno.%no.%no.%biochemistry611000000biology141991100chemistry251000000computer science250976210ecology75954500economics83991100internet183967400information technology196969400management74945600math149974311medicine44981200operations research106991100organization theory94981111other169949511physics110973300political science51980012psychology38971300public health431000000public policy69991100sociology81962211telecommunications107991100transportation41981200utilities21912900figure d5most frequently mentioned fields.05101520253035404550fieldno. of responses4431141099887766unclassified otherengineering geoscienceshuman communications environmentoceanographycontrol theory infrastructuressystemssystems biologyanthropologyneurosciencethe reader may find it useful to supplement the somewhat abstract definitions in the following subsection withthe hypothetical description of a highly simplified networking problem given further on.defining attributes of a networkas noted in chapter 6, analysis of the responses revealsthree common attributes of networks: (1) they consist ofnodes connected by links; (2) nodes exchange resourcesacross the links; (3) nodes only interact through direct linkage; for brevity, these attributes are designated òconnectivnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d79table d7is there an identifiable field of networkscience?yesnodidnõt sayfieldno.%no.%no.%utilities20872914physics9281181633public health347971625transportation337981912medicine357881824biology11077241786ecology6076151945biochemistry4675132123telecommunications8175201976math11575332164information technology152744120126economics6274182145internet138733820147chemistry187272800psychology287292325computer science184716124125sociology5970192367operations research7570272555other124694123148organization theory6669262744management5367202568political science3160173348public policy4057243469figure d6reasons for saying there is no field of network science.05101520253035wrong approachtoo broadother field(s)emergingunclear, no corefraction of òwhy notó responses citing a reason (%)ity,ó òexchange,ó and òlocality.ó table d8 summarizes thestructural and dynamic composition of these attributes.few responses simultaneously capture all three attributes,but across a wide range of subject domains, these three attributes consistently appear explicitly or by implication inmore domainspecific entries. the proportion of responsesdriving the committeeõs identification of each input attributeis shown in figure d7. because all three attributes are inherent to defining and understanding a network, the discussion of each attribute has frequent crossreferences to theother attributes.connectivitya network has a welldefined connection topology, inwhich each discrete entity (ònodeó in graphtheoretic terminology) has a finite number of defined connections (òlinksó)to other nodes. a given link is commonly, but not necessarily, point to point: that is, it connects two nodes. multipointlinks, where they exist, may often be adequately modeled ascollections of pointtopoint links. a given link may or maynot have a defined direction (òfrom node a to node bó);undirected links may generally be modeled as pairs of directed links. the set of links associated with a given nodemay change over time, but at any given moment a node hasonly a finite number of nodes to which it is linked (its òneighborsó). the nodes and links are defined by both structuralattributes and dynamic attributes. the structural attributesinclude the current snapshot of the underlying graph: whichnodes are linked to which others. structural attributes alsonetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80appendix dtable d8summary decomposition of the input attributes of networksattributestructuredynamicsconnectivityñnodes, links,the structural constraints and permissible states of nodesthe state transition models of the nodes and links thatand their specificationsand links. the snapshot at a given instant of the nodes,define their behavior. the mechanisms for the addition,links, and their attributes (the values of their structural statemodification, and deletion of nodes, links, and theirvariables). note that locality implies that individual nodesspecifications.cannot have a consistent view of the complete networkstructure unless the structure changes slowly relative toexchange.exchangeñresources andresource classes, specification of the mechanisms andstorage and transport capacities. interactions betweentheir transport, storage, andresources that realize resource transformation.resource exchanges. latencies in transport andtransformationtransformation. degradation of resources during transportor storage.localityñnode behaviorthe required capabilities that must be installed in nodes andthe definition of the local behavioral rules that governand state; interactions aslinks to support their local behavior.interactions between agents.exchanges over linksfigure d7responses identifying network attributes.0102030405060localityexchangeconnectivityfraction of responses to question 3b citing an attribute (%)include exchangerelated attributes, such as capacity. thedynamic attributes include evolution of the underlying graph(addition and deletion of nodes and links) and the resourceexchange attributes of these nodes such as transit time acrosslinks and resource transformation mechanisms.exchangethe connection topology exists in order to transport oneor more classes of resource between nodes; indeed, a link isrepresented as existing between two nodes if and only if resources of significance to the network domain can be directly transported from one of the nodes to the other withoutthe intervention of other nodes along the transport path. aninstance of a network is then characterized by the classes ofresource that constitute its exchanged payload of interest. tomake this abstract characterization concrete, some examplesof resources exchanged in specific networks include bits incomputer nets; cargo for bulk transportation; people for passenger flights; energy for chemical reaction networks; andinfluence for social relations.the same system can be viewed as a different networkdepending on which resource exchanges are of interest, sothat, for example, the same system might be analyzed as anelectrical power distribution network when the resource ofinterest is electricity and as a telecommunications networkwhen the resource is information encoded as bits distributedover the electric lines. a given network may carry multipleclasses of resource, whose differences are reflected in theconstraint models that characterize and interrelate thenetworkõs attributes (see below). in defining the exchangesof a given network, one must define such characteristics,whether a resource exchange is logically continuous (astream) or in discrete independent units, how the resourcesare transported over the links and stored at the nodes, andwhat resource transformations are performed at nodes ornetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d81figure d8derived properties of networks mentioned by respondents.0102030405060fraction of definitions mentioning the derived property (%)scalabilityresilienceefficiencycostevolutioncharacterizationduring transit over links. technically, there is also shortterm storage on the links, because transport speeds are finite.localitythe exchanged resources are delivered, and their effectstake place, only in local interactions (node to link, link tonode). there is no godõseye view of effects and resources,and the effects take time to propagate. this locality of interaction implies autonomous agents acting on locally available state. (when focusing on locality issues, the termòagentó may therefore be used instead of ònode.ó) like theother key attributes of a network, locality appears in both thestructural and behavioral components of a networkõs definition. each node and link includes in its structure its availableresources, its individual goals (which may be modeled aslocal values for the cost models and benefit models discussedbelow), and the mechanisms available to it for achievingthem. the dynamic components of a networkõs locality definition can be expressed as algorithms for maintaining localstate and exchanging resources.in particular, all networks reflect the dynamic consequences of locality, yielding phenomena that appear acrossthe many application domains of network science, such aswavefront effects in the spread of resources and feedbackand stability issues due to control delays. a fundamentalconsequence of locality is that globally optimal structure andbehavior are hostage to the independent local optimizationsof the individual nodes and links. the aggregate networkmay become trapped in an equilibrium in which the systemis maintained in a nonoptimal state by the independent optimization behaviors of its individual components. localityoften entails an analysis approach that is essentially gametheoretic.derived properties of networksanalysis of the proposed definitions in the questionnaireresponses also identified six derived properties that spanneda wide range of application domains: characterization, cost,efficiency, evolution, resilience, and scalability (see figured8). the responses driving the committeeõs identificationof the common derived properties of interest in network science are tabulated in table d9.shared aspects of the network science problem spacebeyond these shared input attributes and derived properties of interest to problems in network science, several ancillary concerns were shared across many application domains;these may be broadly classified as constraint models andproblem dimensions.constraint modelsthe network attributes are tied together by cost and benefit models that define the mapping from a networkõs links,nodes, exchange model, and local agents to derived penaltyand merit figures. the networkõs creation, operation, andbehavior, as well as its growth, repair, and evolution, arenetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82appendix ddriven by these defining constraint models through feedbackor signaling mechanisms.the cost models and benefit models may have both structural components (determined by static attributes of the network) and dynamic components. òcostó is an abstract termmeasuring consumption of resources or decrease in value;while engineered networks may have cost models that output actual dollar costs (among other penalty factors), manynetworks measure costs in other units. the dynamic components of a cost model reflect aspects of the temporal behavior of the network connectivity and exchange, including thedegradation of an exchanged resourceõs value and the consumption of resources on the nodes and links. as mentionedabove, both nodes and links have dynamic components totheir definition in that they transform resources passingthrough them. the transformation is reflected in both costmodels and benefit models defining the network. dependingon a given networkõs definition, a transformation may contribute to either cost or benefit or both. for a concrete example, the transformation of electrical energy into heat mayappear in the constraint models defining a power distribution grid not as a contribution to the penalty figures but as acontribution to the benefit model of a heating system.the output penalty and merit figures generated by anetworkõs constraint models are where the endtoend andsystemwide attributes of a network first emerge into view asa network is defined. the concomitant feedback or signalingmechanisms may be implicit or explicit and may be any mixture of inband and outofband. inband feedback mechanisms are those exploiting signaling explicitly carried orimplied by components of the resources exchanged.note that the existence of constraint models is an inherentfactor in network science research and one of the dominantreasons for interdisciplinary approaches. all networks implicitly or explicitly have one critical set of dynamic costmodels: the links have finite speeds for exchanging resources and nodes have finite throughput. in particular, thecosts derived from these models ensure that the processingof exchanges and the actions of the feedback mechanismsoccur locally (see table d10).driving dimensionsthe analysis of the questionnaire responses also identified three additional significant and common dimensions thatare drivers of the difficulty of many associated challengesand of the research effort to address them: complexity, scalerange, and network context.note that these three dimensions, although widely mentioned in the responses and critical to the challenges andtable d9summary decomposition of the derived properties of networkspropertystructuredynamicscharacterizationwhich nodes and links are òimportantó? what roles do theywhat is the performance of the network, typically in termsplay in the network? how would one modify a network toof qualities of the resource exchange? what networkchange the role of a node in a specified way?attributes are required to achieve specified behavior? howdo we measure performance and maintain it?costwhat is the cost of the aggregate suite of nodes and links ofwhat is the cost of the latency and degradation of thea network, given their defined attributes?resource exchange realized by this network? what is theleast cost network, given input constraints, to achieve aspecified performance?efficiencywhat is the expected utilization of the network nodes, links,what is the tradeoff between cost and performance for theand their limiting resources?available design space? how could the behavioral attributesof the network components be modified to improve theefficiency of the network realization?evolutionwhich structural attributes are preserved as the networkwhat evolutionary path will emerge under specific rulesevolves? what structure should be created to assure itsand constraint models for the addition, modification, andstable evolution?deletion of nodes, links, and their attributes? how can onedesign or promote local behaviors that will result in adesired evolutionary path? how do failure modes andattacks evolve in response to the network evolution?resiliencewhat are the structural attributes that resist accidental orhow does the behavior of a network change under damageintelligently planned damage and overload?and overload? what input behavioral rules induce betterbehavior under these scenarios?scalabilitywhich structures scale in terms of the measures ofhow does network behavior change as network scalecomplexity?changes? what rules and constraint models assure desiredbehavior across changes in scale?network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d83potential value of a possible discipline of network science,are not required for a system to be studied as a network. thegreatest benefit from a rigorous network science, however,would lie in understanding the laws that drive the structureand dynamics of networks across the extremes of these threecritical dimensions:¥complexity. this dimension includes issues such aslarge scale (a large number of nodes, links, classes ofexchanged resources, or constraints), as well as howthe nodes and links behave.¥scale range. this dimension reflects the wide range ofinteracting critical temporal and spatial scales in thestructure and dynamics of a network.¥network context. this dimension addresses the environment of a network as it relates to other networks:most networks exist in the context of a larger set ofother networks on which they depend and with whichthey interact.these networks may be naturally captured as differentlevels of abstraction or as competing and cooperating networks at the same level of abstraction. a social network, forexample, may be strongly influenced by the characteristicsof the communications, economic, and transportation networks in which the social organisms are embedded (and they,in turn, affect those networks), but each network is best dealtwith to a first approximation as its own form of abstraction,using appropriate approximations to reflect how the othernetworks affect the exchange, storage, and transformation ofits various classes of resource of interest (see table d11).driving applicationsthe 427 responses through april 29, 2005, that proposeddriving applications for network science (68 percent of allresponses, including 92 percent of those who said an identifiable field exists and 10 percent of those who said it doesnot) described a highly disparate set of applications, generally tightly bound to specific other fields or problem areas(see figure d9). most of the responses were fairly terse andhigh level and showed little consensus on specific applications. the committeeõs analysis identified five major communities of research players: technological, biological, social sciences, interdisciplinary, and physical sciences andmath. when viewed at a level high enough to allow identifitable d10summary decomposition of constraint modelsconstraint modelsstructuredynamicscost models, benefitmodels for determining the costs and benefits for a givenmodels for determining the costs and benefits of adding,models, and the associatednode of the locally visible neighborhood.deleting, and modifying nodes and links.models of feedback effects.models for determining aggregate costs and benefits ofmodels for costs and benefits for the exchange of classesthe network nodes, links, and their properties.of resource, with its associated transformation.models for how these costs and benefits affect networkmodels for how these costs and benefits affect networkstructure and its evolution.behavior and its evolution.table d11summary decomposition of the problem dimensions of networksdimensionstructuredynamicscomplexitya high number of nodes, links, resource classes, or rules inhigh numbers of internal states and transition rules for thethe cost models and benefit models.behavior of nodes and links.scale rangedependencies across wide range of spatial dimensions.dependencies across a wide range of timescales.highly disparate node and link attributes within onehighly disparate rates of interaction and evolution innetwork.different regions of the same network.network contextnumber and nature of peer networks and of networks atdefinition of behavioral rules governing resource exchange,other levels of abstraction. opacity: unavailability ofconstraints, and interactions between nodes.information or resources across network boundaries.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84appendix dcation of shared concerns, the current driving applicationsproved to be closely related to the description of the majorresearch challenges (covered in the next section).there were also a few voices dissenting on the questionitself. for example, one response was that there are hundredsof applications called network science; another was that applications are not the drivers for network science, as it is stillan emerging basic research field. in contrast to the view thatthere were too many applications to consider, anotherrespondentõs view was that more effort has been spent on thesearch for universality principles in networks than on therigorous study of standalone application areas. these dissents echoed the reasons given for saying there is no suchfield as network science.because so few responses were received from outsideacademia, no useful conclusions can be drawn about the interests of specific nonacademic communities. within theacademic world, the players are generally grouped into welldefined communities focused on particular domains of study.for this reason, the frequency with which particular classesof applications are cited in the questionnaire response closelytracks the response rate by field shown in table d4. withineach community, the leading applications in terms of thenumber of responses are shown in figure d10 and tabled12.the leading concerns of the technology and engineeringcommunities are closely related. distributed computing focuses on the efficient realization of applications that arefigure d9driving applications identified by respondents.010203040506070physical sciences and mathinterdisciplinarysocialbiologicaltechnologicalfraction of responses to question 3c identifying a driving application (%)020406080100120140160180no. of responses identifying a driving applicationtelecommunicationsphysicsmathbiologyotherinternetinformation technologycomputer sciencefigure d10number of responses to driving applications question.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d85highly decentralized; many of these, in turn, are entwinedwith issues of networked information sharing, such as peertopeer methods. the classic network problems of telecommunications engineering (network design, reliability and resilience, costperformance tradeoffs) appear frequently, butgenerally with an emphasis on wireless infrastructures (including selforganizing ad hoc and sensor networks). network collapse (meaning the collapse of the ability to transport the communications payload) is also involved.the driving applications pursued in the biological sciences include models of disease transmission, ecologicalmodeling and biodiversity, and systems biology. the focusof network understanding of disease transmission is bothpredictiveñhow will epidemics spread? what is the relation between the structure of the transmission network andthe evolution of the disease?ñand interventionalñwhatchanges to the underlying social and transportation networkswould prevent or reduce epidemics? ecological applicationsfocus on understanding the flows of energy and nutrients inecological networks, the interdependence of organisms andspecies, and qualitative changes in an ecosystem (such asbiodiversity stability and collapse). systems biology refersto the need to understand the systemlevel architecture of acell or an organism, as well as to design drugs and interventions that can cause the desired effects and very few sideeffects. however, a few responses expressed concern aboutthe time required to go from basic system biology to specificmedical applications.the applications in the social sciences are affected by thedeep history of the disciplineõs analysis of social interactionand influence networks. other respondents were concernedwith understanding the wellknown, heavytailed distributions in numerous social constructs in terms of the underlytable d12major players and cited applicationsplayerssummary of most cited applicationstechnologicaldistributed computinginformation sharing and discoverytelecommunicationsbiologicalpublic health and disease transmissionecosystem modelingsystems biologysocial sciencessocial network analysiseconomic models and resource distributioninterdisciplinaryunderstanding complex systemsintersection of human interactions and networkingtechnologyphysical scienceshighenergy physicsand mathmathematical models of networks.ing social networks. economic network issues such as theflow of capital also relate to the comparative impact of underlying infrastructure networks for communications, application information sharing, and transportation of people andmaterial. network science is being applied to distributionchannel behavior, such as interpersonal ties within a marketor interorganizational ties in a value chain. smaller but stillsignificant numbers of responses mentioned organizationmodels and political applications, ranging from disruptingterrorist networks to supporting prodemocracy organizationsunder authoritarian regimes.òinterdisciplinary communitiesó refers specifically to respondents who selfidentified as being involved in severaldisparate fields and/or who proposed application topics thatexplicitly span or relate disparate fields. this distinction isnecessary because many responses gave lists of unrelatedapplications drawn from different fields. in this category thecommittee included òcomplex systems,ó which occurredcommonly but was generally not given further definition;the term òemergent phenomenaó is closely related and likewise undefined by the respondents. descriptions of drivingapplication also commonly mentioned the need to understandthe relationship between disciplines such as biological andcomputer networks.the use of telecommunications networks for dataintensive computing applications was cited as one driving application on the physical sciences; other such applications inthat area spanned physics and chemistry, such as understanding highdimensional dynamical systems and the networkstructures underlying the energy landscapes that drive protein folding and similar optimization behaviors. one drivingapplication in mathematics was theories for relating systemwide behavior and network structures.research challengesthe committee, aided by the questionnaire, identified anumber of important research challenges that should be addressed if the field of network science is to be moved forward. the analysis of research challenges was based on theresponses to question 3d (what are the key research challenges?) and was performed by reading through all of theresponses to the questionnaire and binning the results to infer broad topics that recurred frequently. to ensure that theresponses were not being biased by individual committeemembers, the responses were compared with an earlier, independent analysis of the responses.the responses that fit within a broad category of challenge were counted, and the seven most highly populatedcategories were selected for inclusion in the report. eachcategory had between 25 and 100 responses identifying it asa research challenge; the proportion of responses garneredby each challenge is shown in figure d11.the seven primary challenges that were identified werethese:network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86appendix d¥dynamics, spatial location, and information propagation in networks. a major need in network science is abetter understanding of the relationship between thearchitecture of the network and its function. this isparticularly important in networks where dynamicsplays a large role, either through the flow of information around the network or through changes in the network structure (by evolution or adaptation). how thestructure of a network relates to the behavior of thesystem is still not well understood and will be a majorimpediment to progress in many applications.¥modeling and analysis of very large networks. presenttools and approaches are designed to work with relatively small networks, but many of the most importantproblems involve much larger networks. examples ofsuch networks include cell regulatory networks inbiology, social and economic networks, and computercommunication networks (including military commandandcontrol networks). abstractions and approximations are needed that allow reasoning aboutthese largescale networks, as well as techniques formodeling networks with noisy and incomplete data.analysis techniques for such networks must have goodscaling properties so that they can be applied to thevery large networks that are key to network science.¥design and synthesis of networks. while a lot of engineers, scientists, mathematicians, and sociologists aresimply trying to understand complex networks alreadyin existence, in many application areas the goal is todesign a network to obtain a desired behaviorñforexample, scalability, robustness, usability, resiliency,figure d11major research challenges.dynamicsmodelingdesignrigorcommonconceptsexperimentsrobustnessefficiency, and resolvability (or adaptability). it maybe possible here to learn from biological systems howto design engineered systems that exhibit equally complex, adaptive, and robust behavior.¥increasing the level of rigor and mathematical structure. many of the respondents to the questionnaire feltthat the state of the art in network science did not havean appropriate mathematical basis. this level ofmathematical rigor could be achieved by a combination of defining the appropriate levels of abstractionfor analysis, developing better tools in graph theoryand other relevant disciplines, and searching for fundamental limits of performance.¥abstracting common concepts across fields. manymembers of the committee and respondents to thequestionnaire cited the need to define common concepts across the disparate disciplines and applicationsthat are part of network science. the multidisciplinarynature of the work is a challenge, but results could betransferable from one field to another if appropriateunifying principles can be developed.¥better experiments and measurements of networkstructure. current data sets on largescale networkstend to be sparse, and tools for investigating the structure and function of these networks are limited in manydomains. there was a general feeling shared acrossmany fields that there needs to be more and better access to data, which in some domains requires new measurement techniques to be developedñfor example,to obtain a detailed spatiotemporal measurement of theoperation of a cell. one respondent suggested the denetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d87velopment of a socalled òmacroscopeó to detect, communicate, and understand the structure and dynamicsof largescale networks.¥robustness and security of networks. finally, there isa clear need to better understand and design networkedsystems that are both robust to variations in the components (including localized failures) and secureagainst malicious intent. this requires a much moresophisticated understanding of the failure mechanismsin networked systems as well as better tools forpredicting the impact of perturbations on networkedsystems.the social structure of network sciencein addition to the analysis performed by the committee,the data were also analyzed by katy bırner, who addressedthe visible social structure of research in network science asindicated by the collaboration and invitation entries of eachrespondent. her analysis is provided in box d2. upon reviewing her analysis, the committee consensus was expanded to include the following two findings presented inchapter 6 on the empirical state of the proposed field ofnetwork science:finding 67.analysis of the social and collaborationnetworks of the respondents provides additionalevidence that network science is an emerging area ofinvestigation.while the clusters within the network are only weaklyconnected, a large connected core spans many of them.based on dr. bırnerõs extensive experience, and on thejudgement of the committee, this pattern is characteristic ofan emerging field and constitutes objective evidence thatnetwork science is a field, but an immature one whose futureis still undecided.finding 68.analysis of the social and collaboration networks of the respondents provides additional evidence ofthe multidisciplinary nature of network science.dr. bırnerõs analysis of the social and collaboration networks provides additional evidence of the multidisciplinarynature of network science. researchers from any given discipline are distributed throughout the graph, and any givensubcommunity includes researchers from multiple disciplines. this pattern is unlike any field previously analyzedby dr. bırner. in the committeeõs judgment, therefore, thepattern constitutes objective evidence that network scienceis a field that is distinctly interdisciplinary, with researchconcerns that support multiple application domains.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88appendix dbox d2mapping the social network and expertise of ònetwork scienceó researchersthis box presents the anonymized results of a bibliometric analysis1,2 of the social networks and expertise coverage of network science researchersprepared at the committeeõs request by k. bırner and w. ke, of the infovis laboratory at indiana university. all results are based on the selfreported datain the file named òcleanedsurveyasof0503180910aposted.xls.ó subsequently, the authors report the data¨ cleaning and analyses performed,major results, and their interpretation. they conclude with a set of recommended topics for further study.data set used, analysis results, and interpretationthe data file òcleanedsurveyasof0503180910aposted.xlsó comprises 499 completed questionnaires that report 923 òcollabwithó linksreported under q2c and 376 òinviteó links reported under q4a. to ensure a high quality of automatic data extraction and analysis, all names reported infreeform text as òother collaboratorsó under q2c and all òother people to inviteó reported under q4a were not considered. figure d21 illustratesrelationships among the initial invitees, respondents, and identified collaborants.in total, 1,241 unique names of network science researchers were identified. email addresses were used to ensure that these names are truly uniqueand represent exactly one person. as requested by the national research council, author names were replaced by a unique identification number topreserve the anonymity of authors.in addition, the 22 (checkable) fields of interest as well as the freeform text of òotheró fields of interest reported in q1c were analyzed. in total, 138unique fields of interest were identified. fields that were mentioned most often were computer science (mentioned 201 times), information technology(166), and internet (156).data quality issuesthe òcollabwithó links are mostly made to researchers in spatial or thematic proximity. hence, these links help to grow the socialnetwork of network science researchers locally. colleagues reported that they tried to òinviteó people who were not yet in the data set. there was noquestion that asked users to identify òmajor playersó or ògatekeepers.ó there are many misspellings of names and disciplines in this data set. informationprovided in the òother collaboratorsó and òother people to inviteó section could not be used in this automatic analysis.data analysis resultshere we report òmajor researchersó who are frequently mentioned in the data set, who act as gatekeepers, and who interlink manyscientific fields. in addition, we extracted and will present existing social and collaboration networks. researchers who are frequently mentioned in thecomplete data set and the number of times they are listed as a collaborator are given intable d21. figure d22 shows the major components (size10)network of the network science researcher network (nsrn). the pajek3 plot shows exactly 630 of the 1,241 unique researchers, and their òcollabwithólinks and òinviteó links are shown. each researcher is represented by a node. node color coding is used to identify researchers that submitted (brown) ordid not submit (orange) questionnaires. the node areasõ size corresponds to the number of times a researcher is mentioned by other researchers. eachfigure d21relationships among invitees, respondents, andcollaborators.49966340invitedcompleted questionscollaborated784147188110table d21researchers who are frequentlymentioned and listed as collaboratorsno.no. listedidlistedas collaborator10051289875121261009751397510238510475478464455648144412387492554network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d89figure d22network science researchers network.node colororange = not submittedbrown = submittednode size (area)no. of times mentionednode labelscholar idlink colororange = collaboratorsgreen = invitednode with a betweenness centrality no less than 0.00001 or a size (number of appearances in the data set) 3 was labeled with the authorõs name (id).links denote òcollabwithó links (in orange) and òinviteó links (green).subsequently, researchers who act as gatekeepers were identified based on an examination of the betweenness centrality (bc) values4,5 of nodes inthe nsrn. the top 10 researchers are given in table d22. figure d23 indicates nodes with a bc value 0.00001 by a black ring and shows them inthe context of the nsrn.to examine the community structure of network science researchers, we examined the different components in the nsrn. table d23 shows the sizeof existing components, the number of components that have this size, and the total number of nodes in these components. the largest component in thensrn is shown in figure d24 using the color coding introduced in figure d22. it represents the current coherent core of the new field of networkscience.table d22researchers who act as gatekeepersno.betweenessidmentionedcentrality value106640.0002027599720.0001787898140.00015093970.0001340834120.0001250292540.0001088284530.0001068895910.00009716122520.0000777316230.00007060box continuesbox d2 continuednetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90appendix dtable d23components in the nsrnno. ofno. ofsizecomponentsnodes177772326432575445180510506127277498189436104401122213113141141511517117181183013033133731733551355total1,241figure d23researchers with high bc values (in black) and low bc values (in gray).box continuesbox d2 continuednetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix d91figure d24largest component of the nsrn.interpretationcompared with maps of other scientific disciplines, the nsrn clearly exhibits the characteristics of a new and emergent research area: itconsists of many unconnected networks of collaborating network science researchers, and the existing networks show a rather heterogeneous coverageof research topics.figure d25 is a map of all network science researchers visualized in vxinsight.6 the map at the lefthand side shows the nsrn. on the right, the verysame graph is shown in òlandscapeó mode, with colored dots representing the selfreported interest profiles of researchers. a white dot denotes that theresearcher listed òbiologyó as a principal field of interest in q1c. yellow denotes òcomputer sciences,ó light blue òinternet,ó blue òphysics,ó and greenòsociology.ó as can be seen, there are no groupings of researchers with similar fields of interest. instead, very different research interests seem to bealmost equally distributed over the nsrn.as the field of network science matures, subareas devoted to the study of specific research fields are likely to emerge, and many of the separatecomponents will exhibit collaboration links, weak or strong and temporary or stable.box continuesbox d2 continuednetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92appendix dfigure d25disciplinary heterogeneity of the nsrn.social network of network science researchers: topics for further study¥increase our understanding of the interplay of affiliation, thematic, and social interrelations among todayõs network science researchers. invite keynetwork science researchers to identify and label the main research groups key shown in figure d22.¥bibliometric analysis of networkscience publications, patents, and funding data. the infovis laboratory at indiana university is developing thesociotechnical infrastructure to analyze the structure and evolution of scientific disciplines and all of science on a large scale.7 major publication, patent,and grant databases (covering mostly u.s. research) are available, as are scalable algorithms and compute power. a detailed, objective analysis ofscholarly data would complement the selfreported, subjective data and its analysis reported here.¥development of an online portal that tracks and communicates the evolution of network science research and results. geospatial and semantic mapsof network science researchers and publications presented here and proposed in shiffrin and bırner (2004) can be made available online as a uniqueinterface to data sets, publications, and expertise related to network science research. researchers interested in being òon the mapó should be given theoption to submit data about their publications, collaborators, etc. the incentives for researchers to contribute highquality data can be further increasedby using this online map to make funding decisions much as piõs resumes are used today. assuming that a comprehensive set of highquality data canbe acquired on a continuous basis, an interactive, continuously evolving, weatherforecastlike map of network science research can be made availableto grant agencies, researchers, practitioners, and society at large.note: the authors would like to thank will e. leland for compiling the data set used in this study and for insightful feedback on previous results. this work is supported bya national science foundation career grant under iis0238261.1bırner, k., c. chen, and k. boyack. 2003. visualizing knowledge domains. in annual review of information science & technology, b. cronin, ed. medford, n.j.:information today, inc./american society for information science and technology.2shiffrin, r.m., and k. bırner, eds. 2004. mapping knowledge domains. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states 101 (suppl. 1).3batagelj, v., and a. mrvar. 1997. pajek: program package for large network analysis. available at http://vlado.fmf.unilj.si/pub/networks/pajek/.4freeman, l.c. 1997. a set of measuring centrality based on betweenness. sociometry 40: 35ð41.5brandes, u. 2001. a faster algorithm for betweenness centrality. journal of mathematical sociology 25(1): 163ð177.6davidson, g.s., b. hendrickson, d.k. johnson, c.e. meyers, and b.n. wylie. 1998. knowledge mining with vxinsight: discovery through interaction. journal of intelligentinformation systems 11(3): 259ð285.7available at http://iv.slis.indiana.edu.box d2 continuednetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.93eopportunities for creating value from network sciencethis appendix supports the findings of chapter 5 and provides details of the scenarios developed in response to items3 and 4 in the statement of task. what are the viable investment options for the army and nation in network science?how does exploiting these opportunities create value? thecommittee attempted to answer these questions by constructing three scenarios that represent fundamentally differentlevels of response by the army.scenario 1, building the base, examines the alternativesfor the army if it wants to invest a modest amount (on theorder of $10 million annually) in 6.1 basic research withinthe context of its present funding processes. while somechanges in the style and content of its present research activities are envisaged, this scenario represents a minimal investment and a minimal change in posture relative to thecurrent army r&d portfolio of investments and processes.it creates value by increasing the knowledge of topics in thecore content of network science and by expanding the baseof trained practitioners.scenario 2, nextgeneration r&d, examines alternativescreated by applying best practices in modern industrial r&dto the armyõs r&d investments in network science. in thisscenario, basic research (6.1) investments are coupled withlarger applied research (6.2) and, possibly, 6.3 investments,to create technology investment options for the army to exercise in concert with suppliers. the committee envisages,however, that the management of this process would be substantially different from present army practices. the committee gives an idea of how these changes could be effectedby creating a marketdriven r&d environment. projects thatmight be funded in this environment are exemplified by threekinds of projects: one in social networks, one in engineerednetworks, and one in biological networks. comparison ofthese projects shows the sorts of issues and benefits thatcould arise from scenario 2 investments in the three different areas of important network applications.scenario 3 takes as its point of departure the phrase òtoenable progress toward achieving network centric warfarecapabilitiesó in item 4 of the statement of task. in it, thecommittee asks what the army (or, more appropriately, thedod office of force transformation [oft]1) should do ifits primary objective is to create these capabilities in a robustand affordable way over the course of the next decade. asignificant investment in network science would be one element in such an effort, but the emphasis would reside elsewhere. specifically, in this scenario the committee examinespast efforts of the federal government to develop major newwarfare capabilities all the way from basic research to deployment in the field in order to estimate the magnitude ofthe effort and investment required to source and deploy suchcapabilities.scenario 1, building the basescenario 1 involves a modest level of funding (~$10 million per year) that fits into the armyõs current scheme for 6.1basic research. small amounts of army risk capital funds areinvested to create a knowledge and personnel base fromwhich it can attack the practical problems that arise whentrying to provide networkcentric warfare (ncw) or networkcentric operations (nco) capabilities. it is for this reasonthe scenario is called òbuilding the base.óbecause the anticipated investment is too small to fundsignificant interdisciplinary efforts, it should be focused onleveraging existing research in areas related to network science. it would support 20 to 30 singleinvestigator or smallgroup grants of $300,000 to $500,000 per year. such an investment would allow the army to tap into top researchefforts in physical, social, and biological networks. thearmy should fund only the most outstanding researchersbecause the very best are qualitatively different from eventhe very good. the essential point is that to pay off big in1for further information, see http://www.oft.osd.mil. accessed august19, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94appendix eterms of breakthrough ideas and models, the very best researchers must be recruited to do the work. to attract an elitegroup who will influence the future of network science, thearmy must adapt its funding and management policies, possibly offering larger and longerduration grants with few orno restrictions on citizenship, publication, and the like. theselection criteria would be excellence of research as judgedby peer review and track records, relevance to army objectives, and opportunities for army involvement through inclusion of suitable army personnel in the effort.the committee envisions that the research efforts wouldbe located at major research universities. an important aspect of the program might be a onceayear conference at anarmy laboratory or facility, where the principal investigators (pis) would report on accomplishments during the year.the program needs enlightened management to support interdisciplinary work through the interaction of a diversity ofpis. a major theme of the program would be the achievement of fundamental advances in networkresearchbasedstatistical physics, applied mathematics, development ofmathematical models of social phenomena, and other areasby generously funding only exceptionally talented individuals who are organized into a national social network.such a program would be the first to address the needs ofnetwork science per se. the program would focus on networks as coherent entities characterized by their architecture, structure, and dynamics. by deliberately adopting abroad theoretical and methodological focus, the programwould encourage the creation of fundamentally novel ideas.a wide diversity of approaches is a key feature of longtermsuccess. keeping the goals broad and flexible would allowthe army to cultivate such diversity; a narrowly defined program would eliminate much of the creative potential thatcould lead to breakthroughs and new ideas. one way to dothis would be for the army to hold one or more workshopswith appropriate personnel to determine the topical contentfor such a program.the armyõs needs are broad and fundamental in nature:it must learn how to approach the creation of a predictivedescription of large, interacting, layered networks. a basicscience program is the first step toward building up the critical mass of talent needed to address specific army problemsin this area. this modest approach would allow the army toidentify a relevant research community, and organize it sothat, with time, it could be called upon to address specificneeds.the proposed approach differs from existing programs inagencies such as the national science foundation (nsf) andthe national institutes of health (nih) in that it focuses onnetwork science per se. while a significant amount of research is taking place in communities addressing the applications of networks, almost none of this research is fundedby dedicated network science programs. instead, researchersare funded by, for example, the nsf, to improve the internetor to understand the statistical mechanics of complex systems, or the nih, to uncover the features of specific organisms or biological processes. because many of these researchprograms cannot avoid dealing with the network aspects ofthese problems, they divert some of their funding in that direction. nevertheless, most of their work is focused on applying network ideas to specific systems rather than on developing new tools and ideas. currently, no agency thecommittee knows of has a specific program devoted to network science. a research program on network science per seis a new concept, with unique and novel goals.as a consequence of its discussions with army and dodrepresentatives, the committee has come to realize that thefundamental problems underlying effective nco lie in thesocial domain. yet how people interact and utilize technology or make decisions based on shared knowledge are areasalmost unexplored in the armyõs current basic research portfolio. the committee urges the army to focus additionalresources on the possible applications of network thinking tosocial, especially organizational, issues (helper et al.,2000).2 applications to biology, engineering, and the physical sciences are also essential to army applications, but thearmy is already funding research in these areas. the committee suggests that on the margin the most significant problem is not how to build better satellites, tanks, or medicinesbut rather is how to organize millions of individuals to collect intelligence, deliver supplies, and prosecute wars overan increasingly global, constantly shifting geographical andpolitical playing field (garstka and alberts, 2004). this is amonumental problem that has not, however, traditionallybeen the province of science. rather, it has been managedthrough a mixture of intuition, experience, and tradition. asignificant fraction of the proposed program should addressthis organizational problem the way scientific problems areaddressed: through a combination of theoretical modeling,data analysis, and controlled experimentation.to illustrate the flavor of its thinking, the committeecloses this scenario by indicating some promising researchtopics in four broad areas: network structure, network dynamics, network robustness and vulnerability, and networkservices. each area has theoretical, empirical, and experimental components. investments in basic research in eachcan provide value for the army.network structureadvances in the applications of network research are limited by a lack of fundamental understanding of the structure,evolution, and topology of complex networks (newman,2003; watts, 2004; newman et al., 2005). many networkmodels have been formulated and studied by numerical2c.f. sabel, professor of law and social science, columbia law school,òtheory of a realtime revolution,ó briefing to the 19th egos colloquium,copenhagen, july 2003.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e95simulations or approximate analytical methods (albert andbarab⁄si, 2002; pastorsatorras and vespignani, 2004;dorogovtsev and mendes, 2003; bennaim et al., 2004;bornholdt and schuster, 2003; barab⁄si, 2003). while theseefforts constitute an advancement in the modeling and representation of networks, the topology of these models is farless rigorously understood. questions concerning the universality of topological properties, correlations introducedby dynamical processes, and the interplay between clustering, hierarchies, and centrality in networks remain only partially answered (amaral et al., 2004). a full understandingrequires the development of rigorous methods to uncoverthe mathematical structure of growing networks. advancesin this direction can be achieved only by the empirical studyof real networks and by developing the appropriate mathematical tools and metrics not only to characterize novel systems but also to classify networks based on their topology,structure, function, and dynamics. in this respect we are lacking in the fundamental characterization of network topology, in our ability to characterize weighted networks andcommunities in networks, and in our description of the timeevolution of the network topology. in parallel, we need todevelop discrete and continuum models that generate networks whose structure and evolution mimic those of realnetworks.in spite of considerable effort in social network analysisover the past 50 years and great interest in the past decade,surprisingly little is known about either the detailed structure or the time evolution of social networks. in part, the gapin knowledge has come about because purely social interactions, unlike interactions conducted on an engineered network such as the web, are much harder to track empirically.it also derives from a tendency to view all networks as staticentities with structural features rather than as dynamic processes with parameterized rules. finally, it has resulted fromthe tendency to ignore the role of social and organizationalcontexts in network formation and to focus instead on therole of exceptional individuals or smallgroup structures.without a better understanding of social networks, it is extremely difficult to advance our understanding of any socialprocesses, including implementation of the cognitive andsocial domains of nco to improve combat effectiveness.network dynamicsnetworks are specified not only by their topology but alsoby the dynamics of information or traffic flow along theirlinks. the amount of traffic characterizes the connections ina communication system or large transport infrastructure andis fundamental for a complete description of these networks(barrat et al., 2004; almaas et al., 2004). heterogeneity inthe intensity of connections may also be important in understanding social systems. the ultimate objective is a mathematical characterization that might uncover general principles describing the dynamics of networks. furthermore,networks provide the substrate on top of which the dynamical behavior of the system must unfold. at the same time,however, the various dynamical processes are expected toaffect the networkõs evolution. dynamics, traffic, and theunderlying topology are mutually correlated. it is vital todefine appropriate quantities and measures capable of capturing how all these ingredients participate in the formationof complex networks. to carry out this task, we need to develop large empirical data sets that simultaneously capturethe topology of the network and the timeresolved dynamicstaking place on it.understanding òhow things spreadó through differentkinds of social, organizational, and technological structures,and with what consequences, is of paramount concern in anincreasingly global economy and culture (watts, 2003). examples include electronic viruses spreading through computer or phone networks, biological viruses (weaponized ornatural) spreading through the contact network in a society,and ideas or strategic concepts spreading on a social network(arquilla and ronfeldt, 2001; pastorsatorras andvespignani, 2004; anderson and may, 1992). uncoveringthe similarities and the differences between electronic virusspreading, biological and social contagion, and the interplaybetween the network and spreading processes is crucial forthe research community. such research has important potential army applications, from defending the communicationinfrastructure against viruses to developing scenarios for limiting the impact of a biological contagion.individuals making strategic decisions in uncertain orambiguous environments (which is to say, almost all environments) are influenced either explicitly or implicitly bythe decisions of others (katz and lazarsfeld, 1955; watts,2003). and when all individuals are paying attention to oneanother and constantly making or updating various decisionsaccordingly, òsocial contagionóñthe spread of ideas, influence, norms, innovations, attitudes, rumors, unrest, violence,extremism, etc.ñbecomes not only possible, but pervasive(rogers, 1995; gladwell, 2000; huckfeldt et al., 2004). insome ways, social contagion seems like biological contagion, but in other ways it is fundamentally distinct (doddsand watts, 2004, 2005). sorting out these differences is akey to understanding network contagion.in order to exploit the information infrastructure capabilities envisaged for nco, the army must comprehend howlarge groups of individuals coordinate their efforts to solvelargescale problems, where òlargescaleó implies that thescope of the problem is beyond the capacity of any particularindividual to solve or even fully comprehend (dodds et al.,2003; watts, 2003).3 examples of such problems include (1)collating large volumes of ambiguous information, collectedin widely dispersed environments, to assess the seriousness3c.f. sabel, professor of law and social science, columbia law school,òtheory of a realtime revolution,ó briefing to the 19th egos colloquium,copenhagen, july 2003.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96appendix eand immediacy of specific threats; (2) coordinating largenumbers of troops in novel and rapidly evolving combat environments; (3) coordinating geographically and industriallydiverse supply chains to deliver highly specific and timesensitive logistical support that varies rapidly and unpredictably; (4) business firms attempting radical innovations orrecovering from catastrophic supplychain breakdowns; and(5) educational or community development organizationsattempting change to alleviate widespread and deeply rootedsocial or economic disparities. largescale problem solvingis complicated because it involves the study of collectivebehavior that is oriented toward particular (if impreciselyspecified) outcomes rather than just the study of processes inaction. it is also, and perhaps not surprisingly, the problemarea about which least is understood theoretically.biology also deals with diverse largescale networks. themost prominent cellular networks are metabolic networks,the regulatory network, and signaling and protein interactionnetworks (barab⁄si and oltvai, 2004). the key question hereis, what do network science results tell you in terms of biology? are they falsifiable? do they offer testable predications? in order to be of value, the predictions must ultimatelybe testable in the laboratory. this kind of work is being partially funded by the nih roadmap initiatives. results in thisdomain might lead to new ways to analyze networks and tomake predictions relevant to rapid response to disease andbiological warfare.another important structural and dynamical issue is thelocation of function within a biological networkñthat is,what is the architecture of the network? networks typicallycomprise different groups of interconnected elements, ormodules, each one being responsible for different functions.in engineered networks, this architecture is designed in apriori. in biological networks, it must be discovered by, forexample, identifying highly interlinked communities of elements. modules can be repeated at different hierarchical levels and interconnected via the hubs of the system. howmodularity emerges across many biological networks andhow it can be reconciled with the other properties of thesenetworks are basic questions. the constraint and facilitationof biological phenomena by network structure is an issuethat is likely to be at the forefront of biology in the comingyears.network robustness and vulnerabilitynetworks need to be able to function in spite of errors,failures, and attacks. such phenomena can affect a networkõsability to function in several fashionsñfor example, by incapacitating nodes and links or limiting traffic, leading tolocal and potentially cascading failures (watts, 2002; doddset al., 2003; albert et al., 2000; cohen et al., 2000, 2001).how do we understand the different modes of network failure? can we design networks with maximum tolerance oferrors and a high survivability under attack? what is the relationship between a networkõs robustness and its structure?how do the different dynamical processes taking place onnetworks affect their survivability? these are questions that,if answered, could fundamentally alter the armyõs ability todesign and implement faulttolerant communications andorganizational networks.network servicesthe operation of computer networks is governed by anarchitecture, known as a reference model, in which the functioning of the network is divided into independent layersbuilt on top of each other (tanenbaum, 2003). the lowerlayers of this architecture deal with the physical connections(including wireless) and electrical signals transmitted acrossthese connections that link the nodes of the network. theimportant concept underlying this organizational constructis that each layer of the architecture delivers òservicesó tothe layer above according to a standard interface convention.this organization is important to hide the workings of onelayer of the architecture from those of all the others. thus,the technology used to implement one layer can be upgradedwithout changing the operation of the layers above and below. in the open system interconnection (osi) referencemodel describing the architecture of computer networks, thelowest layer is referred to as the physical layer, and the nexttwo layers as the data link and network layers, respectively.on top of these sits the transport layer, whose function is toensure that the messages from the layers above get transmitted reliably from one computer to another even if the lowerthree layers are unreliable. these four layers, in concert, establish a reliable communications link between two computers (nodes) on the network, over which messages associatedwith services created in the upper layers are delivered(tanenbaum, 2003).the internet is the most important and familiar computernetwork. as important as the internet itself, however, are theservices that are created at the upper levels of the internetarchitecture. among the most visible services that haveevolved on the internet are email, the world wide web(www), search engines, and the targeting and formatting ofinformation to individuals. other services, such as makinginformation available in digital format and positioning dataglobally, have added value to the network.search engines such as google play a major role in finding web sites for travel, medical information, research papers, indeed almost anything you can conceive. as commercial activity on the web increases, all kinds of services thatsupport it have developed. these include services that provide individualized news, weather, driving directions, andmaps. such services allow one to track a storm as it travelsacross a state in real time or to view the road surface of ahighway pass from a camera mounted at the summit. theyare changing the way citizens access and use information.underlying these activities is an evolving research base innetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e97filtering, clustering, ranking, and optimization. this is abroad area of study carried out largely in computer science,electrical engineering, and computer engineering departments worldwide and in many firms. some of the importanttopics encompassed by this area are data mining, distributedcomputing, network protocols, information capture and access, and security, privacy and cryptography. since theseservices are vital to nco, support of basic research in thisarea should ultimately create value for the army.scenario 2, nextgeneration r&dscenario 2 envisages applying best practices in industrialr&d management to the armyõs investments in projects thatcombine basic and applied network science. specifically, thecommittee expects the objective of these projects to be thearticulation of technology investment options that could beexercised by the army and its vendors to provide a desiredcapability. the amount of this investment is envisaged to bebetween $25 million and $100 million annually, roughly$25million per project. there are expected to be investmentsin the university community for the basic research and inboth army inhouse activities and commercial firms for theapplied research. the committee envisages, however, thatthe r&d projects would be managed in a way profoundlydifferent from the way in which current army inhouse andexternal centers are managed.the selection of projects to be funded would be marketdriven and controlled by a toplevel army team. it is expected that connections between the basic and applied portions of the research will be much more intimate. moderninternet collaborative tools would be used to manage the daytoday work in rough analogy to the global design of industrial products. the activities are managed in small, intimategroups devoted to specific subprojects that are integrated intothe overall project in a looser networked fashion. people flowfrom one small group to another over time. the entire teammakes up a social network consisting of smaller, more tightlycoupled social networks. in short, this scenario envisagesthe application of modern communications networks andtools and the insights of modern social network theory totransform the management of army r&d projects.the committee proceeded by first agreeing on the mosteffective management approach for nextgeneration r&dprojects. it developed the concept of òmarketdrivenó management to apply to all projects that characterize the entirescenario 2 segment of the opportunity space. while associated issues and benefits will vary depending on the networkapplication, the marketdriven approach is the same. to illustrate the scope and scale of nextgeneration r&d withmarketdriven management, committee members developedthree sample projects in the sociological, engineering, andbiological areas of network applications.these projects were selected in diverse areas to underlinethe committeeõs belief that research will be equally necessary in all areas to advance network science. while each ofthe sample projects has the potential to advance network science, they should not be construed as a òshopping list,ó andthe committee does not recommend their implementationwithout careful comparison of their costs and benefits withthose of other research projects.marketdriven managementthe u.s. army faces a significant challenge todayñhowto create a more responsive r&d process that can leveragethe relevant network science initiatives of universities andprivate companies and use them to design and deliver improved networkcentric warfighting capabilities to ourforces.as dod prosecutes the global war on terrorism, it isterrorist (social) networks that are enabling insurgents toinnovate, react, and adapt very quicklyñin many cases morequickly than u.s. forces. given the complexity of nco, thecurrent r&d model is hardpressed to react, and it is notdelivering new insights and capabilities in a sufficientlytimely manner to meet army operational requirements. oneonly needs to look at the current challenges facing majorprograms like the future combat system (fcs) to understand that the current r&d process needs drastic change(weiner, 2005).to field capabilities for nco more effectively at the strategic, operational, and tactical levels, the army must developa model for nextgeneration r&d, and the evolution of network science may provide a unique opportunity for the armyto transform the r&d process. to make this new model areality, the army must think outside the box, leverage existing technology, and attract outstanding researchers bothwithin the army and in industry and academia.by combining new thinking, new incentives, and a closepartnership among the military, industry, and academia, thenew r&d model could leverage existing networks and collaboration technologies to accelerate the development ofnetwork science and simultaneously to enhance the r&dprocess. the new model must take advantage of the rapidproliferation of technology coming from the commercial sector as well as the increasing amount of network science r&dflowing from university research. at the core of the newmodel will be the innovative use of robust networks andproven, internetbased business concepts that drive changeand increase the speed with which knowledge, research, andtechnology are delivered.companies like intel, ge, and oracle, among others, haveestablished networkcentric business practices to deliver newtechnology, products, and services at a rate that keeps themin the forefront of innovation and competition. they do thisby keeping their feelers out in the academic, scientific, andtechnology communities, monitoring evolving technologies,and placing bets on which ones will mature soon and havethe most positive market effect. simultaneously they developnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98appendix eand market products, build market infrastructure to supportthem, please shareholders, and provide new working capitalto continue the process. the army must adapt and incorporate these industry best practices into its new model, perhapsby creating a networked r&d framework that would engageboth industry and academic researchers and more closelyintegrate them with the armyõs inhouse r&d resources andstakeholders. the framework could be an ebaylike networkmodel that aggregates ideas and supports a community thatrigorously (but rapidly) evaluates them (surowiecki, 2004).at the heart of this new model for advancing nco is theestablishment of a national network of virtual centers of excellence at multiple universities, where small groups of researchers act autonomously but are connected to the armythrough an r&d coordinating council that also facilitateslinkages with private companies. to establish the centers,the army could implement an initial application process thatprovides core funding for the researchers. a portion of thefunding could be maintained in a focused project fund, whichcould then be dispensed to research centers that collaborateto address specific army challenges.the challenges could be prioritized through an internalapplication process. then the army could post specific problems of interest to which the centers could respond with abrief proposal, estimating time and additional resourcesneeded to address them. the army would select the mostappropriate center to address the challenge and allocate additional funding if necessary. the additional funds might alsocover such things as extended data collection, new apparatusneeded to perform the task, or programming to generate aninterface for a project or even to take an idea to a prototype.in most cases, members selected to participate in the community would receive base funding to cover their core personnel and other fixed costs. the network of the communitywould be used to assemble and fund a variety of flexibleproject teams. in addition to an army coordinating council,other funding entities (such as other government agencies orprivate companies) might be invited to participate in thisnetwork as sponsors of projects. this mechanism could significantly shorten the normal process between posing a problem or challenge and getting a solution.projects could arise in two primary ways. first, the armycoordinating council or another sponsor could post a request for proposal (rfp), and various participants from thecenters of excellence would submit research proposals.these proposals would be graded by the community of centers, industry participants, and the army. for large projects,potential participants might also post their own smaller rfpsto assemble teams for subprojects. in either case, projectteams could include participants from multiple institutionsin the network. when a sponsor wanted help evaluating proposals, it could ask other participants in the network to gradedifferent proposals. network participants, like those onebay, would all have a continually updated reputation rating. this buyerinitiated process is similar to that used onsites like elance, inc.a second way for projects to form would be for researchers to post proposals for projects they want to do (or projectrelated services they are willing to do). in cases of highlydesirable projects or services, different sponsors (or subproject leaders) might compete for the services of a personor team. this sellerinitiated process is similar to the processused on sites like ebay.in either case, the centers and researchers who bringworthwhile knowledge, research, and technology to marketare funded, and those who donõt are not. and the lead time ofa year or more that is typical for a grant application processcould be reduced to weeks or days.an example that provides valuable insight is the networked centers of excellence (nce) program in canada.4nce mobilizes research talent across canada and applies itto critical challenges that benefit all canadians. the program fosters partnerships of business, education, and government to accelerate the exploitation of knowledge, research, and technology and to speed their transfer to productsand services that succeed in the marketplace.one way the army could organize and apply this newmodel would be to staff its coordinating council with qualified r&d people (senior officers at the o5 to o7 level,including some with warfighting experience) to operate andmanage army and joint r&d projects, as described above.a onestar general could be placed in charge and told that ifsuccessful, he/she will be promoted in 3 years. the councilcould be limited in number to 1520, mainly to manage thenetwork community described above. it would consist ofexperienced r&d officers to guide this process, includingsome o6 warfighters who would be able to orchestrate ormanage the input from the networked community.the council members would be like linus torvaldõs smallgroup of linux code approvers or ebayõs inner circle of strategic community managers. the army must give seriousthought to how to attract the best minds. additionally, thearmy may want to consider adding to the council one personfrom industry and one from academia, both of whom arefamiliar with network research, with what the differentcenters of excellence can do, and with the cultures of thedifferent communities of researchers.the council would be given priorities based on thearmyõs r&d investment strategy, most likely developed bythe deputy assistant secretary of the army for researchand technology. it would be given authority to cut throughred tape and manage both the process and the networkedcommunity of contributors.4for further information, see ncenet spring 2004 issue, available at http://www.nce.gc.ca/pubs/ncenettelerce/spr2004/newsletterspr04e.htm.accessed august 19, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e99furthermore, the army should develop mechanisms forencouraging and recognizing the best and most relevant research. this would involve attracting talented researchersand providing for a constant stream of challenging projects.for continuity, the military officers on the council would bedesignated òwarfighting r&d professionalsó and set on anappropriate career path that allows them to develop the nextgeneration concept of virtual centers of excellence that canmeet the armyõs critical needs in network science in a shortbut realistic time frame.the nextgeneration model for network science r&d isdepicted in figure e1. this figure shows the conceptualrelationships between the army coordinating council, university centers of excellence, and industry consortia as described above.in summary, the nextgeneration r&d model outlined inthis scenario is a new and different approach based on theproven experience of networked organizations like ebay,intel, and ge. it is based on principles that have worked formany successful companies that needed to get quality products and capabilities to market quickly: think big, startsmall, scale fast, and deliver value. it is this type of nextgeneration model that can deliver the knowledge, research,and technology that will enable the nationõs warfighters towin its wars.for this approach to work requires strong commitmentfrom the army and dod senior leadership and their partnersin industry and academia. a small team of the best andbrightest army warfighting r&d specialists committed for3ð4 years and working closely with industry and academiawould not only contribute to accelerating the developmentof the field of network science but also contribute to theprompt and costeffective delivery of effective nco capability (dod, 1999). the army has an opportunity to assumeleadership in developing and implementing this new model.in dod, nco must be a joint effort, and so should the newr&d modelñafter it has been proved in the army. by moving aggressively to implement this model, the army can establish itself as the lead in dod and seize the opportunity tomake a significant contribution toward improvement of jointnetworkcentric warfighting capabilities.the statement of task requests the committee to òidentifyspecific research issues and theoretical, experimental, andpractical challenges to advance the field of network science.óbriefly stated, one such issue (and major challenge as well)will be to obtain value from the investments that the armydoes make to advance network science. in the case of basicresearch (6.1) alone, relevant challenges are identified inscenario 1. in the case of the combined basic and appliedresearch (6.1ð6.3) projects envisaged in scenario 2, the challenges depend sensitively on the topics of the research.to illustrate the scope and scale of nextgeneration r&dprojects with marketdriven management, three projects involving the sociological, engineering, and biological areasof network applications were developed by members of thecommittee as sample projects and are described in followingsections.figure e1schematic depiction of nextgeneration model for army r&d showing the relationship between the main entities in thismodel.armycoordinatingcounciluniversitycenters ofexcellenceindustryconsortialeverage capabilities of army, university, and industry networks to support marketdriven collaborative environment for r&d.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100appendix esociological research: local decision making in anetworked combat environmentwhen networkcentric operations are conducted in thefield, it is envisioned that squads, platoons, and companieswill have access to communications capabilities that providethem with common situational understanding, a commonoperating picture, information necessary for rapid decisionmaking, and ready communications directly with their commanders and peers. operations like ground targeting for precision aerial bombardment require that specific items of information be made accessible to specific elements on (orabove) the battle. experiments have been conducted to determine whether access to this information actually increasescombat effectiveness, and if it does, how. this proposal isfor an exploration of decision making in an informationrichcombat environment via the design and conduct of field teststo assess how army personnel might adapt their processesfor searching for information and for decision making tomake optimal use of newly acquired information resources.this problem is of profound interest to the army becausean understanding of the impact of incremental increases ininformation resources on the search and decision makingprocesses of field units is central to the utilization of theseresources to improve the combat effectiveness of these units.this is especially true if the units are expected to fight undernontraditional circumstances like urban guerilla combat.the proposed approach to this problem is to extend and toadapt current models of networked group decision makingto examine how the availability of nco capabilities mightmodify the decisionmaking processes used by combat unitsin the field and hence the effectiveness of these units (watts,2003). the current models apply more to simpler, more generic situations than to the complex situation of decisionmaking in combat. thus, three lines of investigation wouldbe initiated. first, extensions of the models would be examined to assess the extent to which they can be applied tosocial situations characterized by information exchange between remotely located small groups collaborating to reacha joint decision. second, examples of specific unit decisionsin field situations would be reviewed to assess if a subset ofthe decisions could be isolated and subjected to the discipline of constructing validated models. third, the availability and accessibility of nco information in field settingswould be explored to assess the types and amount of information that realistically could be expected under combat situations. following these initial lines of investigation, an assessment would be made of the feasibility of combining theresults to design and field test a revised set of decisioningprocesses that showed promise of using the available ncoinformation assets to improve combat effectiveness. at thisstage a decision would be made on whether the prospect ofuseful results was good enough that the project could usefully be scaled up to support an actionable technology investment option to develop elements of training modules orspecifications for the user interface to and functionality ofnco capabilities.the committee envisages that the models would be constructed and exercised by leading university groups. theirtest and validation by means of field experiments and simulations would be performed at army facilities using primarily army personnel. these two groups must work togetherintimately, because the current state of the art in modelingobviously does not extend to the complexities of realisticcombat decisioning. therefore, success of this project depends on an exceptional level of creativity both in the extension of current models and in the identification of specificfieldrelevant situations in which they could reasonably betested.the responsibilities of the university personnel would beto explore the range of behaviors described by current models and their extensions and to work with army personnel toassess their applicability to unit decision making in an ncoenvironment. the responsibilities of the army personnel include management of the program, collaboration with theiruniversity partners to assess the applicability of the modelsto nco, design and conduct of tests, participation in theanalysis and interpretation of test results, and preparation ofrecommendations to the army for changes in unit organization and training processes based on the results.the army could make this program attractive to researchers at leading universities by making 5year grants for thework, facilitating the participation of nonu.s. citizens, allowing for timely publication of the results of the 6.1 portions of the program, providing access to stateoftheartcomputing and web collaboration facilities, and making thecompetition for the grants sufficiently rigorous that only topnotch university personnel could participate.special capabilities that would be required includeenough computer power to exercise the models adequatelyand simulation and test facilities for testing models of ncoinformation availability and usage.this proposal envisages an intimate collaboration between army and university personnel in all aspects of planning and executing the program. the project would start witha workshop in which the goals and approach of the projectare defined and procedures for collaboration clarified. theprincipal university personnel involved would be expectedto devote at least 3 months each year to the project, with upto a full year temporary assignment possible during the conduct of the experiments. army personnel would be madeavailable to give participating university groups extendedbriefings on the realities of decision making under combatconditions. efforts would be made to keep the assignment ofthe leaders (both army and university) of the program stableso that good personal and professional relationships wouldbe established.this project is expected to differ from traditional army6.1 programs in focus, intensity, and style. it would construct, validate, and refine models of combat decision maknetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e101ing in an nco environment that would be usable by thearmy in determining the kind of information that is neededand in training soldiers. the research is expected to be performed in the manner of a team social network, and theproject would be intense enough to require fulltime involvement of participants for extended periods. the university andarmy partners will construct a validated model to assess ifspecific items of information envisaged to be available in annco environment can be used to create a decisionmakingprocess that demonstrably improves combat effectiveness.the proposed project also differs from projects sponsoredby funding agencies like nsf or the department of energyby virtue of being a basic research project in model buildingand validation that is embedded in a design, test, and evaluation environment that would be suitable for the observationand description of human behavior in particular networkcentric operations performed by the army.engineering research: largearea agent monitoringnetworkthe goal of this project would be to develop and demonstrate the ability to create algorithms for communications,sensor fusion, and motion control that can maintain an accurate representation of the location, role, and intent of a distributed set of 10,000+ agents in a distributed geographicarea. the sensors would range from highresolution fixedassets (e.g., satellites), to sensors on platforms whose motion can be dedicated to data collection (e.g., unmannedaerial vehicles [uavs]), to sensors whose motion is underlimited control (e.g., sensors attached to already moving objects or fixed in place). connectivity between the sensorsvaries based on local conditions: some sensors are sporadically available, others are mostly available but moving andchanging the network topology, and still others are permanently attached to the network.a civilian example of this capability would be to maintain a dynamic population density estimate across a city thesize of washington, d.c., that is accurate to within +/ð 100people per square kilometer and to use this information tocontrol the flow of individuals to safety shelters inside oroutside the city through a heterogeneous set of transportation systems (cars, trains, buses, walking, etc.). sensorswould include fixed sensors deployed on buildings and inpublic areas, mobile sensors deployed on vehicles (some ofwhich are dedicated to collecting information, others ofwhich have other primary tasks), and personal sensors carried by emergency personnel.a military example of this capability would be to maintain an accurate representation of an urban area that includedinformation on the location of (possibly moving) militaryassets, on the likely location of specific individuals andgroups of military interest, on the status of civilian and military infrastructure (roads, communications, power, etc.), andother information relevant to a military operation. information sources would include dedicated satellite and uav data,sensors attached to military vehicles operating in the area,and fixed and mobile sensors (including cameras, vibrationsensors, communications taps, and power monitoring equipment) placed by military personnel.current solutions to this problem involve either trying tocentralize all information (as, for example, in an air operations center) or maintaining sparsely interconnected information sources (different military units maintain their ownoperating pictures, and these are synchronized at a high leveland with limited fidelity). the main obstacle to better integration of information is not the communications bandwidthavailable, but rather our ability to design, build, and operatecomplex, networked systems at this scale. traditional approaches to analyzing the dynamics and function of suchnetworks are not likely to provide the insights necessary todesign robust, scalable solutions to this problem.one approach to solving this problem while advancingthe field of network science would be to develop a sequenceof annual experiments in which new methods and approachescould be tested in a highly instrumented environment,roughly like the military exercises run at the national training center (ntc). the army would define and pay for running the experiments and would provide access to the datacollected on various nodes. universities and companieswould demonstrate technologies at the experiments, including forming coalitions to integrate their technologies into acomplete solution. a resident military groupñpatterned after, say, the opposing force (opfor) at the ntcñwouldrole play the opposition and try to exploit the technology sothat it provided incorrect information about what is goingon. all data from the experiments would be made availableto the research community at some point after completion ofthe experiments.to implement this set of experiments, the army wouldhave to first identify (or construct) a site and to install instrumentation to allow monitoring of the operation. the type offacility envisaged by the committee would be similar to thearmyõs ntc at fort irwin, which already has many of thetypes of instrumentation that would be required to keep trackof the movement of and communications between a largenumber of troops operating in a military exercise.finally, the army would have to develop (or contractsomeone to develop) a software and hardware frameworkthat defines the interfaces to the portions of the experimentthat are fixed (e.g., the vehicles, sensors, and humaninterface hardware). the interface specifications and a simulation and/or test suite would be made available to all prospective participants in the exercise. these specifications shouldbe focused on exploring the role of network effects in operations and need to represent current military capabilities, systems, or platforms.a possible model for this framework is the open controlplatform (ocp), developed by boeing as part of thesoftwareenabled control (sec) program of the defensenetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102appendix eadvanced research projects agency (darpa). the ocpallowed researchers from academia and industry to run a setof experiments on a test bed consisting of an f16 and a t33. each research site developed its own code, then testedand verified it in simulation. then the code was run on theexperiment, with full data provided to the users at the end ofthe runs. operation of the entire sec final experiment wasthe responsibility of boeing. although this program wasmuch smaller in overall scope than what the committee isproposing here, it provides one example of how to allowmany users to access a common test facility.the experiments must be sufficiently large and complexthat a systemslevel approach is required to succeed. thecommittee anticipates that an experiment would involve between 10 and 100 vehicles, hundreds of troops (each connected to the network), and 10,000+ individual sensors andinformation sources. the venue of the experiment wouldhave a like number of individual agents that needed to betracked and characterized, as described in the civilian andmilitary applications above.the participants would be teams of researchers, technologists, and engineers from academia and industry. universityresearchers would provide new ideas for methods to integrate information, implemented as protocols, algorithms, andtheory. they would develop software for communicationprotocols, sensor fusion, control, etc. industry would be responsible for overall systems integration as well as implementation of advanced methods for information aggregationin a networked environment. the army would manage theoperation but also insert new technologies from small business innovation research (sbir) and other entities receiving 6.2 funding under their control. several recent examplesof such programs, such as the darpa sec and biospiceprograms, could be used as models for how the teams wouldwork together.the program would be structured to attract participants.the availability of largescale experimental infrastructureand data sets for further research would motivate participation by universities, since this capability would be well beyond what is typically available in an academic environment.it would also be important to provide a mechanism for longterm support of fundamental research in network science,perhaps by engaging a dedicated set of researchers to studythe overall experiment and provide a running assessment ofthe adequacy of the science to explain the results of the exercise. in addition to allowing exploration of engineering aspects of network science, this type of environment could alsobe used to explore the social aspects of networks in militaryoperationsñfor example, the impact of changes in the network on the tactics used by friendly and enemy units.biological research: field biological threat assessmentmilitary personnel are deployed widely in different areasof the globe, are exposed to the different environments anddiseases at these locations, and are then, often quickly, redeployed elsewhere in the world. in addition, there is a threatof directed biological attack on the force during combat.these intense conditions can lead to the rapid infection oftroops and the spread of agents across the world if not immediately detected and neutralized. such a threat is also encountered in civilian situations, where economic needs mightdrive the invasion of remote locations, such as biologicallydiverse rain forests to collect medicines or wilderness area todrill for oil. other such situations might entail the exchangeof bacterially and virally dense sea waters through ballastuptake and dumping by commercial or tourist ships. each ofthese cases involves the introduction of infective biologicalsystems from onceisolated remote locations to places whereindividuals have not built immunity to them.the mobility of the military, or even civilian, participantsmeans infections could be brought from the site of interaction to the wider community. avian influenza provides aprime illustration of the danger posed (see box e1) andunderscores the importance of having in place a wellinformed surveillance and decision structure to detect and respond to emerging biological threats.the goals of this project would be to develop a focusedcapability to monitor the biological load of troops prone torapid redeployment, to demonstrate a capability to detect andidentify the source of new biological threats to soldier health,and to provide recommendations for the control of suchthreats to individuals and populations. a longer term goalwould be to turn this information into sufficient knowledgeabout the biological organism at the molecular level to allowrapid development and deployment of pharmaceutical solutions. for the purposes of this report the committee uses asexamples existing viral threats such as human immunodeficiency virus (hiv1), influenza, and west nile virus and theemerging threat of avian flu. similar considerations apply,however, to bacterial threats such as anthrax, tularensis, andleishmania (a particular problem in the middle easterntheater).this overall assessment effort would require a network ofmonitoring stations reporting on samples from the environment and patients, looking for prevalence of the threat agentand patient response to the agent in terms of morbidity andvirulence indices. agents would be rapidly sequenced andtyped. these sequences would be related to their virulencesand used to track the spread of a particular strain from location to location. models of the viral infection and transmission process based on the sequence and prior measurementsof similar strains would inform network models of the spreadand mutation of these viruses. these models, in turn, wouldenable rapid risk assessments when an infection appears at agiven site.this biology project links with the social and engineeringnetwork sample projects presented above. data from arraysof sensors in the environment and on individual soldierswould need to be fused into a database of biological andnetwork sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e103geographical information. this database would be providedwith analytical and decision management tools that assessthe risk associated with detection of a new strain of virus orinfection event. the information would need to be coordinated from forward field laboratories to commanders responsible for combat operations, especially troop deployment.a pilot study in this area would be designed to cooperatewith marine and u.s. navy seabee medical aid stations(mass) already engaged in disease and noncombat illnesssurveillance, as well as with the global disease tracking efforts of the centers for disease control (cdc) and the worldhealth organization (who). the mass could be chargedwith monitoring soldiers for a panel of viral species andwould be outfitted to rapidly sequence isolates. perhaps afield team would be dispensed to sequence similar viruses inlocal fauna and environments. sequences would be filed indatabases along with soldier data (health and some form ofidentifier for tracking where individuals are stationed andhow they are moved from place to place). these databaseswould be integrated with, for example, the influenza database at los alamos national laboratory.5 a university teamwould work on relating sequence, virulence, and geographicinformation into a model of the sequence determinants ofdifferent virulence and epidemiological parameters, such astransmissibility and the rate of mutation. working with adod team, the university team would develop structuredepidemiological models of the spread and of new viral infections in the troop population based on models of troop movement and the viral dynamics. an army team would thenfocus on modeling decision processes under different scenarios in order to optimize containment of any viral threat.this project involves four major challenges: (1) choosingthe scale, breadth, and accuracy of the data needed for construction and parameterization of the network models, (2)developing a modeling framework relating data at the viralsequence level to the level of whole populations of infectedindividuals, (3) creating modeling tools that take into account the unique ability of live biological threat agents toadapt to and mutate around human interventions, and (4)developing a decision support model that prescribes an effective course of medical and social intervention to quell apossible viral outbreak. this work faces the challenges generally faced by multimodal, multiscale network analysisñhow to place the sensors (in this case medical and environmental surveillance); how to fuse their information intonetwork models at both the epidemiological and molecularbox e1case study from the world health organization: avian influenzaavian influenza is an infectious disease of birds caused by the type a strain of influenza. nearly all birds are susceptible to it, and different strains havewidely differing virulences, with some strains being highly contagious and able to cause severe symptoms, death, or dangerous epidemics. there are atleast 15 subtypes of avian influenza that provide an extensive pool of virus. contact between domestic and migratory birds transmits and mixes thesepools, and research has shown that even viruses of low pathogenicity can, after circulating for only a short time, mutate into highly pathogenic viruses.early detection of these virulent strains and strict quarantine are the most effective means of control. good sanitation helps in prevention, but virus canexist in the environment for long periods, especially in cold regions. in the absence of prompt control measures backed by excellent surveillance,epidemics can last for years.one of the most worrisome aspects of these viruses is their ability to efficiently recombine their genetic material with that of other viruses to cause anantigenic shift, creating variants less likely to be halted by the immune systems of the birds. these viruses rarely hop species (except to pigs), but therehave been a number of recent cases of the avian flu hopping from birds to humans. these cases are so disturbing that a 1997 outbreak of one highlypathogenic strain (h5n1) in hong kong poultry that directly spread to 18 humans, 6 of whom died, caused the government to destroy within 3 days theentire poultry population of 1.5 million birds. this action likely averted a largescale spread to humans and a pandemic. the infected persons were oftenotherwise healthy, and there seemed to be no age preference. since then there have been a number of other outbreaks in southern china, viet nam, andkorea.the h5n1 strain is of particular concern because it has a propensity to acquire genes from viruses that infect other animal species, increasing theprobability that these new strains might become virulent to humans. testing and diagnosis for the virus is rapid and reliable, and treatment is the sameas for human flu. vaccines can be effective, although only temporarily. antivirals often work, but they are expensive and in short supply. the upshot is thatrapid detection, estimation of the threat, and good command and control, such as was demonstrated in the hong kong poultry massacre, are importantmeans for containing this possible source of pandemic.source: adapted from a document found at http://www.who.int/csr/don/20040115/en/.5for further information, see http://www.flu.lanl.gov. accessed august19, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104appendix elevels; and how to use these network models to direct distribution of resources and to design interventionsñand requires network science at all scales. since coordination andcommunication among the teams is paramount to the success of a project at this scale, the online infrastructure andcomputational resources would be an early focus.an initial coordination team would identify the key existing infrastructure for achieving the project goals and wouldestablish contact with the requisite field sites and field military personnel. the team would develop a knowledge of thekey data trackers in the who and cdc. it would identifycandidates to participate in the program. key governmentplayers and invited participants would attend a workshop todiscuss what technology, resources, and organization wouldbe necessary for success of the program. a subset of thisgroup would form a project team and create the final 5yearproject design. dedicated team leaders would be chosen fromthe army, other government agencies, and nonmilitary research groups.the scale of the work, the diversity of participating agencies, and the use of military field data make this a projectoutside the scope of most funding agencies. the committeeexpects that the basic science to be accomplished as well asthe important societal and military applications would makethis project attractive to the scientific community at large.scenario 3, creating a robust ncw/ncocapabilitythe statement of task instructs the committee to òrecommend those relevant research areas that the army should invest in to enable progress toward achieving networkcentricwarfare capabilities.ó when the committee examined the literature on this topic from the dod oft, it discovered thatthe concept of ònetworkcentric warfareó had been superseded by the concept of ònetworkcentric operations,ó asdescribed in a conceptual framework document publishedon the oft web site6 (cebrowski and garstka, 1998;garstka and alberts, 2004). in interviews and discussionswith representatives of the army and dod, committee members learned that opinions on ncw and nco varied widelyand were substantial, not just a matter of nomenclature.moreover, the literature on the topic is dynamic, with newreports and publications frequent. since this report is intended as an archival document, the committee elected touse the published conceptual framework description version2.0 (garstka and alberts, 2004) as its point of reference.in scenario 3, the committee adopts a national point ofview. its purpose is to ask what the nation must do if thestrategic vision of nco is to become a reality. investment inresearch by the army is a part of scenario 3, albeit a modestone.transforming the u.s. military from its current state tothat envisaged for nco, as described by garstka and alberts(2004), is probably the most complex undertaking in the history of the u.s. government. its achievement would arguably be comparable to the successful pursuit of world warii or the cold war with the soviet union. it is a longterm,difficult, costly, and risky undertaking. it is not clear to thecommittee that the difficulty, cost, and risk associated withthis notion have been communicated effectively to the senior management of the army and dod. in scenario 3, thecommittee emphasizes the magnitude of the undertaking andsets forth the view that significant new activities will be required to accomplish it.think first of designing the most complex weapons system yet: say, a large aircraft carrier. add to this the complications in the physical domain associated with, for example,secure, reliable wireless communications via satellite to soldiers on a mobile battlefield. in the information domain, addthe hardware and software challenges associated with storage, search, and retrieval of orders of magnitude more datathan have ever before been processed in real time, as well asthe challenges associated with ensuring the security and reliability of these data. in the cognitive domain, add issues associated with processing information from all three servicesby a junior officer at a local (mobile) workstation. in thesocial domain, add the complications of orchestrating thedecisionmaking process in this informationrich, realtimeenvironment and the issues associated with tactics and training to use all this informationprocessing capability. in allseriousness, the challenge seems more like science fictionthan like science and technology that can be delivered up bythe r&d operations of the military services as currently constituted or even by commercial r&d.the committee regards it as highly unlikely that existingmethods of designing and procuring weapons systems willbe adequate to accomplish this monumental undertaking.current experience in the services themselves supports thispoint of view (brewin, 2005). the committee regards thetask of converting the current state of the u.s. military to thevision articulated for nco as vastly more challenging thanseems to be appreciated.not only is the task dauntingly complex, the knowledgenecessary to accomplish it does not even exist. in similarcasesñthe manhattan project and the initial days of nasacome to mindña focused, longterm national initiative wasrequired, and it seems likely that something similar will berequired in this case also. thus, in scenario 3 the unitedstates undertakes a focused national initiative, comparablein scope to the manhattan project, to design and deploy ncocapabilities as described in the conceptual framework document version 2.0 for all the military services during thecoming decade.6for further information, see http://www.oft.osd.mil/. accessed august19, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix e105insights from network thinkingwhat insight does network thinking offer on this subject?first, a network organization (as opposed to a hierarchicalone) is required because the organization must learn how todo the job on the job.7 a critical function is specifying thearchitecture of the interacting networks in the various domains, setting the interfaces between them, and monitoringsuccessive waves of implementation to ensure consistencyand learning. this could be accomplished by a senior executive office that also managed the program itself. underneaththis top layer of the network is a project management layerresponsible for converting the architecture into a series ofprojects that implement and test various elements of the architecture. think of this layer as the middleware of the organization. beneath this is a network layer of vendors and military logistic organizations that provide and source thematerial for operational commands. a model for the vendororganization might be sematech. a model for the logisticsorganization might be the nuclear navy. the importantpoints are that a new network organizational structure andwork process is required to create a capability of this complexity and that the scale of the activity is larger than thearmy alone; it must be national, or at least dodwide.another insight is that the design and implementation ofnco capabilities are on the same scale and of the same complexity as their use. the same principles of better, faster decisions by means of information sharing apply. thus, theenvironment in which the capabilities are designed can beregarded as a test bed for many of the expected capabilitiesthemselves in the information, cognitive, and social domains.taking advantage of this insight could make the overall jobless onerous and should be an explicit consideration in initiatives to create nco capabilities.synopsisthe committee was not tasked to resolve the issues raisedin scenario 3 but considers their resolution to be of paramount national urgency. the committee stresses that theknowledge of networks that we possess today is not adequateto design predictable, secure, robust global networks. members heard presentations and read reports on how the òtransformationó to a future force capable of nco is not likely tobe achieved by traditional approaches to creating technology. they came to recognize that the policies and practicescurrently used to procure these capabilities do not take intoconsideration the uncertainties inherent in the current stateof understanding the design and implementation of complexnetworks. the purpose of scenario 3, then, is to emphasizethat the task of designing, testing, and operating the envisaged nco capabilities is of an exceedingly high order ofcomplexity and should be approached as seriously as themanhattan project or nasaõs race to the moon.the committee would be remiss in its responsibilities if itfailed to note the essential urgency and profound difficultyof this task. the chances of delivering nco capabilities in atimely and affordable way would be greatly increased by afocused national initiative combining the initiatives of allservices under central leadership, to respond successfully tothe diverse challenges of future warfare.referencesalbert, r., and a.l. barab⁄si. 2002. statistical mechanics of complex networks. review of modern physics 74(1): 47ð97.albert, r., h. jeong, and a.l. barab⁄si. 2000. error and attack tolerance ofcomplex networks. nature 406(6794): 378ð382.almaas, e., b. kovacs, t. vicsek, z.n. oltvai, and a.l. barab⁄si. 2004.global organization of metabolic fluxes in the bacterium escherichiacoli. nature 427(6977): 839ð843.amaral, l.a.n., a. barrat, a.l. barab⁄si, g. caldarelli, p. de los rios, a.erzan, b. kahng, r. mantegna, j.f.f. mendes, r. pastorsatorras, anda. vespignani. 2004. virtual roundtable on ten leading questions fornetwork research. european physical journal b 38(2): 143ð145.anderson, r.m., and r.m. may. 1992. infectious disease of humans: dynamics and control. oxford, england: oxford university press/oxfordscience publications.arquilla, j., and d. ronfeldt. 2001. networks and netwars: the future ofterror, crime, and militancy. santa monica, calif.: rand.barab⁄si, a.l. 2003. linked. new york, n.y.: plume, a member of thepenguin group, inc.barab⁄si, a.l., and z.n. oltvai. 2004. network biology: understanding thecellõs functional organization. nature reviews: genetics 5(2): 101ð114.barrat, a., m. barth”lemy, r. pastorsatorras, and a. vespignani. 2004.the architecture of complex weighted networks. proceedings of thenational academy of sciences of the united states of america 101(11):3747ð3752.bennaim, e., h. frauenfelder, and z. toroczkai. 2004. complex networks. new york, n.y.: springerverlag.bornholdt, s., and h.g. schuster, eds. 2003. handbook of graphs and networks: from the genome to the internet. weinheim, berlin: wileyvch.brewin, r. 2005. dod mulls network coordination. available at http://www.fcw.com/article88939052305print/. accessed may 31, 2005.cebrowski, a., and j. garstka. 1998. network centric warfare. proceedingsof the united states naval institute 24: 28ð35.cohen, r., k. reez, d. benavrahan, and s. havlin. 2000. resilience of theinternet to random breakdowns. physical review letters 85(21): 4626ð4628.cohen, r., k. reez, d. benavrahan, and s. havlin. 2001. breakdown ofthe internet under intentional attack. physical review letters 86(16):3682ð3685.department of defense (dod). 1999. dod financial management regulation volume h.dodds, p.s., and d.j. watts. 2004. universal behavior in a generalizedmodel of contagion. physical review letters 92(21): 218701.dodds, p.s., and d.j. watts. 2005. a generalized model of social and biological contagion. journal of theoretical biology 232(4): 587ð604.dodds, p.s., d.j. watts, and c.f. sabel. 2003. information exchange andthe robustness of organizational networks. proceedings of the nationalacademy of sciences of the united states of america 100(21): 12516ð12521.7c.f. sabel, professor of law and social science, columbia law school,òtheory of a realtime revolution,ó briefing to the 19th egos colloquium,copenhagen, july 2003.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106appendix edorogovtsev, s.n., and j.f.f. mendes. 2003. evolution of networks: frombiological nets to the internet and www. oxford, england: oxforduniversity press.garstka, j., and d. alberts. 2004. network centric operations conceptualframework version 2.0. vienna, va.: evidence based research, inc.gladwell, m. 2000. the tipping point: how little things can make a bigdifference. new york, n.y.: little, brown and company.helper, s., j.p. macduffie, and c. sabel. 2000. pragmatic collaborations:advancing knowledge while controlling opportunism. industrial andcorporate change 9(3): 443ð483.huckfeldt, r., p.e. johnson, and a. sprague. 2004. political disagreement:the survival of diverse opinions within communication networks.cambridge, england: cambridge university press.katz, e., and p.f. lazarsfeld. 1955. personal influence: the part played bypeople in the flow of mass communications. glencoe, ill.: free press.newman, m.e.j. 2003. the structure and function of complex networks.siam review 45(2): 167ð256.newman, m.e.j., a.l. barab⁄si, and d. watts, eds. 2005. the structureand dynamics of networks. princeton, n.j.: princeton university press.pastorsatorras, r., and a. vespignani. 2004. evolution and structure ofthe internet: a statistical physics approach. cambridge, england: cambridge university press.rogers, e.m. 1995. diffusion of innovations. new york, n.y.: free press.surowiecki, j. 2004. the wisdom of crowds: why the many are smarterthan the few and how collective wisdom shapes business, economies, societies and nations. new york, n.y.: doubleday.tanenbaum, a.s. 2003. computer networks, 4th edition. upper saddleriver, n.j.: prentice hall ptr.watts, d.j. 2002. a simple model of information cascades on random networks. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the unitedstates of america 99(9): 5766ð5771.watts, d.j. 2003. six degrees: the science of a connected age. new york,n.y.: norton.watts, d.j. 2004. the ònewó science of networks. annual review of sociology 30(1): 243ð270.weiner, t. 2005. òdrive to build hightech army hits cost snags.ó newyork times, march 28, 2005.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.107frecommended reading listahmadjian, c.l., and j.r. lincoln. 2001. keiretsu, governance, and learning: case studies in change from the japanese automotive industry. organization science 12(6): 683ð701.alberts, d.s., and r.e. hayes. 2003. power to the edge: command andcontrol in the information age. washington, d.c.: ccrp publicationseries.alberts, d.s., and t.j. czerwinski, eds. 1997. complexity, global politicsand national security. washington, d.c.: national defense universitypress.amin, m. 2002. modeling and control of complex interactive networks.ieee control systems magazine: 22ð27.arquilla, j., and d. ronfeldt. 2000. swarming and the future of combat.santa monica, calif.: rand national defense research institute.artzyrandrup, y., s.j. fleishman, n. bental, and l. stone. 2004. comment on ònetwork motifs: simple building blocks of complex networksóand òsuperfamilies of evolved and designed networks.ó science305(5687): 1107c.barab⁄si, a.l. linked. 2003. new york, n.y.: plume, a member of thepenguin group, inc.barab⁄si, a.l., and z.n. oltvai. 2004. network biology: understanding thecellõs functional organization. nature reviews: genetics 5(2): 101ð114.berkowitz, b. 2003. the new face of war: how war will be fought in the21st century. new york, n.y.: simon and schuster.bower, j.m., and h. bolouri, eds. 2001. computational modeling of generic and biochemical networks. cambridge, mass.: mit press.buchanan, m. 2002. nexus: small worlds and the groundbreaking scienceof networks. new york, n.y.: norton.bushnell, l.g. 2001. networks and control. ieee control systems magazine (1): 22ð23.carley, k.m. 1995. communication technologies and their effect on cultural homogeneity, consensus, and the diffusion of new ideas. sociological perspectives 38(4): 547ð571.carley, k.m. 2001. smart agents and organizations of the future. thousand oaks, calif.: sage publications.carley, k.m. 2003. dynamic network analysis. pp. 133ð145 in dynamicsocial network modeling and analysis: workshop summary and papers. washington, d.c.: national academy press.carley, k.m., j.s. lee, and d. krackhardt. 2001. destabilizing networks.connections 24(3): 31ð34.clippinger, j.h. human nature and social networks. available at http://www.dodccrp.org. forthcoming.davis, s., and c. meyer. 1998. blur: the speed of change in the connectedeconomy. new york, n.y.: warner books.davis, s., and c. meyer. 2003. itõs alive: the coming convergence ofinformation, biology, and business. chapter 3 and chapter 7. newyork, n.y.: crown business.epstein, j.m. 2002. modeling civil violence: an agentbased computationalapproach. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of theunited states of america (pnas) 99(suppl. 3): 7243ð7250.ferber, d. 2004. synthetic biology: microbes made to order. science303(5655): 158ð161.fukuyama, f. 1995. trust: the social virtues and the creation of prosperity. new york, n.y.: free press.gaddis, j. 2004. the landscape of history: how historians map the past.vienna, va.: evidence based research, inc.garstka, j., and d. alberts. 2003. network centric operations conceptualframework version 2.0. vienna, va.: evidence based research, inc.gerchman, y., and r. weiss. 2004. teaching bacteria a new language. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states ofamerica 101(8): 2221ð2222.goldsmith, s., and w.d. eggers. 2004. governing by network: cios andthe new public sector. washington, d.c., and cambridge, mass.:brookings institution press and innovations in american governmentprogram at the john f. kennedy school of government at harvarduniversity.hammes, t.x. 2004. the sling and the stone: on war in the 21st century.osceola, wis.: zenith press.hoffman, f.g., and g. horne, eds. 1998. maneuver warfare science.quantico, va.: u.s. marine corps combat development command.horn, p. 2005. the new discipline of services science. business week.available at http://ww.businessweek.com/technology/content/jan2005/tc200501218020.htm?campaignid=nwstechnjan25&linkposition=link10.last accessed on february 28, 2005.ilachinksi, a. 2004. artificial war: multiagentbased simulation of combat. hackensack, n.j.: world scientific press.james, g.e. 1995. chaos theory: the essentials for military application.newport, r.i.: naval war college press.jervis, r. 2001. system effects: complexity in political and social life.princeton, n.j.: princeton university press.keller, e.f. 2002. making sense of life: explaining biological development with models, metaphors and machines. cambridge, mass.:harvard university press.keller, e.f. revisiting òscalefreeó networks. bioessays. in press.kelly, k. 1999. new rules for the new economy. new york, n.y.: penguin group.kobayashi, h., m. k¾rn, m. araki, k. chung, t.s. gardner, c.r. cantor,and j.j. collins. 2004. programmable cells: interfacing natural and engineered gene networks. proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united states of america 101(22): 8414ð8419.network sciencecopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108appendix flooger, l.l., m.a. dwyer, j.j. smith, and h.w. hellinga. 2003. computational design of receptor and sensor proteins with novel functions. nature 423(6936): 185ð189.lun, l., d. alderson, w. willinger, and j. doyle. 2004. a firstprinciplesapproach to understanding the internetõs routerlevel topology. proceedings of sigcomm 04.malone, t.w. 2004. the future of work: how the new order of businesswill shape your organization, your management style and your life.cambridge, mass.: harvard business school press.murray, r.m., ed. 2003. control in an information rich world, report ofthe panel on future directions in control, dynamics, and systems.philadelphia, pa.: society for industrial and applied mathematics.national research council (nrc). 2001. opportunities in biotechnologyfor future army applications. washington, d.c.: national academypress.newman, m.e.j. 2001. the structure of scientific collaboration networks.proceedings of the national academy of sciences of the united statesof america 98(2): 404ð409.newman, m.e.j. 2003. the structure and function of complex networks.siam review 45(2): 167ð256.parmentola, j.a. 2004. army transformation: paradigmshifting capabilities through biotechnology. the bridge: linking engineering and society 34(3): 33ð39.perez, c. 2002. technological revolutions and financial capital: the dynamics of bubbles and golden ages. cheltenham, england: edwardelgar publishers.reed, d.p. 1999. weapon of math destruction. available at http://www.contextmag.com/archives/199903/digitalstrategy.asp/. last accessed on march 23, 2005.rheingold, h. 2002. smart mobs: the next social revolution. cambridge,mass.: ma basic books.sable, c.f. 2003. theory of a real time revolution. paper presented at the19th egos colloquium. july 3ð5. forthcoming.scott, j. 2000. social network analysis: a handbook. thousand oaks,calif.: sage publications.silver, p., and j. way. 2004. the potential for synthetic biology. the scientist 18(18): 30ð31.smith, m.a. 1998. communities in cyberspace. oxford, england:routledge.strogatz, s.h. 2001. exploring complex networks. nature 410(6825): 268ð276.strogatz, s.h. 2003. sync: the emerging science of spontaneous order.pp.229ð259. new york, n.y.: theia books.tanenbaum, a.s. 2003. computer networks, 4th edition. upper saddleriver, n.j.: prentice hall ptr.u.s. marine corps (usmc). 1996. control and command. distributionnumber 142 000001 00. washington, d.c.usmc. 1997. warfighting. distribution number 142 000006 00. washington, d.c.von bertalanffy, l. 1976. general system theory: foundations, development, applications. new york, n.y.: george braziller, inc.waldrop, m.m. 1992. complexity: the emerging science at the edge oforder and chaos. new york, n.y.: simon and schuster.watts, d.j. 2003. six degrees: the science of a connected age. new york,n.y.: w.w. norton.watts, d.j. 2004. the ònewó science of networks. annual review of sociology 30(1): 243ð270.watts, d.j., and s.h. strogatz. 1998. collective dynamics of òsmallworldónetworks. nature 393(6666): 440ð442.wellman, b. 1996. computer networks as social networks: collaborativework, telework, and virtual community. annual review of sociology22(1): 213ð238.wellman, b. 2001. computer networks as social networks. science293(5537): 2031ð2034.wellman, b. 2001. physical place and cyberplace: the rise of personalizednetworks. international journal of urban and regional research 25(2):227ð252.west, g.b., and j.h. brown. 2004. lifeõs universal scaling laws. physicstoday 57(9): 36ð43.wilson, c. 2004. network centric warfare: background and oversight issues for congress, order code rl32411. washington, d.c.: congressional research service, library of congress.wolkenhauer, o., b.k. ghosh, and k.h cho. 2004. control and coordinationin biochemical networks. ieee control systems magazine (4): 30ð34.