detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11529basic research in information science and technology for airforce needs116 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309100311 | doi 10.17226/11529committee on directions for the afosr mathematics and space sciences directoraterelated to information science and technology; board on mathematical sciencesand their applications; national research councilbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on directions for the afosr mathematics and space sciencesdirectorate related to information science and technologyboard on mathematical sciences and their applicationsthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.edubasic research ininformation scienceandtechnologyforairforceneedsbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press500 fifth street, n.w.washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by thegoverning board of the national research council, whose members are drawnfrom the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy ofengineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committeeresponsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and withregard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract no. f1ata04295m001 between the national academy of sciences and the air force office of scientific research. anyopinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number 0309100313copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifthstreet, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313(in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2006 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americabasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuatingsociety of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research,dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for thegeneral welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of thenational academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members,sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising thefederal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulfis president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. theinstitute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciencesby its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, uponits own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education.dr.harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy ofsciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy,the council has become the principal operating agency of both the nationalacademy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providingservices to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute ofmedicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on directions for the afosr mathematicsand space sciences directorate related toinformation science and technologyalan j. mclaughlin, mit lincoln laboratory (retired), chairruzena k. bajcsy, university of california at berkeleyelwyn berlekamp, university of california at berkeleyphilip a. bernstein, microsoft corporationroger w. brockett, harvard universityvincent chan, massachusetts institute of technologystephen cross, georgia institute of technologyedward felten, princeton universityoscar garcia, university of north texasw. david kelton, university of cincinnatiklara nahrstedt, university of illinois at urbanachampaignprabhakar raghavan, yahoo, inc.ronald w. schafer, hewlettpackard laboratoriesstaffscott weidman, director, board on mathematical sciences andtheir applicationsbarbara wright, administrative assistantvbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.board on mathematical sciencesand their applicationsdavid w. mclaughlin, new york university, chairtanya styblo beder, tribeca investments, llcpatrick l. brockett, university of texas at austinaravinda chakravarti, johns hopkins university school ofmedicinephillip colella, lawrence berkeley national laboratorylawrence craig evans, university of california at berkeleyjohn e. hopcroft, cornell universityrobert kass, carnegie mellon universitykathryn b. laskey, george mason universityc. david levermore, university of marylandrobert lipshutz, affymetrix, inc.charles m. lucas, aigcharles manski, northwestern universityjoyce mclaughlin, rensselaer polytechnic instituteprabhakar raghavan, yahoo, inc.stephen m. robinson, university of wisconsinmadisonedward wegman, george mason universitydetlof von winterfeldt, university of southern californiastaffscott weidman, directorbarbara wright, administrative assistantvifor more information on bmsa, see its web site at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/bms/, write to bmsa, national research council, 500 fifth street, n.w., washington, dc 20001, call at (202) 3342421, or email at bmsa@nas.edu.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the nrc’s report review committee. the purposeof this independent review is to provide candid and critical commentsthat will assist the institution in making its published report as sound aspossible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards forobjectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the reviewcomments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrityof the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individualsfor their review of this report:c. william gear, princeton university,eric horvitz, microsoft research,john w. lyons, u.s. army research laboratory (retired),debasis mitra, bell laboratories,s. shankara sastry, university of california at berkeley,william scherlis, carnegie mellon university, andsheila e. widnall, massachusetts institute of technology.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse theconclusions or recommendations nor did they see the final draft of thereport before its release. the review of this report was overseen by williamh. press, los alamos national laboratory. appointed by the nationalresearch council, he was responsible for making certain that an indeviibasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiacknowledgmentspendent examination of this report was carried out in accordance withinstitutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirelywith the authoring committee and the institution.the committee thanks members of the afosr staff of the air forceresearch laboratory’s information directorate; staff of the air combatcommand; thomas cruse, chief technologist of the air force researchlaboratory; and shankara sastry and janos sztipanovits of the air forcescientific advisory board for their helpful discussions and inputs to thisstudy.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsexecutive summary11introduction172background22overview of air force goals that rely on is&t research, 27the r&d response: current directions, 293basic research for air force network systems35and communicationstypes and characteristics of communication and networkservices needed in the future, 35technical challenges posed by future air force networks andcommunications systems, 37challenges for future air force communications systems, 37challenges for future air force networks, 41recommended basic research areas in support of air forcenetworks and communications, 48satellite communications and data networking, 49radio communications and networking, 50freespace optical networks, 51ixbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xcontents4basic research for air force software53coevolution of air force concepts of operations and systemarchitectures, 55software behavior envelopes, 58evolvability throughout the life cycle, 595basic research for air force information61management and integrationbackground, 61major information management challenges forair force is&t, 63recommended basic research in information management andintegration, 676basic research for human interactions with71air force is&t systemschallenges posed by human interactions with air forceis&t systems, 72scope of the challenge, 72interfaces for air force decision makers, 74machine learning to support hsi, 76simulation as a design and training tool for hsi, 77basic research recommendations for hsi for air forceis&t systems, 777priorities in basic is&t research for the air force80a model for air force is&t basic research, 80recommended basic research priorities in is&t, 848funding mechanisms879future considerations91program organization, 91recruitment of program managers, 92a mechanism for fostering experimental research in is&t, 93appendixesameeting agendas101bacronyms105basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1executive summarythe u.s. air force, like the other services, is transforming itself into anew type of force with capabilities appropriate for an emerging array ofnew threats. the air force roadmap for transformation, part of the u.s.air force transformation flight plan,1 describes the desired new capabilities, and it is readily seen that advances in information science and technology (is&t) underpin most of them. for example, the three main newcapabilities are information superiority, precision targeting (or strike), andimproved battlespace awareness. the first requires secure and survivablecommand and control systems; methods for sharing, tailoring, and distributing vast amounts of information; decision aids; and offensive anddefensive cyber warfare. precision strike implies the ability to place munitions with minimal error anyplace required to achieve a military objective, and also the ability to perform rapid damage assessment. and improved battlespace awareness requires the ability to fuse and conveyinformation so that decision makers can fully understand the plan of action and its execution in real time and be able to rapidly assess and anticipate necessary changes to the plan.in order to refocus its program of basic research in is&t to bettersupport these air force goals, the air force office of scientific research(afosr) asked the national research council to establish a committeecharged with the following task:1available at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/aftransflightplan.pdf. referred to inthis report as the air force flight plan.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2basic research for air force is&t needsthe study will create a vision and plan for the is&trelated programswithin the afosrõs mathematics and space sciences directorate. basedon the spectrum of air force is&t needs and the context in which themathematics and space sciences directorate operates, the committee willdo the following:¥identify which of the air forceõs is&t needs seem to call for afosrsponsored r&d;¥recommend a program of 6.1 research2 in is&t that is not being doneelsewhere (or is not readily applicable to air force situations) andthat covers the most critical or broadly useful topics that fit within thepurview of the mathematics and space sciences directorate;¥develop rough estimates of the funding needed to make credibleprogress in this program of is&trelated research, with a prioritizationthat defines what could be adequately covered with flat funding, a10percent decrease, a 10 percent increase, and a 25 percent increase.recommend how the directorate might transition from its current program to the envisioned one under these various budget scenarios; and¥recommend an appropriate balance of funding mechanisms for thedirectorateõs is&trelated research, choosing among the various mechanisms currently in use in the directorate.this report is the outcome of that committeeõs study.the committee learned about air force goals from a variety of sources,including printed reports, briefings at the air force research laboratory(afrl) and the air combat command, and discussions with senior airforce leaders in research and development (r&d). from these sources,the committee concluded that most of the capabilities desired by the airforce cannot be attained without continued is&t r&d. this is because itpervades most, if not all, envisioned air force systems and is often theprincipal enabler of system capability, yet it is still an immature engineering discipline requiring much work to assure predictable results whena system requires itrelated innovation. furthermore, nearly all of thosecapabilities require some advances that are unlikely to be developed commercially or by the other services and therefore will require targeted r&dby the air force itself. moreover, nearly all of that air forcespecific r&dmust include ambitious basic research, because significant gaps exist inthe knowledge base upon which the desired capabilities will be built.2in the department of defense (dod), funding lines are assigned numbers, and 6.1 is theline for basic research. within the air force, the afosr is in charge of all 6.1 funding, mostof which is used to support peerreviewed academic research. funds for applied researchand development (r&d) are designated 6.2 or 6.3.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary3the committee, echoing what is already understood within the afosrr&d establishment, identified (1) access to disparate data and information, (2) their fusion and appropriate distribution, and (3) conversion ofinformation into knowledge as the necessary building blocks for attainingthe desired capabilities. these building blocks, like most of the air forceõsdesired capabilities, rely on teamfocused, networkenabled systemsñthatis, interlocking systems made possible by networks that enable the teamsto work together. the committee concluded that research to develop thosebuilding blocks is the most important air force need, one that will persistas long as the air force relies on networkenabled systems, and from itsinitial store of ideas about which kinds of research would be relevant toair force is&t, the committee identified four that underpin teamfocused,networkenabled systems of any kind: research in networks and communications, software, information management, and humansystem interactions (hsi). the committeeõs vision for afosrõs is&t program iscaptured in figure es1. distributed research and experimentation environments are discussed in chapter 9 and some grand challenges areproposed in chapter 7. then, the committee summarizes the research itrecommends in each of these areas.figure es1a vision for air force is&t research: teamfocused, networkenabled systems are created by the four research areas shown. the concerted efforts in the four areas, which also affect one another, are to be focused by grandchallenges identified by the afosr and by experiments conducted in distributedresearch and experimentation environments.humansystem interactionsinformation managementsoftwarenetworks and communicationsdistributed research and experimentation environmentsgrand challengesbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4basic research for air force is&t needsnetworks and communicationsair force applications must contend with communication modalitiesthat are not encountered in commercial and civilian settings. for example,satellite channels have unusually longdelay data rates and randomlyfading dispersive channel characteristics. classical communication andinformation theories do not incorporate an element of adversarial attacks.radio channels, especially those associated with mobile platforms, haverapidly changing link capacities and connectivity, with disconnectionsand dropouts that can last minutes or more. in contrast with this dynamism,traditional layer 3 (network layer) and layer 4 (transport layer) protocols assume fairly stable underlying substrates that change, if at all, overthe course of minutesñthat is, much more slowly than most transmissions. these traditional protocols often yield low throughputs and poorquality service when applied to defense systems; in some cases, they donot work at all despite valiant efforts to provide patches. thus, the mainchallenge of air force communications is to provide assured connectivitybetween networks (albeit at varying rates) under difficult channel conditions, including during adversarial attacks.another air force communications challenge is how to recognizewhen multiple sensors have collected related observations so that redundancy can be removed or complementary data fused. this is essential inorder to stay within network bandwidth capacities, especially in difficultcommunication environments. more generally, the theory of networks hasnot matured to a point where one can predict how well protocols developed heuristically in one application setting will perform on a communication network built on radically different communication modalities. todeal with the new and complicated modalities of importance to the airforce, fundamental tools must be developed to help understand how networks might perform in new environments and to optimize architectures.it is simply too costly to develop these architectures and protocols ad hocand then experiment with the communication links in the field.bandwidth will always be in high demand in the battlespace, so thereis a need for a network management system that is able to translate highlevel guiding principles into network actions such as routing and mediaaccess control priorities in a timely fashion without a human in the loop.currently, asset management is done manually, and it is far from responsive or optimal. because it will not always be possible to ensure that nonodes are compromised, the network should be designed to sense dead ormalfunctioning network elements and route around them. in addition,the network should have an architecture that confines such damage to alocal area and does not allow it to propagate across the network. whenthe network senses outside attacks, it should be able to locate the realentry points and then defend against and remove these attacks.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary5in response to these challenges, the committee recommends thatafosr pursue basic research in the following topics of importance forair force networks:¥robust protocols, addressed with new mathematical tools for network dynamics analysis.¥errorfree, endtoend delivery, requiring better methods for performance prediction.¥throughput, delay deadlines, and congestion control, all based onnetwork coding.¥network performance optimization, building on dynamic (convexand nonconvex) programming, game theory, and control theory.¥policybased network management, requiring means of monitoring, resource allocation, and making performance guarantees forsubsets of users.¥robust architectures, perhaps based on byzantine robust networking.¥network architecture and protocols for unmanned air vehicles(uavs) and other air vehicles.for sensor networks in particular, the committee recommends thefollowing basic research topics:¥realtime embedded processing.¥embedded control systems.¥minimization of power consumption, addressed through energyefficient routing, transport layer protocols, and energyefficientprocess management.¥programming and support tools for largescale networks.¥energyefficient coding schemes for information distribution.¥techniques for realtime dynamic resource allocation.¥energyaware compilers and schedulers.¥source compression and correlation methods for multiple sensors.the air force communication systems that operate on these networksrequire basic research in the following areas:¥unifying methodologies for modulation, coding, beamforming,and scheduling optimization.¥information theory extensions for dynamic selfadaptive communications.¥wireless architectures for exploiting nodetonode cooperation.¥ultrawideband (uwb) communication: airground, airair, airspace.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6basic research for air force is&t needs¥dynamic exploitation of channel characteristics for increasedcapacity, reliability, and spectrum efficiency.¥design of systems with performance guarantees for difficultchannels, including channels under attack.¥integrated design/optimization of networks plus communicationssystems, being conscious of the vulnerability to crosslayeradversarial attacks.softwarenetworkenabled systems are by definition dependent on complexsoftware because of the great number of possible states of the networks.the systems that require such software transcend a range of air forceapplications, from intensive humanmachine systems (e.g., command andcontrol, air operation centers) to embedded applications (e.g., avionicssystems). increasingly these applications are connected by networks intoa system of systems and, in fact, the distinction between enterpriseand embedded systems blurs as the focus is increasingly on the interconnectedness of all such systems.rather than focusing on largescale code developmentña challengethat is being researched by othersñthe committee recommends thatafosr focus on a set of important software engineering issues that arekey to successful air force networkenabled systems but that havereceived limited attention. this recommended set of issues centers on howto understand what to build and how to ensure that its behavior is relatively predictable and acceptable, both during design and in operationaluse. three important questions emerge:¥how do we discover and understand what is needed?¥how can critical nonfunctional attributes (those that are desired ornecessary but ancillary to the softwareõs primary functionality) beimplemented in a predictable fashion?¥can the resulting software, once fielded, evolve to satisfy newneeds discovered as it is used?to address the first of these, the committee recommends a program ofresearch aimed at the coevolution of air force concepts of operations andsystem architectures. this program extends the philosophy of softwaredevelopment models such as iterative development that support rapidprototyping of a software system so that end users can experiment withthe system to see if it satisfies their needs. the prototype then becomes anexplicit representation of the requirements. current research in executbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary7able architectures and in engineering tools for the design and analysis offunctional and nonfunctional attributes provides a basis for this program.the committee recommends research into the following:¥methods to support rapid composability.¥semantic extensions of current modeling languages to enhancecomposability and representation and reasoning of behavior.¥development of tools that enable the construction of executableversions of models in system modeling languages.¥methods that support experimentation, operational assessment,and the use of initial architecture representations in exercises. anexample might be scripting languages that allow end users toexplore early versions of software and help encode their preferences into the final architecture.¥approaches that allow user tailoring, definition, and explorationof new processes and automated learning based on past problemsolving.¥experimentation and demonstration of these research approachesin domains of relevance to the air force.to address the second question, the committee recommends thatafosr support a new line of research, extending modelbased softwareresearch funded by the defense advanced research projects agency(darpa) to build up an understanding of software behavior envelopes.dynamic analysis of the nonfunctional attributes (e.g., scalability, interoperability, survivability, security, energy awareness) of software coulddefine the performance envelope of a networkenabled system. it wouldbe valuable to know the extent to which software could be modified, bydevelopers or end users, and stay within the desired envelope. this topicwould be a new area of research for the software community, but there isrelated work on which to build, as explained in chapter 4 of this report.once a software architecture has been defined and the performanceenvelope explored, a logical third capability would be one that supportsthe continued evolution of complex software within its fielded context.while most other software engineering research focuses on developingnew softwareintensive systems, in fact the larger challenge is to learnhow to maintain and upgrade the huge amount of air force software thathas already been fielded. thus, important research areas include methodsto infer the architecture of legacy software systems, to identify softwarecomponents within that architecture, to parallelize legacy system softwareand applications, and to migrate that architecture and components to newand improved architectures, possibly within a new computing environbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8basic research for air force is&t needsment. since networkenabled systems will involve many legacy systemsas well as new systems, it is imperative that software be designed so thatit can be evolved in an affordable manner throughout its life cycle. thecommittee recommends that afosr support research to improve theevolvability of softwareintensive systems. the following specific lines ofresearch, which could build on readily available commercial frameworks,are recommended:¥our ability to conduct dynamic, modelbased analyses to analyzenonfunctional attributes needs to be improved.¥in order to improve component integration, research is needed toaccelerate the development of abstract designcomponent systemsand codecomponentbased systems, addressing automated discovery, composition, generation, interoperability, and reuse acrosshundreds of systems.¥research in security is needed in support of the goal of measurable,available, secure, trustworthy, and sustainable networkenabledsystems.¥to attain assured reliability with hard timedeadlines, methods areneeded for modeling and analyzing integrated reliability, availability,and schedulability of components and systems in realistic conditions derived from userspecified scenarios.¥all participating components of the overall system need to be energyefficient: (1) network energy on network interface and communication protocols of ad hoc networks, (2) processor energy and processmanagement for scheduling various applications, (3) memory/storage energy and memory/storage management, and (4) displayenergy.¥research is needed into novel integration of methods for verification and validation, such as integration of informal methods (e.g.,software testing and monitoring) with formal verification (i.e.,model checking and theorem proving) and abstract interpretationand static program analysis techniques. the ability to validatescalability, adoptability, usability, and measurement is also important, and some fundamental breakthroughs have occurred in thepast 5 years that have led to a rapid rise in industry adoption andinterest.information managementone ramification of the ubiquitous deployment of it in the air forceis that both human and automated decision makers are now often facedbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary9with voluminous multimedia data from which they must create knowledge. even the first step in knowledge creationñthe integration of rawdata that are in different formats and managed by different data management technologiesñis challenging, but future air force capabilities willrequire much more.the air force faces major open questions on how to manage and shareinformation in a distributed system. the òpublishsubscribeó paradigm isone that is being explored at the afrl. that concept includes (1) a commonrepository where information is òpublishedó and (2) òsubscriptionó information for various users that defines which posted information theirsystems will download from the common area. the publishsubscribeconcept has been shown to scale to hundreds of thousands of participantswithin stable network environments. however, an air force publishsubscribe system must work in an unstable widearea network environment such as a battlespace network; it must in many cases weed outinformation that is outdated or redundant; its subscription rules must bemore sophisticated than those available today, including having enoughòintelligenceó to take context into account; and the system must be trustworthy even if an adversary has gained access to publish or subscribe.these challenges are examples and not comprehensive. moreover, theyare not unique to publishsubscribe. similar challenges accompany alternative infrastructures for information management. it is clear, therefore,that much research in fields such as distributed computing, database systems, security, and data mining must be accomplished before the air forcecan field a dependable information management system.more generally, the air force needs to understand information at amore abstract level. it needs a model and architecture for situation understanding and a means of incorporating situation modeling, modelbasedprocessing, situation projection, and topdown management of situationunderstanding in order to explore topics in information fusion. it alsoneeds a scientific basis and technologies for multisensor fusion for air andground targets. some of these topics are extensions of ongoing work inintelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (isr) methods. an evenbolder question would be, how can a computer understand data andinformation in context? in principle, background understanding of amission or related intelligence could help a computer interpret information from the battlespaceñfor example, to help identify objects in videoor image data. if such contextdependent processing were possible, perhapsinformationunderstanding algorithms could be embedded in sensors andnetworks to enable rapid data assessment and rapid situation assessment.the committee recommends the following basic research in supportof air force information management:basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10basic research for air force is&t needs¥queryprocessing techniques for largescale sensor networks.ñwhere to place query functionality vs. limited power, bandwidth, etc.ñcoping with mobile sensors, unreliable sensors, high data rates.¥techniques for processing and managing semistructured content.ñfor data modeling, for querying and routing, for execution.¥fusion of uncertain, inconsistent data and querying of incompleteinformation.¥mechanisms for determining the certainty of answers as a functionof the certainty of raw data.¥multilevel representation of multimodal signals (video, images,hyperspectral, etc.).ñfor efficient transmission, storage, manipulation, multimodaldata mining, and machine learning.humansystem interactionsthe committee focuses on hsi to encompass not only humancomputer interactions but also the coordinated and purposeful interactions ofseveral or many humans with complex systems and the interactions ofteams of humans mediated through systems. the committee recommendsan afosr focus on hsi because it is essential to the successful operationof complex systems and to the accomplishment of networkenabled operations. an ultimate goal of hsi research would be to enable machines(or algorithms) to perform more of the complex data manipulation, correlation, computation, and data reductionñand even some decisionmakingñleaving humans to perform the most critical judgments that cannotbe accomplished by algorithms or that rely on extrinsic knowledge. furthermore, hsi should help humans to interact with one another in cooperative tasks where multiple humans are part of the system.in the air force, there are many situations where one or more humansinteract with one or more is&t systems. this includes systems that aredistributed not only among different platforms but also, perhaps, acrossgeographical and organizational boundaries, most often with strict securityand service reliability constraints such as nearrealtime or timecriticalservices. complexity increases if the humans and the systems interact withone another in ways that are not connected with the task being analyzed.what sorts of information, architecture, and format should be used toachieve desired effects, and how can designers and users estimate theuncertainties and internalize the context and caveats associated with eachoption? assuming the right information is available at the right time and inthe right form (e.g., text, images), what techniques will enable the user tomake the best use of it? how can whatif simulations be considered andbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary11evaluated? such complex capabilities might require integrated and synchronized multimodal interfaces (visual, aural, and/or haptic) to capture thehigh dimensionality of a system of sensors and actuators in the battlefield.research into hsi should shed light on the usability of the (same)information in a battlefield commandandcontrol situation relative to theperspective (rank) of the user and the granularity (detail of the information). in other words, one must understand and characterize the mostlikely and useful level of complexity for each potential user, from thewarfighter to the commander, so that the complexity and amount ofinformation can be optimized for battlefield decisionmakingñnot apaucity of data, but not data overload either.the importance of hsi research is also driven home by the air forceemphasis on influence operations, which are meant to alter adversariesõattitudes and perspectives so as to achieve u.s. goals without resorting tothe tools of traditional warfare. influence operations require fundamentalresearch into behaviors and how they can be affected. to this base ofknowledge must be added knowledge on interpretation and presentation,personnel training, and modeling and simulation, building on what isknown about cultural and behavioral factors to carry out influence operations. as an example, characterization and recognition of normal andabnormal behavior would, in general, help in surveillance at all levels.characterizing which actions, postures, and so on signify worrisomebehavior requires ongoing research in the social sciences, and the abilityto automatically recognize such behavior in sensed data is an ongoingchallenge for is&t.the committee recommends that afosr pursue basic research in thefollowing areas of importance to hsi:¥tools for improved human interactions with automated reasoningand inference systems under constraints.¥automated diagnosis and decision support, automated learning.enable user navigation of systems involving complex and noisydata and decision systems.¥learningtheorybased techniques for predictive modeling andanticipatory behavior involving cultural factors.¥combination of heuristic and optimization techniques for complexsearches, with adaptability to different levels of detail to avoidinformation overload of the warfighter.¥tradeoffs between power usage in sensors and displays andchoices regarding the range of visual items, human attention, andcontrol.¥fundamental requirements and metrics in designing, implementing,and experimenting with complex, interactive, timecritical information systems.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12basic research for air force is&t needs¥enhanced, interactive, mixedmodality models, experiments, andtestbeds for more integrated realtime human/system/sensorsynergy and database decision support relevant to air force goals.in particular, hsi research of importance to information usability andinfluence operations would include:¥simulation of urban and human environments.¥behavioral models of individuals, groups, and organizations.¥fundamental attributes of information operations testbeds andexperimental metrics for evaluating effectiveness.¥decision support techniques for addressing partialsolutionapproximations based on evolving, nonstatic information.note that some of the hsi research falls squarely in the domain ofpsychology or sociology. afosr already has programs that are jointbetween is&t and psychology, and the committee recommends that thisinterface continue to be strengthened and broadened.priorities for afosr is&t researchthe committee recommends that afosr prioritize its is&t researchin networks, communications, information management, software, andhis, as shown in table es1. with the current funding available for is&t(the column headed òstableó) the committee recommends that networks,communications, and hsi research merit the highest priority, while information management and software research portfolios would be better ableto weather any forced reductions in the level of effort. the committee isnot saying that the latter two research areas are less important to the airforce. rather, it is the committeeõs judgment that if cutbacks are required,reductions in those programs would do the least harm in limiting futureoptions. if the overall is&t funding dropped by 10 percent, the committeewould give software the lowest priority only because other organizations,and commercial enterprises, are doing some related research. if overallfunding increases by 10 percent, the priority for information managementresearch should be raised a notch. finally, if overall is&t funding were toincrease by 25 percent, the committee recommends a balanced portfoliodrawn from the particular research recommendations earlier in this summary. see also the footnotes to table es1 for additional interpretative notes.because all of the major research areas listed in table es1 contributesynergistically to the future fielding of teamfocused, networkenabledsystems, progress toward that vision is dependent on a balanced researcheffort across all five areas. as implied by table es1, the overall fundingbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary13table es1relative priorities under four funding scenariosis&t topic10% reductionstable10% increase25% increasenetworkshhhhcommunicationshhhhinformation managementmmhhsoftwarelmmhhumansystem interactionshhhhnote: òhó means the general topic is a high priority, and its funding should be protected orincreased. òmó means the general topic is of medium priority for afosr support, given thecontributions by other players, not that it is of medium importance to the afosr. òló meansthat funding in that area should be sacrificed so that a critical level of effort can be supportedin other areas. òló does not mean that the topic is not of importance to the air force, onlythat if resources are tight, it is a reasonable candidate for cuts because other organizationsare contributing to the topic and/or the challenge is so great that a small afosr effort isunlikely to lead to significant progress. these priorities pertain to the five general researchareas listed in the lefthand column as weighed only against one another, not against otherprograms funded by afosrõs mathematics and space sciences directorate. the prioritiesare meant to show the committeeõs consensus on which of the areas to (de)emphasize ifthere are any changes in funding. the priorities take into account not only the importance ofthe research but also the relative need for air forcespecific research. they reflect thecommitteeõs general sense of what can be meaningfully accomplished within the fundingscenarios posited, but the committee did not develop a detailed estimate of the resourcesrequired for each of the research topics in the lefthand column.level for basic research in is&t will not support such a broad, balancedeffort unless there is a significant increase. therefore, the committeerecommends a significant increase in is&t funding within afosr centeredon research to support teamfocused, networkenabled systems of airforce interest.the committee also recommends that afosr consider designatingsome topics as grand challenges as a means of focusing its is&t research,motivating the academic research community, and connecting thatresearch to air force goals. topics designated as grand challenges wouldbe ones for which there is a recognizable gap in the knowledge base thatwould be properly addressed by a crossdisciplinary community of basicresearchers; the grand challenge will help give that community an identity and thus strengthen its coherence. these grand challenges should bedefined in terms that are recognizable to the basic research community,but afosr should also be able to map the grand challenges to future airforce technologies. the grand challenges are not part of, nor do they compete with, the afrlõs focused longterm challenges (which are more oribasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14basic research for air force is&t needsented toward technologies), but they should link to them. building a program around grand challenges quite naturally facilitates new interdisciplinary research communities: òinterdisciplinary,ó because the breadth ofthe challenges calls for varied expertise, and ònaturally,ó because the associated researchers are interested in the whole range of efforts addressing the grand challenge.the committee recommends that afosr consider the following aspossible grand challenges, but this list is by no means exhaustive:¥control of multiple uavs. research to enable the control of multipleuavs by one human in mixed mannedunmanned airspace, incontrast to todayõs requirement for many humans for a single uavin carefully deconflicted manned and unmanned airspace.¥taskable airborne network. research to enable costeffective andrapidly deployable tactical intelligence networks in urban environments, where the nodes generally are sensors carried on uavs orlighterthanair vehicles and the networks are taskable by groundand airbased commanders.¥mixedreality training environments. research to enable training forair crews, command post staff, and commanders in an environment of such fidelity that it would be indistinguishable from thereal world (and in fact would sometimes involve the real worldñhence òmixedó rather than òvirtualó or òaugmentedó). the computer tools used in such training environments should be the sameas those used in the real world.¥an automated air operation center staff assistant. research to enablesoftware that can learn from being told, much as human staffmembers learn on the job.¥rapid system integration. research to enable the rapid integration ofitbased systems, such as those belonging to different members ofad hoc coalitions. this research would encompass hsi, networks andcommunications, security, software, and information management.funding mechanismsafosrõs current is&t research is supported through a range of funding mechanisms, and the committee found that each of those mechanismsprovides value and that the afosr program managers are doing a goodjob of making use of them. the committee does not recommend any hardandfast rules for balancing the various funding mechanisms; rather, itencourages continued flexibility and is comfortable with the current mix.the committee did observe, though, that it would be beneficial for afosrto increase the number of young investigators who are aware of air forcebasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.executive summary15challenges. therefore, it recommends that the air force consider establishing a mechanism for young investigator awards so as to raise itsvisibility within that group of is&t researchers.future considerationsthe committee observed that afosrõs is&t portfolio is difficult topin down because it is distributed among various programs in two afosrdirectorates. the committee recommends that afosr identify is&t as amajor topic within the mathematics and space sciences directorate and,as is&t investment increases, establish a separate directorate with thatsingle focus. it also recommends that all humansystem and human effectsresearch be consolidated within that is&t directorate because of the critical importance of hsi to the effectiveness of complex air force systems.as the is&t program grows, the committee sees an opportunity forafosr to try new mechanisms for recruiting program managers, especially by reaching out to the broader is&t community. mechanisms suchas the intergovernmental personnel act and the experimental personnelhiring authority can be very useful for bringing in both program managersand higherlevel staff.finally, the committee urges afosr to work with other parts of theair force to establish testbeds that will allow researchers and air forceusers to experiment with prototype is&t concepts and systems. besidesthe inherent benefit of experimental science, such an approach wouldprovide an intellectual crossroads between the scientific and operationalcommunity to support the scientific discovery process. the committeeuses the label òdistributed research and experimentation environmentó(dree) to describe a shared computation infrastructure that supportsexperimentation within a community of researchers.the committee believes that drees would be useful for each area ofresearch cited in this report. a dree for information management, forinstance, would enable the associated communityñincluding universities, afrl laboratories, and perhaps federally funded r&d centersñtocreate sample data sets and develop associated queries that illustrate howthe data are to be integrated. a dree related to networkcentric systemswould allow exercises from which concrete performance requirementscould be generated; those requirements are difficult to identify otherwise.while exercises are ongoing, operational air force participants can clarifytheir real, not hypothetical, needs; is&t applied researchers can investigate engineering issues with the prototype network; basic researchers inis&t can experiment with fundamental changes (e.g., to communicationprotocols); and hsi researchers can instrument the experiments and learnfrom them.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16basic research for air force is&t needsthe dree approach to promoting experimental science should not beprohibitively expensive, because the necessary network infrastructure israpidly falling into place and there is the possibility of leveraginginvestment in testbeds made by other afrl directorates. for example, aresearch version of the distributed mission training environment housedin afrlõs human effectiveness directorate might support experimentalscience in areas ranging from control of uavs to decision making in realtime environments. the committeeõs recommendation is that basic researchfunds not be used to establish drees, only to support the involvement ofresearchers.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.171introductionin october 2004, the national research council (nrc) was asked bythe air force office of scientific research (afosr) to recommend a basicresearch program to support air force information science and technology(is&t) goals. the nrc established the committee on directions for theafosr mathematics and space sciences directorate related to information science and technology and charged it to òcreate a vision and planfor the is&trelated programs within the afosrõs mathematics andspace sciences directorate.the committee was not charged with reviewing the current is&t program, so nothing in this report should be construed as a criticism ofafosr or its current program. rather, this report was designed to be a denovo look at what should be included in the air forceõs basic is&t program. many of the recommended research topics are well known toafosr staff, and they clearly overlap the current program. the identification in this report of a basic research need does not imply that the needhas been overlooked, only that it should be one of afosrõs top is&tpriorities.to accomplish its charge, the committee held three meetings. thefirst two were intended to inform the committee of the air force needs inis&t, from which the committee would deduce the required basic research portfolio. (complete agendas of the three meetings are includedin appendix a.) the first meeting was held at the air force researchlaboratory (afrl) information technology directorate in rome, newyork. this directorate is a counterpart to afosr charged with conducting 6.2 and 6.3 r&d in is&t; as such, it is both a user of the results ofbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18basic research for air force is&t needsafosrsponsored is&t and a conduit for transitioning results betweenthe research community and air force operating units. at that meeting,the committee also interacted with two members of the air force scientific advisory board, who conveyed results from that boardõs 2003 review of air force is&t r&d. the second meeting was held at langleyair force base in hampton, virginia, and was hosted by units of the aircombat command (acc). the accõs command, control, intelligence,surveillance, and reconnaissance center and acc activities in information operations make it the primary customer among air force operational units for afosrõs is&t research. at that site visit, the committeereceived additional perspectives on the air forceõs is&t needs. at itsthird meeting, in washington, d.c., the committee held a discussion withthomas cruse, chief technologist for the afrl, to explore afrlõs directions in is&t. at all meetings, the committee had ample opportunity forfrank discussions with afosr personnel who manage is&trelated research portfolios, and on two occasions it had indepth discussions withbrendan godfrey, the director of afosr.the committee also sent one member to attend a program review ofthe partnership for research excellence and transition (pret) foradvanced concepts in space situational awareness, held in january 2005,and another member for a site visit to the mesa, arizona, unit of afrlõshuman effectiveness directorate. the first visit was helpful in bringingout different perspectives about afosr funding mechanisms, and bothvisits covered potential research.as part of its investigation, the committee examined a wide range ofpast reportsñfrom the air force itself, the defense science board, the airforce scientific advisory board, and the national research councilñthatbear on air force basic research into is&t. for example, the committeeexamined air forcespecific planning documents such as the air forcelongterm challenges, the air force mission and vision statement, andthe air force flight plan. from all of these investigations, readings, anddiscussions, the committee first established a consensus on what is&tresearch is needed to support the air forceõs goal and then filtered thosefindings based on the committee membersõ collective insight about whatresearch is being done, or is likely to be done, in industry, academia, andelsewhere. the study focused on information available from afosr,afrl, and the air force scientific advisory board. as such, this reportcenters on is&t research for air force operations and does not explorepossible is&t research to improve air force processes. the committeealso filtered the research needs according to whether or not there wereair forcespecific questions to be addressed: if not, then there is no needfor afosr to carry out research in that particular area.based on these inputs and its own expertise, the committee firstbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19generated a list of more than a dozen is&t research areas of importanceto the air force. then, echoing what is already understood within the airforce r&d establishment, the committee identified three building blocksfor attaining the desired air force capabilities: (1) access to disparatedata and information, (2) fusion and appropriate distribution of the data,and (3) conversion of the information into knowledge. these buildingblocks, like most of the air forceõs desired capabilities, rely on teamfocused, networkenabled systemsñthat is, interlocking systems madepossible by networks that allow teams to work together. the committeeconcluded that research to develop those building blocks is the mostimportant for the air force, and from its initial list of air forcerelevantis&t research areas, it identified four that underpin teamfocused, networkenabled systems of any kind: research in networks and communications,software, information management, and humansystem interactions (hsi).this committee vision for afosrõs is&t program is captured in figure 11;òdistributed research and experimentation environmentsó and ògrandchallengesó will be explained in chapters 7 and 9. by building up theknowledge base in these four fundamental areas, afosr can help the airforce move beyond more heuristic approaches for developing disruptivetechnologies such as networkenabled systems.figure 11a vision for air force is&t research: teamfocused, networkenabled systems are created by the four research areas shown. the concerted effortsin the four areas, which also affect one another, are to be focused by grand challenges identified by the afosr and by experiments conducted in distributedresearch and experimentation environments (see chapter 9).humansystem interactionsinformation managementsoftwarenetworks and communicationsdistributed research and experimentation environmentsgrand challengesbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20basic research for air force is&t needsthe committee believes this structure for is&t research is generic inthat it applies to a broad set of informationintensive challenges andembraces all of the highpriority topics for the air force. in developingthis vision, the committee decided to recommend that afosr focus onthe is&t needs of teamfocused, networkenabled systems. this choice ofresearch areas is strongly suggested by the documents, briefings, andplans reviewed by the committee. such a focused research program promises to be much more effective in achieving the goals of a networkenabledair force than would a piecemeal attack on disparate is&t researchtopics. the committee recognizes that the inputs to networkcentricoperations and lowerlevel aspects of networksñfor example, sensors,processors, information/surveillance/reconnaissance (isr), and information assuranceñalso require continued afosrsponsored research, but itbelieves the greatest research void when looking to the future lies withthe systemoriented topics in figure 11. it is at the interface to thesesystems that information and data emerge and must be dealt with in aneffective way to enhance the decision superiority of the air force.the basis for all networkenabled operations is a good understandingof networks and the communications that traverse them. as explained inchapter 3, there are many differences between air force networks andcommercial networks such as cell phone networks and the internet. thesedifferences mean that a large number of basic research challenges are airforcespecific and are not being addressed outside the military. atpresent, there is no solid foundation of understanding to guide the designand management of these complex networks, and without that understanding building such a network would be akin to designing a newgeneration of fighter planes by piecing together components from the last.on top of the networks and communications, the air force relies on awide range of complex software. the challenge is to develop a capabilityto build complex software systems with predictable behavior. this is alongstanding challenge, and chapter 4 recommends specific aspects thatafosr should pursue.information management and interactions between human beingsand systems are needed to create military value from the air forceõsemerging information dominance. for example, much basic research isneeded before the air force can effectively use and coordinate all of thedata currently available from both unmanned air vehicles (uavs) andsatellites. there are many unmet challenges in these areas, which are explored in chapters 5 and 6. included in the hsi discussion is informationoperations, which entails not only offensive and defensive cyberwarfarebut also the emerging area of influence operations, which aims to effectmilitary goals without necessarily damaging people or infrastructure.there is a great deal of research to be done on that topic.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction21the committee did not conduct a detailed audit of the present afosris&t programs other than to review the brief summaries that wereprovided. such an audit was not within its mandate, and the committeetook a blankslate approach to defining an is&t vision and a basic research program. by identifying the basic research challenges that underpin teamfocused, networkenabled technologies rather than those suggested by specific air force or dod systems and programs, the committeeaimed to define an is&t program that will remain relevant regardless ofhow particular technology foci might vary over the coming years.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222backgroundan nrc review of dodõs is&t for air and space asserts the following:1the pervasiveness of information systems in military systems and in visionsfor future warfighting and the accelerating threat information technologyposes require that [the department of defense] have a strong information systems s&t program. the committee found the opposite to be thecase, however, in its review of the air force s&t investment. since atleast the mid1990s, the air force s&t investment in information systemshas declined steadily, despite recurring annual plans to increase it.later, on pages 29 and 30, that report notes as follows:future air force concepts are driven by information and informationsystems, which are becoming the òforce multiplieró for the air force ofthe future. the increased emphasis on information and associated trendsare reflected in air force warfighting concepts. these concepts include:*¥dynamic aerospace command¥joint battlespace infosphere¥information operations¥integrated aerospace operations¥the expeditionary aerospace force¥effectsbased operations*defense science and technology advisory group, òair force strategy in infor1national research council, review of the u.s. department of defense air, space, andsupporting information systems science and technology program, national academy press:washington, d.c. (2001), p. 4.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background23mation,ó briefing by john a. graniero at the information systems technology(ist) technology area review and assessment (tara), air force research laboratory, rome, new york, march 1317, 2000.on pages 31 and 32, the nrc report notes that commercial is&t willnot, no matter the size and strength of the investment, address all of theis&t needs of dod:leveraging commercial information technologies is difficult, however,because industry rapidly changes direction to meet rapidly changingcustomer demands and because the time to market must be as short aspossible. fierce competition dictates limited, short research and development cycles and nearterm investment strategies. very little funding isbeing invested in basic research, which is usually outsourced to academia.*industryõs shortterm needs cannot support the longerrange visions ofthe services. although commercial technologies show promise in providing significant nearterm capabilities, leveraging them could requiremuch effort (and significant resources) to adopt, adapt, or reengineerthem. . . . another caveat about using commercial information systems isthat they are becoming available to all nations and interest groups. if theservices depend on commercial technologies for advancing the state ofthe art in their information systems, potential enemies may come close toachieving parity (or even asymmetrical superiority) with u.s. forces . . . .dod needs to expand its basic research to explore the frontiers of sciencein search of new technological approaches for maintaining militarysuperiority. . . . the committee believes that dod should continue toexplore the frontiers of science and that basic research has never beenmore important to dod.*national research council, trust in cyberspace, national academy press: washington, d.c. (1999).it is certainly desirable to use commercial technology wherever it fulfills air force needs, meaning when the air force requirements are insome sense close to those of the commercial sector. however, the airforce, like all the services, has requirements that are not significant driversin the commercial sectorñrequirements in security (e.g., being multilevelin many cases), in the complexity of its command and control systems, inthe realtime requirements of some systems, and in the need for robustness and resilience in the face of broken network or communications linksor of captured nodes.that 2001 report ultimately reaches (p. 36) the following recommendation for air force is&t research funding:the committee believes that the air force should increase its science andtechnology (s&t) budget for information systems technology (ist). thebasic research (6.1) program should support longterm air and space istbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24basic research for air force is&t needsneeds, surpass previousyear levels, support a strong inhouse program(with appropriate researchers), and compensate for limited longtermcommercial investment.the dod investment in basic research in is&t has not improved inthe 4 years since that report was issued. while the committee did notdevelop a detailed estimate of the level of effort required for air forcebasic research in is&t, its general sense is that it is small in relation to thechallenges identified in chapters 3 through 6.the air force roadmap for transformation is described in the air forceflight plan.2 though not intended as a primer on air force needs for is&t,it describes deficiencies in current capabilities as well as desired newcapabilities that require new information technologies. the three mainnew capabilities are information superiority, persistent precision strike,and battlespace awareness.assuring information superiority is a critical part of the air forcemission. issues requiring advances in is&t include secure and survivablecommand and control systems, the rapid evolution and adaptation ofcommand and control systems, decision aids based on rapidly changingoperational needs, and increased capabilities in information operations.information operations3 include all offensive and defensive actionsnecessary to ensure full access to timely and accurate information and todeny the same to adversaries.precision strike refers to the ability to place munitions with minimalerror anyplace required to achieve a military objective. persistence, a relatively new desired capability, refers to the ability to maintain precisiontargeting for long periods. open goals for r&d revolve around decreasing the time from sensing to shooting to less than 10 minutes, providingactionable intelligence in a useful (i.e., decisionready) form, and timelyand accurate damage assessment, which is particularly difficult whennonkinetic weapons are used. a report from the national intelligencecouncil4 notes as follows:the use of precisionguided munitions will increase. the accuracy ofthese systems will improve. targeting will remain the critical factor indetermining success or failure of these missions. having eyes on target . . .must be a core mission.2available at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/aftransflightplan.pdf.3available at http://www.epublishing.af.mil/pubfiles/afdc/dd/afdd25.pdf.4john b. alexander, òthe evolution of conflict through 2020: demands on personnel,machines, and missions,ó cia conference on the changing nature of war (2004), pp. 912.available at http://www.cia.gov/nic/nic202020040525intro.html.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background25actionable intelligence is essential. in recent conflicts commanders at alllevels have lamented the shortfalls of actionable intelligence. operationiraqi freedom was initiated prematurely when it was reported thatsaddam hussein would be located at dora farms in baghdad. a phonecall from an agent in the area began the process. because this was thebeginning of the conflict the decision rested with president bush. thereaction time was too long, and if saddam ever was there, he left beforethe target could be hit.by 2020 we should be able reduce the time from which a target is detecteduntil it is hit to under ten minutes. currently, for dod elements, targetidentification and release must cycle back to the us for approval. this issimply too slow.battlespace awareness implies the ability of a commander and his orher staff to fully understand the plan of action and its execution in realtime and to rapidly assess and anticipate necessary changes to the plan.the deficiencies that motivate current research are summarized from anair force report on information operations:5battlespace awareness information is often reactive in nature and rapidlyloses relevance. targeting decisions often are made too far away fromthe warfighter to effectively engage mobile targets. . . . it is still verydifficult to integrate rapidly expanding data streams from multiplesources in a timely manner. . . . commanders often do not have a clear,accurate realtime picture of the battlespace. . . . the military still cannotassess, plan, and direct air and space operations from anywhere or frommultiple locations in near realtime, something the air force believeswill be necessary in the future to give the commander the greatest flexibility to meet national tasking.the air force needs take into account that our potential adversarieshave access to the same commercial it as we do and that those adversariescan field it systems at commercial rates, typically much faster thanpossible under current dod acquisition practices. hence, air force is&tresearch must be focused on capabilities that fill air force needs, will probably not be provided by the commercial sector, and will give superiorityover the enemy.in the abstract, to fully address air force needs, is&t research mustyield new capabilities that satisfy the four sõsñspeed, security, scalability,and smartness. òspeedó means itbased systems need not only to operatein realtime environments but also to be built and delivered much fasterand to be extensible in the field by end users. such systems must also be5available at http://www.epublishing.af.mil/pubfiles/afdc/dd/afdd25/afdd25.pdf.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26basic research for air force is&t needssecure and scalable. lastly, they need to be smart. getting there requires abetter approach for sponsoring and conducting is&t research. the afosr,which is the air forceõs prime agent for the conduct of 6.1 research, is wellaware of these issues.as part of its investigation, the committee examined a 1996 nrcreview of afosr programs in mathematical and computer sciences andfound that some of the observations still pertain and are helpful for setting the context of the current study.6 that study reviewed the size, scope,and quality of the erstwhile afosr mathematical and computer sciencesprogram. (many of the elements of that program, and some of the programmanagers, are now part of afosrõs is&t program. the is&t program,though, does not map directly onto any afosr unit. most of the is&tresearch is managed today within the afosr mathematics and spacesciences directorate, but only about half of that unit deals with is&t. inaddition, afosrõs research in humancomputer interfaces is managedjointly with its chemical and life sciences directorate.) the followingobservations, paraphrased from the 1996 report (pages 13), appear tohave withstood the test of time:¥afosr program managers in mathematical and computer scienceshave a great deal of autonomy and compete for funds among themselves in a relatively cooperative way. they are selfmotivated topromote their areas in order to gain an adequate share of the available funds.¥the majority of funds go to principal investigators (pis) at universities, but the air force is successful at teaming these pis withresearchers at air force laboratories.¥prior collaboration with air force laboratories is not essential forobtaining program support, but collaboration subsequent to anaward characterizes the best and longestlived research projects.¥during the early 1990s, these program managers were underincreased pressure to fund projects with short rather than longterm payoffs, although there appears to have been adequateflexibility to resist such pressure.¥in determining program priorities, emphasis should be given toresearch that clarifies air force problems, has an impact on operational procedures, and advances the state of the art in areas ofinterest to the air force.6national research council, review of afosr programs in mathematical and computersciences, national academy press: washington, d.c. (1996).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background27overview of air force goalsthat rely on is&t researchthe air force is already heavily dependent on is&t, and its ongoingtransformation is critically dependent on the successful fielding of newis&t products. many of those new products will be specific to militaryneeds, and many require basic research. a good summary of air forceis&t goals is contained in the pamphlet òs&t planning review.ó7 thispamphlet presents six longterm challenges identified in 2001 to providefocus and motivation for air force science and technology over the next20 to 50 years. the emphasis is on basic and applied research that willenable critical future air force capabilities:¥finding and tracking. provide the decision maker with quality information from anywhere in near real time. the needed capabilitiesinclude reliable assessment and monitoring, sensor placement andsustainment, and information systems.¥command and control. monitor, assess, plan, and direct aerospaceoperations anywhere from multiple locations in near real time.capabilities to support this goal include monitoring and assessingglobal conditions and events, planning and executing militaryoperations, and information assurance.¥controlled effects. rapidly create precise effects with the ability forquick retargeting. the needed capabilities include measured globalforce projection and dominant remote control.¥sanctuary. protect the total force from natural and manmade hazardsand threats while permitting operation with lowest possible risks.¥rapid aerospace response. quickly respond to peacetime operationsor crises. required capabilities include rapid global reach, ondemand space surge, and aerospace power network.¥effective aerospace persistence. sustain the flow of equipment andsupplies as well as the application of force as required. capabilitiesinclude space awareness and control, space access, and operations.it is clear that information systems pervade all of these capabilitiesand that sustained basic research in is&t will be required to meet thesechallenges. it is also clear that there are air forceunique aspects to most,if not all, of this basic research.more recently, the air force released the latest statement of its mission,which encompasses not only air and space operations but also informa7available from the afosr.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28basic research for air force is&t needstion operations.8 the latter includes the union of electronic warfare, bothdefensive and offensive; offensive and defensive cyber operations (that is,disruption of, or tampering with, computing and communications ordefense against the same); and òinfluence operations,ó actions intendedto lessen an enemyõs resolve to fight.9 influence operations was givenspecial emphasis when the study committee met with the air combatcommand, which is exploring a range of means to lessen adversariesõ willto fight, their negative impressions of the united states or u.s. forces, orotherwise reduce the need for traditional military action. the principalgoal of all information operations is to ensure decision dominance overadversaries. key challenges from an is&t perspective include integrationof, access to, and fusion of disparate data and information sources;conversion of information to actionable knowledge; basic modeling ofhuman behaviors; and so on.the ways the air force achieves its vision and accomplishes its mission are changing. this change is the process dod calls transformation,and it relies in a central way on information superiority. the air forceroadmap for transformation is described in air force flight plan, 2003,which on pages 5156 expands the notion of information operationsdescribed in the vision statement to the notion of information superiority:10information superiority is a key enabler of the type of revolutionarychange described by rma [revolution in military affairs] advocatesincluding effectsbased operations and parallel warfare. . . . there arestill many obstacles to achieving the full potential of informationsuperiority under many circumstances today:ñthere is still significant progress to be made in rapidly gettingtimely, accurate, and relevant intelligence from sensorstoshooters(actionable intelligence in a usable format) in singledigit minutes.ñbattlespace awareness information is often reactive in nature andrapidly loses relevance. targeting decisions often are made too faraway from the warfighter to effectively engage mobile targets.ñit is still very difficult to integrate rapidly expanding data streamsfrom multiple sources in a timely manner.ñcommanders often do not have a clear, accurate, realtime pictureof the battlespace.ñthe military still cannot assess, plan, and direct air and spaceoperations from anywhere or from multiple locations in near realtime, something the air force believes will be necessary in the futureto give the commander the greatest flexibility to meet national tasking.8available at http://www.af.mil/library/posture/vision/vision.pdf.9available at http://www.epublishing.af.mil/pubfiles/afdc/dd/afdd25/afdd25.pdf.10available at http://www.dtic.mil/jointvision/aftransflightplan.pdf.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background29ñcomputer network and information systems are often vulnerableto attack.ñthere is limited ability to disrupt adversary c4isr [command,control, computing, communications, intelligence, surveillance, andreconnaissance] assets and information flow.ñòtribaló platforms and procedures within the air force still mustbe integrated using information technology.ñnew and planned c4isr systems require a lot of additionalbandwidth.ñlack of data standards inhibits use and exploitation of artificialintelligence capabilities.ñthe air force has not developed all necessary protocols for machinetomachine interfaces.ñthe air force lacks a scalable c4isr system that can support operations across the spectrum of conflict.ñthe air force still needs to evaluate its current systems and determine what they can contribute to its capabilities and what tools arenecessary to transform those systems from a collection of platformsinto a networked system that is greater than the sum of its individualparts.the r&d response: current directionsthe afrlõs information directorate (afrl/if) is a major performerof applied research and development for air force is&t, and the committee spent considerable time with researchers there to learn about theirprograms and their strategy for addressing air force is&t needs.northrup fowler, chief scientist (at the time), told the committee on february 24, 2005, that the directorateõs main r&d thrusts were¥global awareness. methods to acquire, exploit, fuse, and reasonabout information.¥dynamic planning and execution. methods for rapidly exploitingknowledge of the battlespace and fostering better informed andmore accurate decisions.¥global information enterprise. methods to move, process, manage,and protect information throughout the global information grid(gig) and provide assured information to decision makers.the underlying science and technology focus areas identified byafrl/if are these:¥information exploitation, which involves estimation and predictionof signals from electronic intelligence, imagery, audio, and speechprocessing.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30basic research for air force is&t needs¥information fusion and understanding, the process of combininginformation to estimate and predict the state of the battlespace.¥information management, the harnessing of information resourcesand capabilities of an organization to accomplish its objectives.¥a framework for developing and demonstrating informationmanagement technology solutions.¥advanced computing architectures, r&d focused on fundamentalmodels of computation and on engineering techniques for thedesign of computing systems.¥cyber operations, encompassing technologies for informationassurance, computer network defense, and computer networkexploitation.¥connectivity, addressing the need for highcapacity c4isr networking and enterprise management and control.¥command and control, involving decision support, adversarialmodeling, and battlefield simulation.afrl/if and afosr have a joint strategic planning process to helpthem align 6.1 investments with afrl/if program needs. the processinvolves afosr program managers in strategic deliberations with afrl/if and input from afrl/if on afosrõs 6.1 investments. the committeeconcluded that the afrl/if program, though certainly not exhaustive, iswell matched to the longterm challenges outlined above, and it also concluded that the success of the afrl/if program is critically dependenton a number of basic research advances that are well within the purviewof afosr.final background information was provided to the committee in abriefing by shankara sastry of the university of california at berkeley,who chaired an is&t review panel for the air force scientific advisoryboard that issued a report on november 21, 2003. that review identifiedseveral key is&t areas for investment: the scalability of the informationmanagement systems under investigation, security and realtime capability,mission management technologies for unmanned air vehicles in mixedmanned/unmanned environments, and embedded software and systems.afosrõs current response to these various challenges is suggested bythese excerpts from its ongoing broad agency announcement 20051,11which invites is&t proposals in the following areas:dynamics and controlthe . . . program is interested in . . . guidance, navigation, and control ofautonomous aerial vehicle systems and teams; image tracking and robustfeedback control in high scintillation environments; . . . and . . . hybridbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background31control systems that can intelligently manage actuator, sensor, andprocessor communications in complex, spatially distributed systems. . . .interest in control of complex, multiscale, highly uncertain nonlinearsystems is increasing. . . . interest exists in the development of controlconcepts applicable to single and multiple unmanned aerial vehicles(uavs) and micro air vehicles (mavs). areas of interest includecooperative/collaborative control of a team of uavs conducting operations such as cooperative combat isr, electronic attack, urban warfare,wide area search/attack, and persistent area denial. realtime, adaptiveacquisition, classification, prosecution and assessment of geographicallydispersed targets is envisioned, requiring cooperation amongst uavs. . . .a cooperative decision and control theoretic framework is of interest toaddress robust dynamic control of distributed uavs executing multiple,strongly coupled tasks with a high degree of decentralization. a longterm goal of the dynamics and control program is control for intelligentautonomy, in order to achieve a higher level of autonomous control. . . .providing uavs and mavs with faculties of wide fieldofregard perception will be a significant step toward the realization of autonomouscontrol, and in this area research in visionbased guidance, navigationand control is of interest.optimization and discrete mathematicstarget tracking environments include multiple maneuvering targets inclutter, targets with low [signaltonoise ratios], and cooperative tracking platforms. computational complexity for real time applications is akey issue. . . . research includes discrete event systems, especially as itrelates to air force transportation, target tracking, command and controlsystems, and battlefield management.signals communication and surveillancethis . . . activity is concerned with the systematic analysis and interpretation of variable quantities that represent information, or convey information physically through a channel. communications signals, enablingcommand and control, and surveillance images are of special importance. . . . an outstanding need in the treatment of signals is to develop resilientalgorithms for data representation in fewer bits (compression), imagereconstruction/enhancement, and spectral/frequency estimation in thepresence of external corrupting factors. . . . these . . . hold promise in thedetection and recognition of characteristic transient features, the synthesis of hardtointercept communications links, and the achievement offaithful compression and fast reconstruction for audio, video, and multispectral data.11available at http://www.afosr.af.mil/pdfs/baa20051.pdf, dated october 2004.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32basic research for air force is&t needssoftware and systemsthe goal is . . . basic research needed to enable development of advancedcomputing science methods to support future air force needs in worldwide, 247 battlespace information management. . . . research is . . . tomeet . . . challenges including collection, control, and integration of thevast amounts of information flowing through battlespace informationnetworks, protection of friendly information resources, and complexitiesin software and algorithm development in support of large informationsystems. some specific areas of infospheric science research follow:¥models of information flows¥metrics for information flow¥hierarchical flow models¥information dynamics¥managing massive numbers of triggers¥information pedigree/certainty¥stream data processing¥automated downgrading of sensitive information¥preventing selfinflicted dos attacks¥audit data for damage assessment¥steganography detection¥secure code composition¥distributed, assured pipelines¥application layer multicast encryption¥seamless integration of wirelinewireless networks¥network monitoring, measurement, and inferencing¥ad hoc wireless networking¥middleware¥joint battlespace infosphere (jbi) system stability¥dynamic system management¥jbi information metadata and structure¥evolvable componentsthe need to collect, integrate, and disseminate information from widelydisparate sources will be crucial. . . . information extraction from allsources of data is . . . of interest. . . . network protection . . . detection ofintrusion, forensics, and an active response and recovery from an attackon information, are needed. basic research that anticipates the nature offuture information system attacks is critical. . . . research on effectivesecurity policies across large, heterogeneous infospheres is of high interest.techniques to automatically detect deceptive data or information are ofinterest . . . [as are] mathematical approaches for the specification, design,and analysis of distributed software systems. approaches for overcomingthe increasing computational complexity of these systems are essential.artificial intelligencemathematical foundations of information fusion must be establishedñrobust, integrated fusion architectures for handling increasing diversitybasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.background33of input sources. . . . research is sponsored into how to make the best useof uncertain information; share and disseminate information; increasethe accuracy, speed, and economy of the recognition and identificationprocess; and aid the intelligence analyst. . . . research is needed todevelop largescale intelligent systems that can address practical airforce needs. . . . means are sought to scale up those methods that workfor small knowledgebased systems. . . . formalisms need to be developed for the representation of and reasoning with uncertainty, in handlingcorrupt information, identifying deceptive information, and effectivelyusing experiences. . . . we seek means to combine numeric and symbolicinference methods. . . . the program seeks to develop technology thatwill support decisionmaking. . . . intelligent agents are needed [that are]capable of gathering information, reducing data to a manageable amountof essential information, and cooperating with other agents to solveproblems. research is also needed to combine artificial intelligencemethods with operations research tools to overcome inefficiencies insolving some missioncritical air force problems (e.g., scheduling in adistributed, dynamic environment).to cover this range of research, afosr has an annual budget of some$25 million for is&t: approximately $16 million for academic grants,$7million for multidisciplinary university research initiatives (muris),and $2 million for inhouse research at afrl/if.12 although it did notexamine the current is&t portfolio in any depth, the committeeõs sense isthat the resources are not adequate for the broad scope of the challengeidentified earlier. while many of these topics are clearly important, thecommittee also found gaps and recommended changes of emphasis,which are reflected in chapters 3 through 7.in the next chapters, the committee offers recommendations for thetoppriority basic research in is&t to help the air force meet its is&tgoals. the recommendations fall into four very general areas: research toenable networkcentric warfare, including networking, communications,security, realtime embedded systems, and other topics; research tosupport improvements in software development, including the ideasdeveloped in chapter 4; research in information management, includingintegration of complex databases, publishsubscribe systems, signal processing, and information fusion; and research into the interface betweenhumans and is&t, including humancomputer interfaces, humansystemintegration, decisionsupport tools, and information fusion.12figures supplied by clifford rhoades, head of the afosr mathematics and spacesciences directorate, in discussions with the committee on february 27, 2005, in rome, n.y.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.343basic research for air force networksystems and communicationsthe air force is becoming a networkenabled paradigm, whereinmany of its capabilities will be generated through, and dependent on, theintegrated efforts of multiple components. this approach to operations isexpected to result in greater agility and attendant tactical advantages.however, as is the case with any untested concept, there is a need fortechnology that enables the analysis and execution of the new paradigm.in this case, the scope of change is extremely large, requiring reanalysis offorce structures, doctrine, acquisition options, commandandcontrolsystems, training, and longrange planning, not to mention the considerable challenges involved in engineering, constructing, and managing theactual networks. much of the planning and analysis will depend on theresearch described in this chapter, which will provide the necessaryconceptual and technical foundation. networkcentric warfare also is critically dependent on software, the subject of chapter 4, on the effectivedistribution and management of information throughout the network,which is the prime topic of chapter 5, and on the effective employment ofthat information, which is considered in chapter 6.types and characteristics of communication andnetwork services needed in the futurefigure 31 shows the range of components that will be networked inthe future air force. the following capabilities are key to achieving thedesired functionality, but offtheshelf technologies are not yet adequate:basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.35figure 31schematic showing the range of components that will be networked in the future air force. robust dynamic tacticalnetworks support 10,000 to 500,000 communicating devices in theater. they go beyond traditional òtactical,ó which is oriented tothe voice and to human users, and beyond traditional ad hoc networks.transoceanic linkbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36basic research for air force is&t needs¥the network must provide robust data and circuit services to tensor hundreds of thousands of fixed and mobile users with differentservice levels. some of the service challenges include guaranteedrates, communication over difficult channels, hard timedeadlines,reliable message delivery over unreliable networks, security, andpolicydriven resource allocation (explained below).¥sensors in the networks must be able to relay data while maintaining coherency, and there must be high compression of correlatedsensors to reduce communication needs.¥laser communication must be available between satellites and aircraft and to terrestrial sites.¥satellite services must be available to mobile and fixed users. thoseservices must (1) maintain connectivity at all times and track important users, (2) have low probability of detection (lpd), low probability of intercept (lpi), and antijamming (aj) capabilities, (3) besecure, and (4) support very small as well as large terminals.¥wireless radio services must be available in the field without preexisting infrastructures, and they must be secure, powerefficient,have lpd and lpi, have aj capabilities, and be able to maintainconnectivity with important users.¥the satellite, radio, and wireless networks must be integrated witha highbandwidth, affordable, and secure terrestrial fiber networkas one supernetwork.¥the network must be an integrated one with multilevel security,data delivery within deadlines, and the capability for rapidreconfiguration and adaptation.with the possible exception of power efficiency and some aspects ofsecurity, all of these characteristics are primarily driven by defense needs,and they will not be advanced by the commercial sector.the remainder of this chapter describes some of the technical challenges of future communication modalities planned for the air force andthe performance of networks when they are connected together in militarysettings. it concludes with recommendations of particularly importantbasic research areas that typically cut across multiple challenges.technical challenges posed by future air forcenetworks and communications systemschallenges for future air force communications systemsdefense applications have to contend with communication modalitiesthat are not encountered in commercial and civilian settings. satellitebasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications37channels have unusually longdelay data rates (sometimes known asdelaybandwidth products) and randomly fading dispersive channelcharacteristics. radio channels, especially those associated with mobileplatforms, have rapidly changing link capacities and connectivities, withdisconnections or dropouts that can be on the order of minutes or more.in contrast to this dynamism, traditional layer 3 (network layer) andlayer 4 (transport layer) protocols assume fairly stable underlying substrates that change, if at all, over the course of minutesñthat is, muchmore slowly than most transmissions. recent applications have shownthese traditional protocols often yield low throughputs and poor qualityof service when applied to dod systems. in some cases, these protocolsdo not work at all despite valiant efforts to provide patches. thus, themain challenge of air force communications is to provide assuredconnectivity between networks (albeit at varying rates) under difficultchannel conditions, including during adversarial attacks.a costeffective investment strategy is to make maximum use of commercial technologies. however, not all the services listed above can besupported by commercial technologies. in many cases, commercial architectures only need to be modified, but in some cases completely newdesigns are needed.source compression for correlated sensorsone communications challenge is the need for source compressionmethods when multiple sensors collect correlated observations, whetheror not this was done in a coordinated manner. this is critical in order to fitthe large volumes of sensed data in modest network capacities, especiallyin difficult communication environments. particularly challenging is theidentification and compression of highly correlated data in the absence offine coordination among sensing platforms. this will require both losslessand informationlossy compression and new approaches to measuringsignal fidelity tailored to battlefield signals. another challenge lies increating joint sourcenetwork coding: the separation theorem, which forpointtopoint communication channels allows one to decouple sourceand channel coding, does not apply to networks of air force interest,where the data volume itself may cause packet loss due to congestion. it isimportant to explore the joint consideration of coding for both source compression and network transport (from layer 1 to layer 4).design of communications systemsa better understanding of capacity limits is needed in order to designthe best architectures for air force communications systems, whichbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38basic research for air force is&t needsshould perform at the theoretical limit for difficult channels and in thepresence of adversarial attacks. the openair satellite, radio, and opticalchannels planned for the air force exhibit fading, dispersion, and interference (benign and adversarial) not typically encountered in wellknownclassical channels, especially when the channel is broadband. for thesechannels, there are many different ways to design the communication system, and good system design will depend on understanding the channeleffects and the fundamental limits of communication performance optimized over the class of possible architectures. our current understandingof the fundamental limits of these channels is only rudimentary, and thespace of communication designs has yet to be fully characterized andoptimized. there are also open questions related to the capacity limits ofmultipleaccess channels with or without coordination. multipleaccesstechniques for openair channels, such as satellite and battlefield radiochannels, are extremely important for good communication performance.classical techniques must be reconsidered in a context that includesadversarial jamming, interference, coupling, and little or no coordinationwith some key inputs such as the satellite channel. classical informationtheory articulates the limits of communication capacities with no specificattention paid to the transaction delay of the session. in fact, most resultsare asymptotic, taken as the delay becomes large. in contrast, some criticalair force applications are very delay sensitive, and a theory for thefundamental capacity limits of a communication system with delay constraints needs to be developed. in some applications power efficiency isalso required.classical communication and information theories do not incorporatean element of adversarial attacks, although some results related to lpd,lpi, and aj communications were developed 40 years ago. the technology assumptions underlying those results have changed, of course,and none of the results were obtained with networking in mind. forinstance, networks using openair interfaces present a new set of vulnerabilities that can be easily exploited by adversaries. it is important tounderstand the set of possible technologies and techniques available toadversaries and to design the network with those in mind rather thantreating them as an afterthought. gametheoretic and optimization techniques will likely be relevant approaches, as will methods for authentication and cryptography.reliable and efficient freespace optical communicationsfreespace optical communications in space is relatively well developed, though its capabilities for terminal spatial tracking systems and theweight and power demands of the systems can be improved using morebasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications39sensitive receivers. the current sensitivity of the best receivers (direct orheterodyne detection) available in prototype form requires 210 receivedphotons per bit. with the advent of solidstate, singlephoton detectors, aphoton counting receiver can achieve 510 bits per received photon. afundamental investigation into the best combination of modulation andcoding under technology constraints could lead to large payoffs for airforce space and aircraft systems.more problematic is freespace optical communication over the turbulent atmospheric channel where fast fading (a few multiseconds) presents difficulties in the design of modulation/coding and receivers. thesesystems are important for aircraft and ground applications. for supersonic platforms, the bow shock presents even bigger challenges thanatmospheric turbulence owing to its speed, which is three orders ofmagnitude higher. the current mainstream receiver uses adaptive opticsto compensate for phasefront distortion, which gives rise to fading andother undesirable channel effects. while its performance is adequate, thesolution is costly and heavy. the air force should pursue new systemtechniques, such as spatial, temporal, and frequencydiversity receiversin both coherent and incoherent forms, to mitigate the turbulence effect.energyefficient communicationsthe air force needs more energyefficient communications for tworeasons. the first is that for operations in a hostile environment, keepingthe transmitter power low is good for lpd and lpi. the second is thatsome operations may be conducted with ground mobile radios, wherebattery conservation is very important. the first problem can and shouldbe addressed as part of the research outlined above aimed at developingcapabilities for efficient communications for difficult channels and underattack. the second includes efficient signal processing and higherlayernetwork protocols, which will be addressed below in the discussion ofsensor networks.dynamic information theory for network applicationsrecent developments in the new applications of communication networks often require that information be processed in a distributed fashionin real time. for example, in a sensor network, a relay node often needs toforward a received signal without being able to decode the embeddedmessage reliably; when controlling a dynamic system, decisions oftenneed to be made based on noisy observations. conventional informationtheory, which is based on the concept of reliable communications andbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40basic research for air force is&t needsthus assumes large delays and extensive coordination, is often not applicable to these new problems. the theoretical understanding of how tohandle information without the errorfree guarantees is therefore important for future developments of highly dynamic and distributed networkapplications. the study of communication systems with partial or listdecoding using a layered coding structure could be the first concrete stepin this direction.challenges for future air force networksthe theory of networks has not matured to a point where one canpredict how well the protocols developed heuristically in one applicationsetting will perform on a communication network built on radicallydifferent communication modalities. to deal with the new and complicated modalities of importance to the air force, fundamental tools mustbe developed to help understand how networks may perform in newenvironments and to optimize architectures. it is simply too costly todevelop these architectures and protocols ad hoc and then experimentwith the communication links in the field. in addition, there are manypossible ways to configure a communication system. if a communicationsystem is going to be used as part of a network, it should be designedjointly with the network and not independently. for example, endtoendreliable data delivery can be a function of the communication system(using diversity receivers and errorcorrecting codes), or it can be a function of the network (using diversity path routing and automatic repeatrequests at various layers such as the data link control layer and thetransport layer).highbandwidth, affordable, and secure global fiber networkthe air force needs a global broadband fiber network to interconnectits multiple modalities and act as the highspeed backbone. currentnetworks, such as the global information grid (gig), use commercialtechnologies with wavelengthdivision multiplexed optical transport andelectronic packet switching. this technology is both costly (it does notscale well to very high data rates) and insecure. for terrestrial networksthere is a burning need to create economical new optical transport mechanisms such as optical flow switching (dynamically set up with shortduration connections on demand) with lightweight protocols and also asecurity architecture for both the physical layer (the transport mechanisms) and the higher layer protocols.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications41network layer (routing) designrouting over the internet today is purposely set to change ratherslowly to prevent oscillations and overreactions to sudden rate surges. incontrast, most of the channels used by the air force can experience rapidchanges in connectivity and link capacities due to random channel effects,mobility, and adversarial attacks. thus, most routing protocols in usetoday cannot keep up with such changes nor can they provide effectivecongestion and flow control. to create better protocols it is important firstto understand the fundamental effects on the network layer of these fastdynamics. for example, mobile networks (especially those that supporthigh data rates and timedeadline services) are not well served by conventional commercial protocols, which are mostly designed for static orquasistatic network topologies. many of these dynamics appear first inthe physical layer and permeate up the protocol stack. the mobilityaspect calls for the joint design of the physical layer and the higher layers,including routing and the transport layer. the development of fundamental mathematical tools is a prerequisite to the understanding andsolution of this very important problem.transport layer designthe task of providing errorfree, endtoend delivery of messages in anetwork is jointly shared by the data link control layer (layer 2) and thetransport layer (layer 4). for random channels (especially those in mobilenetworks), these two layers interact in ways that are stochastic and not yetwell understood; the interactions often result in drastically reduced throughput. researchers have not yet succeeded in predicting the performance ofspecific implementations and determining the fundamental limits of theseprotocols when coupled with random channels. the answer might comefrom control theory and stochastic system analysis.current transport layer protocols assume a stable physical layercommunication infrastructure, so packet losses are typically interpretedas buffer overflow at routers due to congestion. in the random channelswith which the air force has to deal, packet losses can also be due to pathfades or intentional interference by an adversary. some of these effectscan be very fast owing to the mobility and agility of electronic attacks. thetransport layer protocol will react poorly to these effects, resulting invery low network throughput. this is plaguing many current dod programs. for the difficult channels dod and the air force deal with, fundamental research is needed to address this large and critical performancegap. joint design of the physical layer and upper network layers mustbe done in these cases.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42basic research for air force is&t needsnetwork coding and diversity routing for difficult channelsfor networks using difficult channels, such as channels that changequickly compared with network coordination time, it may be impossibleto solve the network routing problem with traditional techniques. network coding is a new technique that uses almost no buffering, no routecomputation, and no flow control. the simplicity of this technique couldbe the answer to these problems (especially for mobile networks that haveno infrastructure and dynamic topologies that change too quickly). however, the area of network coding is just beginning to be defined, and thereare many theoretical problems in throughput, delays, and congestion control that need to be solved. this topic is explained further later in thischapter.because some packets on air force networks have hard timedeadlines,those networks must be designed with an understanding of the limits andtradeoffs of network throughput, delay, and available resources. diversityrouting, for instance, is one possible technique for increasing performance,albeit at the expense of more network resources. some network topologies are better for this purpose than others, so there is a need to optimizenetwork performance as a function of topologies and protocol design atthe higher layers.policydriven efficient network resource allocationthere may be a misconception that with modern fiber and radiotechnologies, bandwidth is plentiful and should not be a bottleneck tonetwork performance. this is far from true in a tactical battlespace, wherethere are several limitations to bandwidths and quality of service. first,the amount of asset that can be deployed is limited. second, difficultchannel conditions can drastically reduce rates; in some situations, expensive relay assets must be put in place to provide minimal but criticalconnectivity. finally, in adversarial attacks, the number of survivingroutes may be few and signaling bandwidths may have to be used toprovide aj via band spreading, reducing the actual data rates. thesefactors all point to the reality that highperformance tactical networkassets will always be precious and in demand. to allocate these preciousresources fairly and provide the best operational support to our forces,the network management system must be able to take into account external policy on priorities, which would change from time to time depending on the important missions at the moment and requirements that arisein the field. the network management system should be able to translatethese highlevel guiding principles into network actions such as routingand media access control priorities in a timely fashion without a human inbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications43the loop. currently, assets are managed manually, and the process is farfrom responsive and optimal.there are risks associated with a network management system that isagile and responsive. to guard against the network going into undesirable states, it needs to be closely monitored for unusual behavior, andfallback procedures and network states must be implemented to ensureminimal critical network service performance. the fundamental researchthat must be done to support such a vision includes multicommodityresource allocation in a competitive environment, gametheoreticapproaches to deal with adversarial attacks, and inference techniques toassess network states in the presence of noise and intentional masking.networks designed to function under adversarial attacksthere will be many nodes in a tactical network and the span can bewide, with connectivities back to the continental united states from anywhere on the globe. since it will not always be possible to ensure that nonodes are compromised, the network should be designed to sense dead ormalfunctioning network elements and route around them. in addition,network failures often result from operator errors, so the network shouldhave an architecture that confines such damage to a local area and doesnot allow it to propagate across the network. when the network sensesoutside attacks, it should have the capability of first locating the real entrypoints and defending and removing the attacks. because sensing and otherprotection techniques can fail, the network should be designed to recognize such failures and be able to continue to function, probably at a lowerperformance level. this feature is necessary because it may be impossibleto avoid rogue nodes or network operator errors. techniques such asbyzantine robust networking can provide sabotageresistant routing anddefend against compromised trusted network elements. there is someparallel here to faulttolerant computing, except in this case the adversarialfactor must be included in the analysis. of particular importance are thetechniques for refreshing and distributing cryptographic keys for dynamicnarrowcast groups. this is especially difficult when a central authority isnot readily connected to the population. a provably secure consensusagreement and key exchange mechanism must be devised.in particular, jamming of openair communication systems (e.g.,satellite links and wireless radios) is a standard military technique to bringabout denial of services. only a few military radio communication systems today have been designed with any aj capability. of these, only thesatellite system milstar has adequate aj capability to deal with jammersthat employ modern technologies. milstar succeeds by deploying spreadspectrum and antenna nulling techniques. however, milstar was designedbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44basic research for air force is&t needsfor voice communications. when data networking protocols are put ontop on this physical layer medium to provide data services in new dodnetworks, such as those described by the transformational communication architecture, new vulnerabilities have surfaced that significantlyweaken the systemõs aj capability. for example, the adversary need onlyjam a few bits per internet protocol (ip) packet to fool the transport control protocol (tcp) into believing that there is congestion at some routersdownstream. in response, tcp will begin closing its transmission window (reducing the number of packets released in flight), reducing the effective throughput of the system to less than 1 percent. counteracting thisnew attack requires a combination of techniques from the physical layerto the transport layer: spread spectrum, nulling, rerouting and diversityrouting, and changes to tcp. there are several other known networkweaknesses, some of which would appear to be correctable, although history tells us that ad hoc changes to overcome vulnerabilities often open(or overlook) other vulnerabilities. what is needed is a systematic fundamental look at networking, perhaps with a solid mathematical foundation, to provide some assurance of protection. in particular, vulnerabilities to crosslayer attacks (which might be more effective than traditionalwithinlayer attacks) should be examined and addressed.crosslayer network design and optimizationmore generally, there would be value in rethinking the networkarchitecture across the layering boundary for military networks, becausethe difficult channels encountered by dod are a reality that cannot beavoided. it is easy to state the obviousñnamely, that when networklayering structures are broken and the architecture is optimized withoutboundary constraints, the network will perform better. however, theunstructured problem may become so unwieldy that any insight and hopeof arriving at a good architecture is lost. there should be a wholesalereevaluation of the functions of each traditional layer to see if there is abetter way to group these functions in view of new communicationmodalities. even if it is highly unlikely that one could find a layering structure that totally decouples the network architecture, breaking down thearchitecture problem into weaker interacting subsystems would be a greatadvance over todayõs architecture.optimization is a fundamental discipline very important to networkdesign and multiagent control. it relies on tools such as mathematicalprogramming for optimization in static contexts, dynamic programmingfor optimizing systems that evolve over time, and game theory for optimizing in the presence of competing interests. a key characteristic of theair forceõs communication networks is their decentralized nature. theybasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications45are being constructed from the interconnection of different systems andusers with different objectives and performance measures, and theiroperation relies on varying degrees of collaboration and competitionamong these entities. thus, there is a need to understand the optimal allocation of resources in the presence of users with heterogeneous servicerequirements, which would seem to necessitate the use of gametheoreticand economic market models for resource allocation and network control.challenges in this area might include (1) developing gametheoreticand artificial intelligence models for resource allocation problems indifferent types of networks, (2) studying the optimality/efficiency properties of such multiagent control schemes, (3) developing new theoreticaltools in optimization and game theory to analyze convex and nonconvexoptimization problems and games that arise in these settings, (4) devisingefficient computational methods with established convergence/rate ofconvergence properties, and (5) developing tractable approximate dynamicprogramming methods that generate suboptimal control strategies.some of the difficult network design problems can benefit from newmathematical analysis tools. in the past few years, ideas developed instatistical physics seem to have had a strong impact in many areas ofelectrical engineering and computer science. in particular, òreplicaó andòcavityó methods arising from physics have led to better (heuristic)understanding as well as the development of novel algorithms for hardquestions arising in combinatorial optimization, errorcorrecting codes,statistical inference, and the like. it would be profitable to study theseconnections rigorously as well as to identify their strengths and weaknesses. this would also lead to a healthy shift in the engineering thinkingof largescale systems such as a globally connected defense network.network codingtraditionally, network schemes have considered transmission ofinformation in networks in terms of flowsñin essence, networks are usedin a manner akin to any transportation system. recently, a radically different approach has been proposed. rather than considering informationas a good to be distributed, one could actively make use of the fact thatinformation is composed of algebraic entities, such as bits, that can bemanipulated. one could then consider combining the information ofdifferent packets in the interior of the network in order to increasethroughput, even in the case of a lossless network. this type of networkrouting has significant potential application in military networks, wherelinks are unreliable to begin with and there are also adversarial attacks.the main theoretical underpinnings of this area should be developed bymerging algebraic theory, networks, and stochastic algorithms to estabbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46basic research for air force is&t needslish the fundamental performance characteristics of network coding. astrong focus should also be maintained on randomized distributed algorithms for multicast network coding, which has shown promise for network operation in preliminary industry demonstrations.some specific basic research challenges in network coding wouldinclude the following:¥concurrently explore the theoretical foundation of network codingand applications of that theory.¥bring network coding to the area of network security by developing the ability of network coding to perform algebraic manipulations in the interior of the network.¥consider the economic implications of network coding. in particular,the pricing of resources in network coding differs significantly fromtraditional network and other pricing mechanisms based on additive resources. network coding builds on the use of entropy ratherthan volume as a pricing unit.¥develop the theory and implementation of network coding in lossynetworks for data dissemination and for creating altogether newmeans of performing distributed storage.¥bring network coding to wireless applications. the dynamic andlossy nature of wireless networks renders the use of networkcoding, particularly for robustness, very effective.energyefficient sensor networksthis is a topic of considerable interest in the private sector, so thereare opportunities for leveraging developments there. however, thereremain significant research challenges in the area of networked sensorbased embedded systems (for instance, to control swarms of uavs).within sensor networks of importance to the air force, the followingcharacteristics are common: (1) sensors vary widely in size, computingresources, and sensing information, ranging from very simple sensors liketemperature sensors to acoustic sensors and surveillance cameras capturing and distributing video signals, (2) sensors are deployed in very largenumbers to ensure adequate coverage, (3) sensors generally perform onlya single task (such as sensing temperature or other environment characteristics), but they operate at very high sensing rates to ensure accuracy inenvironment monitoring, object identification, coordinate location, orother tasks, (4) sensors are deployed in difficult environments whereenergy sources are not easily accessible and where external forces candamage them, and (5) sensors need to communicate with the environment (other sensors or other it devices) to distribute information.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications47the embedded sensor area is relatively new, although some work hasbeen done in the development of operating systems for sensors and inprotocols for the physical, media access control (mac), network, andtransport layers. related work exists in vehicular sensor networks,applied to sensor information such as global positioning system (gps)positions, video, and others. efforts are starting in programming and debugging largescale sensor networks. many relevant results exist in theuse of sensors for location identification, but their integration with othersensing platforms has still not happened. energy is an issue, and extensive work has been done on minimizing the consumption of ad hoc sensornetworks. however, significant research challenges specific to air forceapplications remain in the area of sensor networks:¥development of scalable largescale sensor network topologies andenergyefficient architectures, including algorithms, operating systems, protocols, and internetworking management for the collection of information, taking into account constrained resources suchas energy, communication bandwidth, and processing capacity.¥design/development of efficient algorithms and protocols whensensors are part of a vehicular area network and need to communicate with one another under highmobility scenarios.¥development of efficient programming support and tools forprogramming largescale systemsñthat is, developing efficientlanguages, compilers, and debuggers for programming largescalenetworks of sensor nodes.¥development of efficient memory systems and caches on sensornodes to capture the state of the environment.¥development of energyefficient encoding schemes to distributeinformation at low data rates.¥development of location identification sensors (e.g., radiofrequency identification), their associated processing algorithms,and their integration into the overall computing/communicationenvironment.¥investigation of security and privacy to protect sensing information.¥incorporation of fault tolerance to ensure reliability of processingat sensing nodes and during information dissemination.recommended basic research areas in support ofair force networks and communicationssome of the challenges described above need more investment by theair force than others. in this section the committee recommends a fewparticularly important basic research areas that typically cut across mulbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48basic research for air force is&t needstiple challenges. the committee believes that the most valuable resultswill be achieved when communications and network challenges are considered together, so it has formulated recommendations that target thesetopics jointly. because these recommendations are for basic research, theresearch programs should be tailored to the abstractions that arise fromthese applications rather than the specific applications themselves.satellite communications and data networkingsatellite communications will be an important means of providinglinkages between disconnected pockets of radio clusters and theaters tothe outside world. very high frequencies (>20 ghz) are necessary to support high data rates in benign situations and provide good aj capabilitywith widebandwidth, spreadspectrum modulation. thus far, all military satellite systems have been designed for circuit operations havingrelatively few users (~1,000s), and the systems are highly inefficient forthe transmission of bursty data traffic. these inefficiencies are exacerbatedby the unique characteristics of the satellite channels. for example, satellite systems often have longer propagation delays and higher bit errorrates than their terrestrial wired counterparts, while the openair interfacefor satellite channels (and the high sunk cost of those channels) argues fordynamic sharing of resources. to accommodate data communication formany (~100,000) bursty computer users, the architectures of the airforceõs satellite communications systems will have to undergo a radicalchange. at the physical layer, the communication system should adapt toweatherinduced impairments with power and variable rate control; over10 db of efficiency gain could be realized. to serve a large population ofbursty data communication users, an efficient and rapidresponse macprotocol needs to be adopted for the unique properties of the satellitechannel. rapidly changing channel conditions, especially under openairattacks, will require a fresh look at the routing and flow/congestioncontrol algorithms at the network and transport layers. since this satellite network will be interconnected to other networks, issues of routing atthe network layer, reliable packet delivery at the transport layer, andnetwork management and control will also need to be addressed. thecorresponding research efforts should center on communication theory,experimentation, and practice, with emphasis on heterogeneous networksinvolving satellites, aircraft, uavs, and terrestrial wireless and opticalsystems. examples of some highpriority research topics include thefollowing:¥design of architectures and protocols for satellite communicationssystems, including design of satellite constellations, efficientbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications49resource allocation algorithms, link layer protocols for dealingwith special properties of space systems, and efficient channelsharing mechanisms (i.e., mac protocols).¥development of hybrid spaceterrestrial network architectures,including spaceground network architectures and interfaces, andthe design of protocols for internetworking over heterogeneousnetworks that are efficient, reliable, and able to assure quality ofservice.¥network architectures and protocols for air vehicle systems, including architectures for reliable communications between autonomousair vehicles (e.g., uavs) for the purpose of delivering timecriticalcontrol information.¥development of analytically tractable models of wideband channelsand exploitation of channel characteristics to increase transmissionavailability, reliability, and/or spectral efficiency.¥development of new lossless and lossy techniques for joint compression and aggregation of correlated sensor signals.¥efficient design and performance analysis of transmission systems,receiver algorithms, diversity methods, and impairment mitigationtechniques for airground, space, and inter and intravehiclecommunications.¥reliable and robust ultrawideband communications for highspeedwireless access, inter and intraairplane and spacecraft communications, uav communications, and special operations inharsh environments.radio communications and networkingthe development of wireless applications and wireless networks inrecent years has motivated some significant improvements in communication theory and information theory. however, maintaining good performance at the physical layer for difficult radio channels in the battlefieldwill be very challenging. channel conditions and topologies can changerapidly, and the network must efficiently manage its communicationsover these shared, dynamic, unreliable resources. highpriority researchgoals in this area include the following:¥development of a methodology that unifies the rich collection ofnew results in the wireless field. while numerous new techniqueshave been introduced in recent years to address different aspectsof wireless applications (e.g., multiple input, multiple output(mimo), beamforming, energyefficient ad hoc networks), translating these results into fundamental principles requires that webasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50basic research for air force is&t needsfirst merge them into a unifying framework. designs for modulation and coding, antenna shaping, and processing should be optimized across multiple nodes and with resource scheduling androuting and adversarial attacks all incorporated as key elements inthe problem.¥extension of the basic setup of information theory to allow moreflexible communications. the primary goal of information theoryis to enable reliable communication over long blocks at a prescribedrate. wireless applications, however, call for breaking such operational scenarios. many of these applications require communication over dynamic links, with varying qualities and performancerequirements. the goal is thus to extend information theory to address the dynamics of information transmission and thereby develop rateless, blockless, selfadaptive communication schemeswith delay as a prominent constraint.¥development of cooperation in wireless environments and thearchitecture of wireless networks. while most of the current wireless networks adopt the cellular architecture, new selforganizingnetworks promise much better flexibilities, making many moreapplications possible. a basic research goal in this area would be tostudy cooperation between wireless nodes with limited information exchange between them and, further, to develop new wirelessnetwork architecture that takes advantage of such local cooperation.¥the emergence of new applications with diverse requirements hasmade traditional wireless systems suboptimal, often leading toinefficient use of spectrum, energy, and other resources. it is important to understand how the communications paradigm is evolvingand to develop methodologies for the design of flexible, efficientnetworks. of particular interest is how decentralized systemsñwhere decisions are made with local information onlyñcan achieveglobally optimal use of resources. also, the research efforts shouldincorporate factors that are traditionally overlooked, such as thecompetitive equilibrium and mechanism design for the resourceallocation problem, in order to allow the design of fundamentallydifferent systems based on the paradigms of cognitive/softwaredefined radio and opportunistic communication.freespace optical networksfreespace optical networks are important for air force applicationsconnecting satellites, aircraft, and ground terminals. the physical layerproperties of fading and phase distortion for optical links passing throughatmospheric and aircraft turbulence create serious problems for protocolsbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.network systems and communications51for higher network layers, often resulting in very low throughputs andlong delays for data delivery. it is important to consider optics as a network system rather than an isolated communication link. as described inthe section above on transport layer design, the physical layer and thenetwork architecture must be codesigned. highpriority areas of researchinclude the following:¥understand the interaction of network protocols with the opticallink and quantify the performance shortcomings.¥jointly design the physical layer and higher network layers, makingjudicious use of spatial, temporal, frequency, and route diversity.¥internetworking with other modalities, including using them asbackup for guaranteed message delivery.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.524basic research for air force softwarenetworkenabled systems are by definition dependent on complexsoftware because of the great number of possible states of the networks.building such software is very challenging. the systems that require suchsoftware transcend a range of air force applications, from intensivehumanmachine systems (e.g., command and control, air operationcenters) to embedded applications (e.g., avionics systems). increasinglythese applications are connected by networks into a system of systems,and, in fact, the distinction between enterprise and embedded systemsblurs as the focus is increasingly on the interconnectedness of all suchsystems. this chapter develops recommendations for basic research toenable more successful development of networkenabled systems, andthose recommendations therefore apply to enterprise systems as well asto embedded systems.the air forceõs experience with software over the past 30 years ormore has been one of grappling with more and more lines of code toimplement increasingly complex functionality in a softwareintensivesystem that itself may contain many interconnected subsystems (e.g., afire control system and a navigation system on a fighter aircraft). thissoftware complexity has contributed to the challenges encountered indeveloping and fielding operational systems such as the f22 aircraft andspace systems such as the spacebased infrared system (sbirs).1 the1department of defense, report of the defense science board task force on defense software (2000). available at http://www.acq.osd.mil/dsb/reports/defensesoftware.pdf.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software53advent of networkenabled systems is in some sense an extrapolation ofthe old challenge: the development, integration, and sustainment (maintenance) of many interconnected, large, softwareintensive systems. andthe air force expects to continue to develop and sustain systems that areunprecedented in terms of their size and complexity. therefore, a basicresearch program in software must address how to develop and sustainsuch large families of softwareintensive systems.rather than focusing on largescale code developmentña challengethat is being researched by othersñthe committee recommends thatafosr focus on a set of important software engineering issues that arekey to successful air force networkenabled systems but that havereceived limited attention. this recommended set of issues centers on howto understand what to build and how to ensure that its behavior is relatively predictable and acceptable, both during design and in operationaluse. little is predictable about an end productõs behavior when and whereit is needed, and this knowledge is critical to understanding both how toengineer a new system and how to sustain and upgrade an existingsystem. in order to address this challenge, the committee recommendsrevisiting a concept articulated in 1987 by the air force scientific advisory board: pursue research that helps imbue unprecedented softwaredevelopment projects with some of the attributes that enable success whenthere is a precedent. quoting from that report:2the main philosophy behind risk reduction [for software] is to makeunprecedented systems as precedented as practical.precedented systems are those for which (1) the requirements are consistent and well understood, (2) the system architecture (both hardware andsoftware) is known to be adequate for the requirements, and (3) the acquisition and development teams have worked together to develop a similarprevious system. violation of one or more of these elements of definitioncauses the system to be unprecedented. consequently, certain risks arisethat require an acquisitiondevelopment strategy for their mitigation.a primary assertion . . . is that precedence is one of the most importantelements in the timely development of quality software. in many cases, itis more dominant than many of the more narrowly focused issues thatreceive more attention, such as language, tools, hardware instruction set,architecture, etc. simply stated, the concept of precedented systemsmeans that the learning curve applies to software development, as it doesin all other areas of human endeavor.2air force scientific advisory board, adapting software development policies to moderntechnology (1987). this report is summarized in r.j. sylvester and m. stewart, òunprecedented systems,ó encyclopedia of software engineering, j. marciniak, ed., john wiley (1994).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54basic research for air force is&t needsthat report went on to note that engineering and management techniques have been developed to address the predictability of software andits behaviors, but only in domains that are fairly well understood andwhere the team developing and acquiring the softwareintensive systemhas worked together on a similar system. with networkenabled air forcesystems, such experience in software development and maintenance doesnot yet exist, at least not with actual systems in operational settings (asopposed to tightly controlled and scripted exercises). that gap can beaddressed by research into three major questions:¥how do we discover and understand what is needed?¥how can critical nonfunctional attributes (those that are desired ornecessary but ancillary to the softwareõs primary functionality) beimplemented in a predictable fashion?¥can the resulting software, once fielded, evolve to satisfy newneeds discovered as it is used?figure 41 shows the logical flow from one question to the next andalso indicates an appropriate research theme for each question. thesethemes, which leverage related research already under way at afosrand other research funding organizations, are explored next, and specificresearch topics are recommended.coevolution of air force concepts ofoperations and system architecturesone of the persistent problems in software development is requirementuncertainty. this is particularly problematic with the complex unprecedented systems envisioned by the air force. the software managementliterature is replete with methods to instill disciplined approaches tofigure 41logical flow of software development in support of air forceoperations.rdneeded?howcancriticalnonfunctionalattributesbepredictablyimplemented?howcanitevolvetosatisfywarfighterntwithitsuse?howcancriticalnonfunctionalattributesbepredictablyimplemented?canfieldedsoftwareevolvetosatisfyneedsdiscoveredcoevolutionofafconceptofoperationsandsystemarchitecturesoftwareperformanceenvelopesevolvabilitythroughoutthelifecyclerdneeded?howcancriticalnonfunctionalattributesbepredictablyimplemented?howcanitevolvetosatisfywarfighterntwithitsuse?howcancriticalnonfunctionalattributesbepredictablyimplemented?canfieldedsoftwareevolvetosatisfyneedsdiscoveredcoevolutionofafconceptofoperationsandsystemarchitecturesoftwareperformanceenvelopesevolvabilitythroughoutthelifecyclecoevolution of air force concepts of operation and system architecture software behaviorenvelopesevolvability throughoutthe life cyclehow can we discover and understand what is needed?as it is used?basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software55developing and managing (e.g., the software engineering instituteõscapability maturity model integration),3 but an even more powerfulmethodology is needed for the air forceõs nextgeneration systems; it willrequire far more than process discipline to avoid repeating recent problems encountered with air force software systems.the committee recommends that afosr sponsor research to extendthe philosophy of software development models, such as iterative development, that support rapid prototyping of a software system so that endusers can work with the system to see if it satisfies their needs. throughsuch interplay, the prototype then becomes an explicit representation ofthe requirements. to extend this research for, say, a networkenabledc4isr system, a software model of the proposed system could be constructed and used in simulationbased exercises. the exercises wouldserve the dual purpose of discovering and validating user requirements,which help build air force concepts of operations (conops) while supporting the design and analysis of the architecture. this is consistent withthe architecturefirst approaches advocated in best practices (e.g., usingthe unified modeling language (uml) to enable architecture design thatis motivated by cases supplied by end users) and the dod standards foroperational, system, and technical views of systems. this model forrequirements definition has the additional benefits of building strongercommunication between researchers and the user communities and ofproviding infrastructure to better support teambased problem solvinginvolving humans and automated decision aids, which is particularlyvaluable for nextgeneration enterprise systems.current research in executable architectures and in engineering toolsfor the design and analysis of functional and nonfunctional attributes provides a basis for enabling this coevolution. architecture developmentmethods typically rely on standardsfocused specifications and policydocuments (e.g., those for the gig, jta, dodaf, dii coe) and on environments based on industry standards such as realtime corba. thosemethodologies bring together operational views, which describe how thesystem will be used from the usersõ perspective and which might beexpressed by the software or system engineer in a formal language suchas uml; technical views, which describe the building codes or standardswith which systems will be constructed; and the system view, the actualarchitecture of the system to be fielded. the system view satisfies theneeds as defined in the operational architecture and adheres to the constraints imposed by the technical view.3capability maturity model integration is a service mark of carnegie mellon university.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56basic research for air force is&t needstechnologies now exist for modeling an architecture, the most popularbeing uml. tools and methods exist for evaluating the architecture fromthe perspective of scalability, realtime performance, survivability, andother nonfunctional attributes; for example, the architecture tradeoffanalysis method (atam)4 is a commonly used analysis technique forarchitecture assessment. some work has been done on executable andmodelbased architectures, which enable early execution in a simulationenvironment. these analysis methods typically work on static representations. a new approach in the software engineering community, the modeldriven architecture (mda), is designed to document an organizationõsbusiness and business rules and the structure of its information infrastructure so as to create an expression of the business need for softwarethat can guide it projects. the power of the mda approach is that thepeople who know the business will develop and maintain the businessmodel, while the software engineers will develop and maintain the designand documentation of the software. these ideas are also being exploredby other communities. for example, the workflow management community has developed an xmlcompliant standard to support the explicitdefinition of business processes and the separation of these processes fromunderlying applications.5 in addition, the object management group(omg) recently released a draft version of a new language called thesystem modeling language.6these recent advances would be extended through the recommendedresearch into methods to allow the coevolution of air force conops andsystem architecture. the committee recommends a general goal of providing executable versions of systems earlier in the development processto ensure that the operational view (the conops) is accurately, effectively, and consistently represented by the system and technical views. toachieve that goal, the committee recommends research into the following:¥methods to support rapid composability.¥semantic extensions of current modeling languages to enhancecomposability along with representation of and reasoning aboutbehavior.¥development of tools that enable the construction of executableversions of models in system modeling languages.¥methods that support experimentation, operational assessment,and the use of initial architecture representations in exercises. an4atam is described at http://www.sei.cmu.edu/ata/atainit.html.5for example, see http://www.wfmc.org/standards/docs/tc003v11.pdf.6see http://www.sysml.org.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software57example might be scripting languages that allow end users toexplore early versions of software and help encode their preferences into the final architecture.¥approaches that allow user tailoring, definition, and explorationof new processes and automated learning based on past problemsolving.¥experimentation and demonstration of these research approachesin domains of revelance to the air force.software behavior envelopesair force systems need to be scalable, interoperable, survivable,secure, evolvable, and capable of predictable realtime performance andenergy awareness, among other things. these are ònonfunctionalóattributes: characteristics of the software that, while necessary for the success of the system, are ancillary to the softwareõs ability to execute itsfunction(s). the degree to which such attributes can be achieved in asystem requires tradeoff analysis during design and monitoring duringexecution. to this end, the committee recommends that afosr support anew line of research, extending darpafunded, modelbased softwareresearch to explore the concept of a software behavior envelope. dynamicanalysis of nonfunctional attributes based on embedded models could beviewed as the behavior envelope of a networkenabled system. the extentto which the software could be modified within the envelope, by developersor end users, provides a measure of system elasticity. the analogy is tothe flight envelope of an aircraft: stay within the envelope and performance is safe and assured; wander outside the envelope, and tragedycould follow.this topic would be a new area of research for the software community, but there is related work upon which to build. one related area is theapproach called rate monotonic analysis (rma), which is commonly usedfor realtime scheduling in operating systems. rma was credited withenabling the rapid debugging and repair of the mars rover during its1997 mission.7 another avenue of research is qualitative modeling.8 thisis worth reexamination because of the huge increases in computing powerover the past 20 years, the lack of which was a limiting factor in thoseearlier efforts. a third related area comes from a recently completeddarpa program, the modelbased integration of embedded software7see http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs/user/raj/www/mars.html.8for example, see d.s. weld and j. de kleer, eds., readings in qualitative reasoning aboutphysical systems, morgan kaufmann: los altos, calif. (1990).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58basic research for air force is&t needs(mobies) program, which was largely executed by afrlõs informationdirectorate.9 a fourth area of related research would build on reference frameworks for composable systems (e.g., the work of david garlanand colleagues at carnegie mellon university) and the work at the software engineering institute in predictable assembly from certifiable components.10 another relevant line of work is that by janos sztipanovits andcolleagues at vanderbilt university.11 the union of these directions provides a good starting point for research into how to include executableversions of intended system behavior into actual systems, thus providinga means to establish a software performance envelope. this recommended program of research would leverage and extend ongoing researchcalled out in afosrõs baa 200501 and research supported by other dodlaboratories, the national science foundation,12 and other agencies.evolvability throughout the life cycleonce a software architecture has been defined and the performanceenvelope explored, a logical third capability would be one that supportscontinued evolution of complex software to continue to adapt it to itsfielded context. while most other software engineering research focuseson developing new softwareintensive systems, in fact the larger challengeis to learn how to maintain and upgrade the huge amount of air forcesoftware that is already fielded. thus, important research areas includemethods to infer the architecture of legacy software systems, to identifysoftware components within that architecture, to parallelize legacy systemsoftware and applications, and to migrate that architecture and components to new and improved architectures, possibly within a new computing environment. the products of the research outlined in the previoussection, for predicting software performance envelopes, could also beapplied during such a migration to end users to tailor the software in anew operational environment.9mark lewis, air force chief scientist, described the opportunities and benefits of afosrcontinuing, and thus completing, research projects initiated by darpa in his october 2005address to the air force scientific advisory board.10see http://www.sei.cmu.edu/pacc.11k. chen, j. sztipanovits, a. ledeczi, and s. neema, òtoward a semantic anchoring infrastructure for domainspecific modeling language,ó proceedings of emsoftõ05, acm specialinterest group on embedded software, september 2005.12for example, see the nsfsponsored study at http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~sullivan/sodsis.html or a related nsf program at http://www.cise.nsf.gov/funding/pgmdisplay.cfm?pubid=13078.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software59since networkenabled systems will involve many legacy systems aswell as new systems, it is imperative that software be designed in a waythat it can be evolved in an affordable manner throughout its life cycle.the committee recommends that afosr support research to improve theevolvability of softwareintensive systems. the following specific lines ofresearch, which could build on readily available commercial frameworks,are recommended:¥improvements to our ability to conduct dynamic, modelbasedanalyses to analyze nonfunctional attributes.¥in order to improve component integration, research to acceleratethe development of abstract designcomponent systems and codecomponentbased systems, addressing automated discovery, composition, generation, interoperability, and reuse across hundredsof systems.¥research in security in support of the goal of measurable, available, secure, trustworthy, and sustainable networkenabled systems.¥to attain assured reliability with hard timedeadlines, methods formodeling and analyzing integrated reliability, availability, andschedulability of components and systems in realistic conditionsderived from userspecified scenarios.¥energyefficient components of the overall system: (1) networkenergy on network interface and communication protocols of adhoc networks, (2) processor energy and process management forscheduling various applications, (3) memory/storage energy andmemory/storage management, and (4) display energy.¥research into novel integration of methods for verification and validation, such as integration of informal methods (e.g., software testing and monitoring) with formal verification (i.e., model checkingand theorem proving) and abstract interpretation and static program analysis techniques. the ability to validate scalability, adoptability, usability, and measurement is also important, and somefundamental breakthroughs in the past 5 years have led to a rapidrise in industry adoption and interest.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.605basic research forair force informationmanagement and integrationbackgroundthe primary reason for developing a networkcentric air force is togain the ability to rapidly collect and distribute information and therebycreate information superiority and, from it, military superiority. this is avery challenging objective. while the air force has greatly increased itsability to collect information, the capability does not yet exist for quicklymanaging that information so as to create knowledge where it is neededwhile avoiding information overload.technology to manage and integrate information is critical to the airforce for its current operations and its longterm challenges. the need forthis technology arises in finding and tracking, command and control,decision support for situation assessment, counterintelligence, and publicaffairs. for example, finding and tracking require integrating data fromlarge numbers of sensors and fusing them into actionable information.command and control and situation assessment have similar requirementsñfor example, to tie together sensors and databases into a publishsubscribe environment.more concretely, the air force will need an integrated battlespacemanagement system that combines all of these capabilities in order tosignificantly improve its ability to conduct effective joint and coalitionwarfare. such a system is dependent on several key is&t advances:information exchange with complex event processing; transformationof multiple sources of information into a common representation and theninto knowledge; and distributed collaboration via shared knowledge.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information management and integration61building such a system is made more difficult by many realworld factorsthat are well beyond the state of the art. for example, integration oftenneeds to be done quickly between systems that were not designed tointeroperate, such as those of partners in an ad hoc coalition. efficienttechniques for evaluating complex subscriptions may enable warfightersto identify targets more quickly, while they are still vulnerable to attack.sensors may be moving and unreliable, so that integration needs to bemore dynamic and flexible. as improvements are made in power sourcesfor sensors and networking technology and the cost and size of sensorsdecrease, we can expect the number of sensors and the data rate per sensorto increase. the combination of these effects will greatly increase the overall data rate from sensors, seriously taxing the scalability of currentstreamprocessing algorithms. and, inaccuracies in human sources ofinformation must be factored in.the air force also needs advanced data integration technology in support of nonkinetic operationsñthat is, those that do not rely on damage tophysical objects. for example, public relations challenges might requirequickly searching and correlating information across many data sources,only some of which may be owned by the air force and many of whichhave not been integrated at the time the search request is issued. influenceoperations might rely on very fast unearthing of information about particular individuals (e.g., a leader of a threatening group) or groups (e.g., atribe, clan, or religious community). other nonkinetic operations mightdepend on quick searches of blueprints, building permits, inventories,cybercrime logs, and so on.commercial database and distributed systems technology can beexpected to meet many air force needs. however, for many technicalareas, the air force places a higher value than the commercial sector onobtaining highly innovative solutions or on obtaining them well beforetheir widespread commercial availability. because the air force usesmany customdeveloped application systems, offtheshelf solutions areoften insufficient, particularly for aspects of databases and distributedsystems that enable interfacing with other systems: schema reconciliation, metadata, and so on. rather, fundamental models of informationintegration are needed, models that can be tailored to unique air forcerequirements.what is the current state of the art? robust database system productsexist to support the storage and management of structured information,and recent research is leading to versions of these products that can manage xml documents. extract, transform, and load (etl) tools are available to help clean and integrate datañfor example, to store it in a datawarehouse. enterprise information integration (eii) tools are becomingavailable that enable querying heterogeneous databases, typically relabasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62basic research for air force is&t needstional or xml, although this approach is much less mature than datawarehousing.data integration projects, particularly for data warehouses, are nowan important part of the it work done in large enterprises. however, suchprojects are usually quite expensive. simple ones typically require a yearof elapsed time and several personyears of engineering effort, and complex projects require much more effort.there is also a large market for application servers and related middleware products that support the integration of distributed applications.application servers enable the integration of applications through remoteprocedure call (rpc). the newest incarnation of this technology is serviceoriented architecture (soa), where the rpc is internetenabled using thexmlbased simple object access protocol (soap). enterprise applicationintegration (eai) tools have a similar goal, but they use asynchronousmessagepassing and generally run behind the firewall. as in the database area, the deployment of such products is usually an expensivemultiyear affair.there is some redundancy of application development tasks appropriate to etl, eii, eai, and/or application servers. for example, data mayneed to be cleaned and reshaped in the same way for each of them. thisredundancy increases the cost of integration and potential inconsistenciesbetween functionally related solutions. however, there are technicalimpediments to eliminating this redundancy, such as incompatible execution models (e.g., streaming vs. rpc vs. batch processing). this area isripe for research.major information management challengesfor air force is&ta central issue in the ubiquitous deployment of it is the efficient andeffective use of the large variety and large quantities of data that can beacquired, transmitted, and stored. in the specific area of national defense,both human and automated decision makers must rapidly sort throughvoluminous multimedia data and fuse disparate sources to create knowledge. the first step is to integrate raw data that arrive in different formatsand are managed by different data management technologies so that theycan be correlated and searched using a common mechanism. there hasbeen much progress on integrating classical formatted files with semistructured data, such as xml, which is becoming a standard feature ofcommercial database systems. the integration of other information management functions into a common database infrastructureñsuch as information retrieval, natural language processing, geographical informationsystems, image and video stream processing, and data streamsñis not asbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information management and integration63far along. it is an open question how best to integrate these functions intoa common database system architecture.similarly, the air force faces major open questions on how to manageand share information in a distributed system. the òpublishsubscribeóparadigm is an increasingly popular one for enabling distributedinformationsystem integration and which is being explored by the airforce to work with dodõs global information grid. that concept includesa common area where information is òpublishedó and òsubscriptionó information for various users that defines which posted information theirsystems will download from the common area. while the publishsubscribe concept has been shown to scale to thousands of participants withinstable local area network environments,1 there are many air force requirements that will be met only with further research:¥an air force publishsubscribe system must work in an unstablewidearea network environment such as a battlespace network.¥an air force publishsubscribe system must scale to a very largenumber of users and data sources, while coping with a bursty loadthat generates network and server contention.¥a publishsubscribe systemõs scalability depends in part on theamount of state information it needs to maintain about old events.thus, in order to scale to the sizes contemplated by the air force,systems based on this paradigm must weed out published information that is outdated or redundant, even if it has not beenreplaced by a clear duplicateñexcept that in some cases, old information is still useful for some subscribers.¥the system must distinguish between subscription rules that do notfire because the ruleõs conditions do not hold and those that do notfire because their data sources are unavailable. the former situation indicates that no action is required but the latter is ambiguous.¥a system that handles more expressive subscription rules can bemore selective in identifying events of interest to battlefield commanders and can reduce the cognitive load on commanders bytracking the state of partially satisfied subscriptions. however, theexpressiveness of subscription rules is limited by the speed withwhich they can be processed and the amount of memory needed tomaintain the state of partially satisfied subscriptionsñremember1a. carzaniga, d.s. rosenblum, and a.l. wolf, òdesign and evaluation of a wideareaevent notification service,ó acm transactions on computer systems 19(3):332383 (2001);yimin wang, lili qiu, chad verbowski, dimitris achlioptas, gautam das, and paul larson,òsummarybased routing for contentbased event distribution networks,ó computer communication review, october 2.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64basic research for air force is&t needsing, for example, that two of the three requested events haveoccurred.¥in effect, rules are continuous queries being posed on streams ofdata arriving from sensors and other data sources. databasestylequery optimization will be needed to cope with high data rates andthe large number of rules that need to be concurrently checked. itwill also be needed to process queries over a combination of historicaldata and newly arriving data.¥the system must have some òintelligenceó to take context intoaccount when interpreting subscription rules. for example, a userõsinformation needs can vary tremendously depending on externalconditionsñfor example, whether a battle is ongoing, whetherother elements of the chain of command are online, and whetherother information sources are operational.¥the importance of timeliness can vary greatly according to theinformation posted or the external conditions. rules must beevaluated on input data streams at a rate that suits the timelinessrequirements.¥the relative importance of certain rules can vary according to externalconditions. when the system is overloaded due to a burst of activityin one area of the battlespace, performance should degrade gracefullyñthat is, the system must not thrash. the most important rulesshould be prioritized to access the limited system resources.¥security of the published information is critical, and the systemmust be trustworthy even if an adversary has gained access to publish or subscribe. in an air force setting, it must also offer multilevel security.the above requirements are examples and not comprehensive. evenso, it is a long list of challenges that spans many areas of computer sciencein addition to publishsubscribe concepts, such as database systems, security, and data mining. moreover, in addition to publishsubscribe, otherdistributed computing paradigms might be relevant, such as peertopeermessaging, media delivery, grid services, distributed services for wirelessnetworks, and overlay networks. different paradigms offer differentoptions for power management, net capacity, security, and other factors.information needs to be understood at a more abstract level. the airforce needs a model and architecture for situation understanding and ameans of incorporating situation modeling, modelbased processing, situation projection, and topdown management of situation understandingin order to explore topics in information fusion. it also needs a scientificbasis and technologies for multisensor fusion for air and ground targets.some of these topics are extensions of ongoing work in intelligence, surbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information management and integration65veillance, and reconnaissance methods. these sorts of analyses need toaccount for the uncertainty of information sources, sometimes due toknown error characteristics of instrumentation but also due to hardtoquantify uncertainties such as those inherent to humansupplied intelligence.an even bolder question would be, how can a computer understanddata and information in context? in principle, background understandingof a mission or related intelligence could help a computer interpret information from the battlespace. for example, it might help identify objects invideo or image data. if such contextdependent processing were possible,perhaps informationunderstanding algorithms could be embedded insensors and networks to enable rapid data assessment and hence rapidsituation assessment. source compression methods might also be possiblewhen multiple sensors collect correlated observations, whether or not thecollection was done with coordination. if the correlation is known, as isoften the case (e.g., when data are bursty), redundancy can be compressedout. this is critical in order to fit the large volumes of sensed data intomodest network capacities, especially in a difficult communication environment. one challenge is the compression of highly correlated data without fine coordination among sensing platforms.defense applications today involve a wide variety of informationbearing signals. examples include audio and video communicationsignals, video and still light imagery, hyperspectral imagery, and radarimagery, to name but a few. often, these different data acquisition modeswill be employed simultaneously in the same system. to use such signalseffectively, it is necessary to represent them in digital form in a hierarchyranging from the basic uncompressed analogtodigital form to a compressed digital form to a symbolic form. continuing research will berequired to find multilevel representations of multimodal signal sets sothat they can be efficiently stored, transmitted, manipulated, and understood by digital techniques. although much progress has been made instandardizing signal and data representations (e.g., mpeg7 and xml),additional afosrsponsored research is needed to focus on air forcesignal representation problems. given appropriate digital representationsof multimodal signal sets, it is also important to find new ways to searchfor desired information and to aggregate that information into a convenient form. this means that basic digital signal processing topics such assignal enhancement, signal modeling, redundancy removal, and featureextraction will continue to be important fundamental research topics. thisalso requires advances in multimedia data mining and machine learningin the defense context. combining information across different signalmodes and fusing that information into robust multimedia òdocumentsówith high semantic value is another topic of broad interest beyond justthe air force, but there are also air forcespecific aspects to this challenge.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66basic research for air force is&t needsthroughout information management and integration, there is acritical need for security, but many of the research challenges are militaryspecific. a very difficult challenge is how to enable the multilevel securityneeded in a fully functional publishsubscribe system. however, some ofthe most important issues there are policy ones, not technical ones.there is a great need for research in defensive and offensive information operations, some of which has already begun at the afrl. there isalso a great need for better understanding of how humans react to information operationsñthat is, what actions will create the desired effectsñand ways to evaluate options for influence operations, tradeoffs, andcourses of action. damage assessment for influence operations is a specialchallenge so far unexplored.recommended basic research ininformation management and integrationfollowing are areas of information management and integration functionality that are important for future air force systems and are eitherbeyond the state of the art and require basic research or are areas whereprogress has been slow and could be sped up by additional researchinitiatives:¥largescale sensor networks need to support queries, because it isoften infeasible to send all sensor data to a central location toprocess queries. research is needed to understand where to placequeryprocessing functionality when nodes have limited power,limited computing capability, and limited network bandwidth andconnectivity. conversely, as network and power limitations areovercome, higher data rates can be expected, which will lead tooptimization tradeoffs different from those being investigatedunder todayõs limitations.¥applications needed in the field will demand coping with dynamic,latebinding, and unpredictable structure in the data, or even nostructure at all. accordingly, dealing with semistructured contentwith unpredictable structureñfor the data model, for querying androuting documents, and for efficient executionñis critical.¥data arriving from different sensors and other sources may beinconsistent. yet they need to be rolled up into a coherent view ofthe environment, thereby being turned into knowledge. technologies are needed for fusing uncertain or inconsistent data andfor querying databases containing incomplete or inconsistent information. some of these technologies may be generic across arbitrarydata types, while others may be specializedñfor example, forbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information management and integration67merging location information from mobile sensors. it is also important to be able to mine inconsistent data for patterns, to obtain hintsabout a coherent view without necessarily being able to constructsuch a view. it may be helpful to create and maintain an ontologyof the information domain, to help direct the data mining or interpret the results.¥database mechanisms are needed to track the lineage of all storeddata, from its initial source through transformations and updatesthat were applied to it. solutions exist for tracing schema information, for example, from the column of an output report to the inputdata sources and transformations of those inputs that generate it.however, much less is known about how to track lineage at thelevel of data instances, especially when arbitrary transformations,not just database queries, can be applied.¥database system mechanisms are needed to deduce the degree ofcertainty of query results as a function of the uncertainty of the rawdata, under appropriate probabilistic models. uncertainty mayarise, for example, from measurement errors, incomplete structure,imprecise knowledge of the location where a measurement wasmade, data cleaning of raw data, or conflicting data from differentsources. some of the challenges are to identify mathematical modelsof uncertainty that have general utility across a variety of applications, to develop efficient deduction algorithms for these models,and to find optimal ways of making these algorithms effective inthe context of information management systems (e.g., in a databasesystem, in middleware, or in application programs).¥new approaches are needed to reduce elapsed time and level ofeffort to integrate independently designed databases, such as thedatabases supporting each participant in a joint mission. suchapproaches must be embodied in tools that can help an engineerdesign, develop, and test mappings between databases, find andreuse existing mappings in the same domain as the mapping to begenerated, and evolve and customize mappings as data sourceschange and new ones are added. here, too, the creation and maintenance of an ontology may be useful to organize a repository ofschemas and mappings.¥the air force needs advanced distributed systems technology insupport of battlespace information management. as discussedabove, in the section on major information management challenges,publishsubscribe is one important distributed systems infrastructure, though other distributed computing paradigms should alsobe explored. although there is much research on publishsubscribesystems for centralized infrastructure, many improvements in thebasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68basic research for air force is&t needsfunctionality of publishsubscribe systems are needed, which requiresadditional research. these include scalability to widearea, unstablenetwork environments; filtering outdated or redundant information; coping with intermittent availability of event streams; supporting more expressive subscription rules; improved optimizationof rule execution; processing strategies that account for context,timeliness, and priority; and incorporating security guarantees.architectural principles that enable us to create secure, scalable,reliable publishsubscribe platforms would also be valuable.¥air force distributed systems need to be interoperable, secure,massive in scale, highly available, dynamically reconfigurable, andeasily managed. these systemlevel characteristics are notoriouslymore difficult to engineer than componentlevel capabilities. moreover, some military requirements for these systemlevel characteristics are beyond todayõs state of the art.¥the data that flow through such distributed systems are subject tothe same integration problems described above for informationmanagement. for example, identifying errors, cleaning the data,fusing data from multiple sources into a coherent view, and tracking data lineage are all relevant to data flowing through a distributed system. some data must be moved from a realtime publishsubscribe system into a database to enable historical queries of(possibly recent) publications, to obtain answers to point questions,and to identify trends.¥system management is important, especially in an environmentwhere information publishers, subscribers, and even major serversare unreliable. system managers must know who is connected,must be notified when users and information sources connect anddisconnect, must be warned of impending performance and reliability problems, must be helped in understanding the impact ofthese problems on system behavior, and must be able to reconfigurethe system dynamically in response to these and other changes.again, techniques are needed to ensure these capabilities can bemade available despite incompatible network architectures andsecurity domains.¥performance and scalability, which are always a major concern, areespecially hard to manage in heterogeneous distributed systemsthat are frequently reconfigured as components and communications fail and recover. for example, quality of service for realtimestreaming of audio and visual information needs to be maintained,while avoiding overload that interferes with concurrent highpriority interactive workloads.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.information management and integration69¥given the dynamic nature of battlespace systems, testing for abroad range of contingencies is extremely challenging. bettermodels of largescale systems are needed to allow virtual testingand analysis.¥continuing research will be required to find multilevel representations of multimodal signal sets so that they can be efficiently stored,transmitted, manipulated, and understood by digital techniques.this means that basic digital signal processing topics such as signalenhancement, signal modeling, redundancy removal, and featureextraction will continue to be important fundamental researchtopics. however, the special nature of defense applications arguesfor continued support by afosr of work that leverages and extendssignalprocessing r&d of a more general nature.¥there is also a need for research on multimedia data mining andmachine learning in the defense context. research on basic signalrepresentation and research on signal analysis must be closelyintertwined. combining information across different signal modesand fusing that information into robust multimedia òdocumentsówith high semantic value and focused on information sources ofinterest in air force applications will allow afosr to leveragenondefensebased research and foster the creation of new knowledge with direct applicability to air force problems.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.706basic research for human interactionswith air force is&t systemsthe concept of humansystem interactions (hsi) includes the traditional field of humancomputer interactions (hci) but also encompassesthe coordinated and purposeful interactions of several or many humanswith complex systems and the interactions of teams of humans mediatedthrough systems. the committee recommends that afosr focus on hsibecause it is essential to the successful operation of complex itbasedsystems and to the accomplishment of networkenabled operations. thereis strong historical precedence for this area of research. one example ofclear importance to the air force is the use of cockpit simulators for training and rehearsing. however, the increasing pervasiveness of interactivecomplexity in is&t systems argues for a broader interaction, muchbeyond the computer interfaces and humanmachine synergy. examplesare interactions in realtime virtual and simulated environments and inthe collaborative control of uavs. clearly, such capabilities are both teamfocused and networkenabled. an ultimate goal of hsi research would beto enable machines (or algorithms) to perform most if not all of thecomplex data manipulation, correlation, computation, and automatic datareductionñand even some decision makingñleaving humans to performthe most critical judgments that cannot be accomplished by algorithms.furthermore, hsi should help humans to interact with one another incooperative tasks where multiple humans are part of the system.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.human interactions with air force is&t systems71challenges posed by human interactionswith air force is&t systemsscope of the challengein the air force, there are many instances where one or more humansinteract with one or more is&t systems. these include systems that aredistributed not only among different platforms but also perhaps acrossgeographical and organizational boundaries, most often with strict security and service reliability constraints such as nearrealtime or timecritical services. added complexity comes about because both the humansand the systems might be interacting with one another in additional waysthat are disconnected from the task being analyzed. new paradigms suchas publishsubscribe architectures are being investigated to cope withsome of the challenges. what sorts of information, architecture, and formatshould be used to achieve desired effects, and how can designers andusers estimate the uncertainties and internalize context and caveats associated with each option? assuming the right information is available atthe right time and in the right form (e.g., as text or images), what techniques will enable the user to make the best use of it? how can whatifsimulations be considered and evaluated? such complex capabilitiesmight require integrated and synchronized multimodal interfaces (visual,aural, and/or haptic) to capture the high dimensionality of a system ofsensors and actuators in the battlefield.research into hsi should shed light on the usability of the (same)information in a battlefield commandandcontrol situation relative to thedifferent perspectives (ranks) of the users and the different degrees ofgranularity (detail). in other words, one must understand and characterize the most likely and useful level of complexity for each potential user,from the warfighter to the commander, so that the complexity of theinformation can be tailored to provide an optimal amount of informationfor battlefield decisionmakingñnot a paucity of data, but not data overload either. visualization (interactive visualization in particular) is animportant topic. because this subject is receiving much attention as partof darpaõs command post of the future program, afosr should workto complement the darpa investment.the issue of how to ensure security pervades the topic of hsiñinparticular because human behavior regarding security has a great influence on the effectiveness of embedded security protocols. user behaviorcan reinforce or undermine security systems, and we do not know enoughabout how the interface influences those behavioral choices. the most frequent cause of system failure is human error, and even under the best ofcircumstances (good training, no stress, welldesigned interface system,basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72basic research for air force is&t needssimple tasks), human operators have been shown to have a finite (nonzero) rate of placing a system outside its operational allowed boundaries.1usability and errorfree hsi design may work at cross purposes in certaincases. for example, the therac25 medical radiation device allowedoperators to bypass error messages and apply treatment even if lethaldosages were being used. in interface design, unusual system circumstances must be prominently flagged. it is well known that a high level ofstress increases the errors that may cause security or system failures. amodicum of system sensor display redundancy (from different sensors)also gives the user greater confidence in the validity of critical information.hsi research could lead to improved design and evaluation of itbasedsystems to achieve better usability, safety, and security simultaneously.much of the research on influence operations goes beyond is&t andrequires fundamental research into behaviors and how they can beaffected. to this base must be added research into information interpretation and presentation, personnel training, and modeling and simulationfor influence operations, building on what is known about cultural andbehavioral factors. as an example, characterization and recognition ofnormal and abnormal behavior, in general, would help in surveillance atall levels. characterizing those behaviors requires ongoing research insocial sciences, and automatic recognition of the identified characteristicsis an ongoing challenge for is&t.power consumptionñconcerns about which were noted in chapter3ñmay also be improved through hsi research into how users interact withmobile devices with small displays whose display component consumesa significant proportion of the deviceõs energy. while hardware advancesallow for the dimming of displays and the use of screen savers to lowerpower consumption, the possibility of selective dimming of display areasnecessitates a better understanding of which display regions to dim andwhen and of which display effects may be acceptable to the users orallowed by different operations (email, for example, will have differentcriteria on dimming than video streaming). research efforts could beshared by industries that are also seeking powerefficient displays.hsi challenges also arise when using commercial offtheshelf hardware and software, which when merged into complex systems maypresent the user with a confusing, even contradictory, set of interfaces.hsi challenges certainly present in specialized equipment interfaces suchas those used by the remote operators of uavs. such applications drivethe development of contextaware, crossmodal analysis techniques that1barry kirwan, a guide to practical human reliability assessment, taylor and francis,ltd.: london (1994).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.human interactions with air force is&t systems73provide input to automated systems. in other cases, the analysis techniques can assist human decision makers in sorting through huge amountsof information. in such cases, datamining and machinelearning techniques can simplify complex multidimensional data. how to representsuch information in multimodal form to facilitate its use is an importantarea of research. new approaches for the display and rendering ofmultimodal signal sets, such that important contextdependent featuresare highlighted and subtle features are not obscured, will be necessary toprovide contextaware, useroriented interfaces that allow effective decisions to be made in complex situations. such system interfaces must allowusers to probe deeper layers to capitalize on uniquely human analysiscapabilities.finally, two issues related to the sharing of information should bekept in mind when planning the hsi research program:¥dod and the services have a range of geographically distributedr&d efforts in hsi and modeling. because the hsi challenge is sohuge, it is important that these resources and accomplishments beshared, striving for commonalities of icons, network services, standards, interoperability, response time, scalability, and so on.¥some key concerns with respect to information sharing in battlefield situations include scalability, allocation and management ofbandwidth, message and resource priority allocation policies, timeorder of the processing steps used in publishsubscribe systems,intelligence needed to establish logical and semantic relations onthe information objects, potential deadlocks, etc. these concernsare closely related to the shift to networkenhanced operations,where multiple sites and organizations need to share commoninformation on a timely basis.interfaces for air force decision makersthere is a general need within the air force for decisionsupport toolsproviding more effective interfaces between decision makers and thevoluminous information available to them. over the years, various software packages have been developed to support decisionmaking. one ofthe simplest and most useful is the spreadsheet, but others such as criticalpath methods and the program evaluation and review technique (pert)have also found a place. however, most realworld problems involveuncertainty. whether we are dealing with scientific issues, engineeringproblems, or capabilities of individuals, we make decisions based onimprecise assumptions and incomplete and timevarying data. decisionmaking under uncertainty is usually studied as an offshoot of probabilitybasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74basic research for air force is&t needstheory, merged with ideas of risk. in principle, decision theory offers a setof structured procedures that assist decision makers.classical decision theory is most widely studied in a static setting inwhich the data are given and then analyzed and acted upon. in the realworldñand especially in air force information operations and influenceoperationsñthe inputs to the decision often change before the solutioncan be implemented. thus, one needs to pay attention to techniques thatlend themselves to rapid, perhaps approximate, solutions and techniquesfor rapidly updating given solutions when small parts of the problemchange. stochastic programming methods could be useful in some probabilistic settings, although problems involving military logistics are oftentoo large to be treated successfully using these methods. there is also theneed to develop software that incorporates bayesian inference, althougha completely resolved bayesian inference model might not be realisticgiven the computational resources likely to be required. as a consequence,statistically sound heuristics could be developed and explored to extendcomputational feasibility to much larger problems. as a model one mightthink of greatly extending the functionality of spreadsheet software bycombining it with packaged statistical algorithms and an appropriate userinterface designed to help users formulate questions and display theprobabilistic information associated with the results. part of any effectivesystem of this type would be effective optimization algorithms, becauseevery nontrivial whatif question requires optimization. (see chapter 3for some discussion of optimization, dynamic programming, and gametheory in complex systems.) it would be desirable for this type of researchto develop new classes of statistical models for complex phenomena that(1) are rich enough to capture relevant physical laws and other knownconstraints in large classes of problems of interest to the air force and(2)have exploitable structure that allows the development of new methodsfor information extraction and for the development of bounds on achievable performance for problems that previously defied practical solution.another example where better decision support is needed is in control systems that involve humans as essential parts of the decision chain.technologyñespecially it, collaborative work analysis, and communication technologyñcan provide such decision makers with better local andglobal awareness, e.g., about the weather and other environmental conditions, including other aircraft and machines in the environment. theresearch community has been quite successful in modeling and predicting the behavior of machines interacting with relatively wellunderstoodor wellmeasured environments, including those with uncertainty andsome bounded nonlinearity. but people in the loop make decisions thatare highly nonlinear and not always predictable, and therefore theirbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.human interactions with air force is&t systems75inclusion creates a greater modeling challenge. in addition, the air combat command told the committee that it was increasingly concerned withwinning the local populationõs hearts and minds as the most effectivemeans of achieving military goals, and in such a context, improved understanding of people can be more important than improved models ofequipment. to address all of these peopledependent modeling challenges, there is a great opportunity to devise research experiments thatinstrument people and their environment with cameras, microphones,stress and pressure sensors, and other measurement devices, perhapscollecting data via wireless technology. such measurements would offerobjective observations about peopleõs behavior under varied conditions,which could help in its modeling.one specific need is hsi systems that make the control of uavs moreefficient. currently, global hawks and predators require as many as25people for each operation: at least three groundbased pilots, one foreach 8hour shift, and various support personnel to launch and captureuavs, process collected data, etc. while some attention has been paid tothe design of ground control units, significant improvements could probably be made using stateofthe art knowledge of hsi design and collaboration. however, significant advances in intelligent control, hsi methods,and other areas of interactivecollaboration research will be needed tomove toward the goal of having one person control a single uav, witheven more research being required before one person could control multiple uavs.machine learning to support hsisystem components that adapt and learn from their environment orfrom coaching by a human supervisor would open an amazing number ofdoors, from intelligent control systems to intelligent decision aids.machine learning is a critical technology for eventually enabling softwareintensive systems to (1) adapt and extend their functionality in responseto specific training and (2) make intelligent inferences either from generalhuman guidance or through reasoning based on interaction with thesystemõs domain.one particularly important application area for intelligent systemswould be immersive environments for training and exercise support. thiswill require advances in modeling and simulation, eventually yieldingvirtual worlds that can be used to support training, exercises, and criticaldecisions about system development and acquisition. all too often modeling and simulation are underused because technical difficulties preventreuse and combination.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76basic research for air force is&t needssimulation as a design and training tool for hsianother challenge for human interactions with complex is&t systemsis the need for realistic, validated simulations that allow humans to designsystems and learn about their management, operations, and vulnerabilities. design options and capabilities of systems as complex as a networkenabled battlefield force or a publishsubscribe system with 100,000 userscan only be explored via simulation. the software engineering and validation and verification aspects of such simulations are known to be challenging. less well known is the need for the proper design and analysis ofexperiments run via simulation. without attention to this need, complexsimulations often lead to inaccurate or imprecise results. moreover, thewidespread use of simulation for air force training presents more challenges owing to the presence of a human in the loop. the simulationmodeling of human behavior is not well developed or understood, thoughefforts along these lines (e.g., models of crowd behavior) are ongoing. in atraining mission, the vagaries of human behavior make careful attentionto statistical design and analysis even more critical.another area where the potential of simulations is underutilized isinput/output sensitivity analysis. the simulation model is not only forobtaining predictions but also for investigating which inputs are important and which are not (often of equal interest). the same statisticaldesign/analysis methods for òproductionó runs can be used for sensitivityanalysis to elucidate things like main effects, interactions, and so on. thisleads rather naturally to validation and verification, because validationrelies on statistical comparisons between the outputs from the simulatedsystem and those from the real system. a rigorous simulation procedureoffers the potential for objective and rational validation. and a good simulation system can also be a good training tool for users.basic research recommendations for hsifor air force is&t systemssome of the most valuable basic research efforts that would addressthe challenges in this chapter are listed below. the committee recommends that these topics be addressed in an interdisciplinary manner withgoals that could enhance multiple capabilities (e.g., network security,simulation, information operations). some of this research would seem tobe appropriately conducted collaboratively with other branches of themilitary or with the national science foundation. the research shouldstrongly articulate basic design principles, goals, and evaluation of humaninterfaces with complex is&t systems. the committee recommends afocus on the following areas:basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.human interactions with air force is&t systems77¥behavioral models for individuals, groups, and organizations.¥specification of an information operations testbed and experimental metrics for evaluating its effectiveness in distributed environments that preserve realistic situation awareness.¥better understanding of mixedmodality methods (systems thatunderstand speech, gestures, sound, touch, etc.) for imparting information and effecting control. research should aim to illuminate theminimum speech capability (or iconography, haptic stimuli, etc.)needed under varied conditions.¥design of communication methods that combine text, speech, andvisual modalities appropriate to the information being communicated.¥understanding user needs that have implications for power usage(and energy efficiency) in displays, such as how users scan areas ofa display.¥exploration of the theoretical tools used to design, implement, andfield complex, timecritical information systems. topics include thedevelopment of largescale deterministic, stochastic, convex andnonconvex, dynamic, and integerconstrained mathematical programming; algorithms for largescale bayesian analysis, includingapproximate techniques, partial evaluations, and update algorithms; game theory; multiscale modeling and multiscale analysis;and formal approaches to data mining, knowledge representation,and reasoning.¥development of better tools for automated reasoning and inference under uncertainty. such tools can draw on diverse techniques,such as data mining and knowledge discovery in databases; modelsthat learn from data; information retrieval; automated diagnosisand decision support; and machine learning. the goal is to enableusers to quickly navigate complex data sets, to set up and analyzedecision trees or bayesian networks, to understand the effects ofdecision rules, and so on.¥the paradox of automation is that the more automation is added toaid humans, the more work the humans have to do to understandboth the automation and the task(s) which the automation isdesigned to support. to counter this, specific research is needed toenhance models of usersõ capabilities to interact with and understand systems via different modalities; to automate acquisition andenhancement of information fusion models; to create models ofusers that can be trained from instruction or in exercises withhumans; and experimentation in domains of air force relevance.¥interactive system components that can adapt and learn from theirenvironment or from human supervision should be investigated.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78basic research for air force is&t needsappropriate methods include indexing, retrieving, and reusingpast problemsolving episodes; encoding problemsolving methodsfrom instruction or observation; explanationbased methods; inferring or suggesting improved problemsolving methods; enhancingthe efficiency of algorithms based on past problem solving; inductively inferring regularities using, for example, graphical models(bayesian networks); reinforcing learning methods; understandingemergent behavior; transferring lessons learned in one domain toanother domain; using multiagent teams to learn how groups collaborate to solve problems; integrating multiple machine learningtechniques; developing toolkits and frameworks that integrate andfacilitate adoption of learning methods and provide guidance onthe best methods to use in different situations; and experimentingin domains of air force relevance.¥research on the modeling and simulation of scenarios of importance to the air force, including more rapid and costeffective construction of domainfaithful models of information and influenceoperations; support for the authoring of scenarios and their translation into the models and databases required for simulations; andsoftware tools to allow users to tailor and understand the behaviorand functionality of software components.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.797priorities in basic is&t researchfor the air forceit is the committeeõs consensus that the basic research topics describedin chapters 3 through 6 are of great importance for enabling the capabilitiessought by the air force and that none of them are likely to be adequatelyexplored by the private sector. recognizing, too, that afosrõs resourcesfor is&t are relatively limited, the committee recommends in this chapterhow to prioritize among those research topics given different fundingscenarios. as background for that discussion, it first presents its overallvision for air force basic research.a model for air force is&t basic researchgiven the limited availability of 6.1 funds for is&t research, the committee believes it is best to give priority to those research areas that afosrgives a realistic chance of enabling significant new air force capabilities.this is not to say that all of afosrõs basic research in is&t should be tiedto particular technology goalsñin fact, such tieins should be an unusualexceptionñbut that is&t basic research should normally be motivated bythe recognition of a gap in the knowledge base that underpins desired airforce technologies. the committee suggests that these knowledge gaps beseen as ògrand challenges,ó which is a helpful way to motivate researchand build research communities and a useful mechanism for communicating the relationship between basic research and future air force technologies. topics designated as grand challenges would normally be onesthat are properly addressed by a crossdisciplinary community of basicresearchers, and such a designation gives that community an identity andbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80basic research for air force is&t needsstrengthens its coherence. grand challenges should be defined in termsthat are recognizable to the basic research community, but afosr shouldalso be able to map the grand challenges to future air force technologies,strengthening the linkage between basic research and the rest of air forcer&d. the grand challenges are not part of, nor do they compete with, theafrl focused longterm challenges (which are more oriented towardtechnologies), but they should link to them.some examples of grand challenges in a general sense are included ina recent paper by wellknown computer scientist butler lampson:1¥development of a computer that hears, speaks, and sees as well asa person;¥a system architecture that scales up by 106; and¥an information system that can be used by millions yet only requires a parttime support staff.such grand challenges quite naturally facilitate new interdisciplinary research communities: òinterdisciplinaryó because the breadth of the challenges calls for varied expertise and ònaturallyó because the associated researchers are interested in the whole range of efforts addressing the grandchallenges. the computing research association has for several yearsheld conferences that similarly seek to identify grand challenges for computer science more generally. information about these meetings may befound at http://www.cra.org/grand.challenges/.figure 71 suggests how the grand challenges model would contributeto cohesion across the total air force r&d enterprise. the grand challenges would be defined by afosr as a clear response to afrl and airforce technology needs, but in terms of concepts that motivate the basicresearch community. they have the advantage of not biasing the researchdirections chosen to address a particular air force need: they define achallenge for the research community that relates to desired capabilitiesbut do not present the research community with specific technology goals,as would be the case if the basic research program were motivated directlyby current air force technology programs. in turn, the 6.1 research buildsup a base of knowledge related to the grand challenges (the arrow on thelower right of figure 71), and the rest of the air force r&d communitycan track progress on the grand challenges that support its technologygoals. that transition (indicated by the arrow at the lower left of figure 71)is aided by the computational laboratories recommended in chapter 9.1b. lampson, òcomputing meets the physical world,ó the bridge 33(1) (2003).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.81figure 71mapping of air force needs to basic research through grand challenges.6.1 researchmultiple and diverse scientific explorationfocused in common grand challenge areasshared, repeatable experimentsmetrics that are grounded in good science6.26.3a researchafrl computational laboratories(related to battle labs/testbeds)experiments with operational personnelmeasures with operational significance(e.g., , not expected from the commercial sector)afosr 6.1 justificationgrand challenges support afosr investment strategyair force needsleapahead research highrisk but highpayoff researchthat would provide significant advances in military capabilitiesair force needs translated into research issuespotential research impactexplained in air force termsas articulated in air force flight plan 2004, recent usaf sab studies, and afrl s&t plansgrand challengesvisionary capabilitiesbased on air force needs andrequiring breakthroughtechnologies that likelywill not come without afosrinvestmentbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82basic research for air force is&t needsthe characteristics that are important in defining grand challenges for theafosr are these:¥they should be representative of important systems that the airforce would like to have but that are well beyond the state of theart, like the examples in the next paragraph.¥the key component technologies that would make them realizableshould be technologies where the air force wants research advances.¥they should be readily comprehensible to researchers who do nothave domainspecific knowledge of the air force system.¥they should bound the research somewhat, so that researchers canaim toward specific applications rather than general capabilities.the committee recommends that afosr consider the following aspossible grand challenges, but the list is by no means exhaustive:¥control of multiple uavs. research to enable the control of multipleuavs by one human in mixed manned and unmanned airspace, incontrast to todayõs requirement for many humans for a single uavin carefully deconflicted manned and unmanned airspace.¥taskable airborne network. research to enable costeffective andrapidly deployable tactical intelligence networks in urban environments, where the nodes generally are sensors carried on uavs orlighterthanair vehicles and the networks are taskable by groundand airbased commanders.¥mixedreality training environments. research to enable training forair crews, command post staff, and commanders in an environment of such fidelity that it would be indistinguishable from thereal world (and in fact would sometimes involve the real worldñhence òmixedó rather than òvirtualó or òaugmentedó). the computer tools used in such training environments should be the sameas those used in the real world.¥an automated air operation center staff assistant. research to enablesoftware that can learn from being told, much as human staffmembers learn on the job.¥rapid system integration. research to enable the rapid integration ofitbased systems, such as those belonging to different members ofad hoc coalitions. this research would encompass hsi, networks andcommunications, security, software, and information management.it is envisioned that an interdisciplinary community would engage incollaborative research focused on each grand challenge. researcherswould describe repeatable experiments and metrics with which to assessbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.priorities in basic is&t research for the air force83the research results. greater synergy with 6.26.3a research programscould result in shared research environments or computational laboratories. funding for 6.1 research should continue to be used to find solutionsbut not (normally) to develop or demonstrate particular technologies.recommended basic research priorities in is&tthe committee recommends that in determining program priorities,afosr should emphasize research that clarifies air force problems,impacts operational procedures, and advances the state of the art in areasof interest to the air force. prior collaboration with air force laboratoriesshould not be essential to obtaining program support. afosr should alsocontinue to monitor the emergence of possibly disruptive technologies orair force missions and adapt the research program and strategy accordingly: the rise of networkenabled systems and the emergence of a globalwar on terrorism have been recent disruptive changes, and they will notbe the last.the reader is reminded that the committee did not examine the entireportfolio of the afosr mathematics and space sciences directorate,which manages most of afosrõs is&t research, and it did not mean toimply that other topics covered by that directorate are less important.rather, the topics funded by the programs in physical mathematics andapplied analysis, computational mathematics, electromagnetics, and spacesciences were not within the scope of this study, and it is not the committeeõs intent that is&t topics should be emphasized at the expense ofthose topics in other programs. even greater care is necessary in interpreting the priorities given here that overlap the current afosr programs indynamics and control, optimization and discrete mathematics, highperformance computing and advanced architectures, and signals communication and surveillance, which overlap with is&t only in part. thus,any highpriority research identified by the committee in chapters 3through 6 that would be funded by one of those programs was notweighed against other topics covered by the same program, only againstother is&t topics. for instance, challenges in the control of complex adhoc networks, distributed information systems, and multiple uavs wereconsidered by the committee in setting priorities, but it did not weigh inthe importance of other challenges in control, such as control theory foravionics.recommendation. the committee consensus on how to prioritize airforce is&t research in networks, communications, information management, software, and hsi under different funding scenarios is encapsubasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84basic research for air force is&t needslated in table 71. see chapters 3 through 6 for detailed recommendationsabout research directions in each of these five areas.with the current funding available for is&t (the column labeledòstableó), the committee recommends that networks, communications,and hsi portfolios merit the highest priority, while the information management and software research portfolios would be better able to weatherany forced reductions in effort. the committee is not saying that the lattertwo research areas are less important to the air force. rather, it is thecommitteeõs judgment that if cutbacks are required, reductions in thoseprograms would do the least harm in limiting future options. if the overallis&t funding dropped by 10 percent, the committee would give softwarethe lowest priority only because other organizations, and commercialenterprises, are performing some related research. if overall fundingincreased by 10 percent, the priority for information management researchshould be increased. finally, if overall is&t funding were to increase by25 per cent, the committee recommends a balanced portfolio drawn fromthe recommendations of chapters 3 through 6.table 71relative priorities under four funding scenariosis&t topic10% reductionstable10% increase25% increasenetworkshhhhcommunicationshhhhinformation managementmmhhsoftwarelmmhhumansystem interactionshhhhnote: òhó means the general topic is a high priority, and its funding should be protected orincreased. òmó means the general topic is of medium priority for afosr support, given thecontributions by other players, but not of medium importance to the air force. òló meansfunding in that area should be sacrificed so that a critical level of effort can be supported inother areas. òló does not mean that the topic is not of importance to the air force, only thatif resources are tight, it is a reasonable candidate for cuts because other organizations arecontributing to the area and/or the challenge is so great that a small afosr effort is unlikelyto lead to significant progress. these priorities pertain to the five general research areaslisted in the lefthand column as weighed only against one another, not against otherprograms funded by afosrõs mathematics and space sciences directorate. the prioritiesare meant to show the committeeõs consensus on which of the areas to (de)emphasize withany change in funding for their support. they take into account not only the importance ofthe research but also the relative need for air forcespecific research. they reflect thecommitteeõs general sense of what can be meaningfully accomplished within the fundingscenarios posited. the committee did not develop a detailed estimate of the resourcesrequired for each of the research topics in the lefthand column.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.priorities in basic is&t research for the air force85because all five major research areas listed in table 71 contributesynergistically to the future fielding of teamfocused, networkenabledsystems, progress toward that vision is dependent on a balanced researcheffort across all five areas. however, overall funding would have toincrease significantly to support such an effort, a conviction that is contained in the following recommendation:recommendation. the committee recommends a significant increase inis&t funding within afosr, centered around research to support teamfocused, networkenabled systems of interest to the air force.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.868funding mechanismsthe afosr is responsible for oversight and management of the airforce program in basic (6.1) research. afosr program managers orchestrate the research program with universities, industry, other governmentorganizations, and the afrl technical directorates. the goal is to createrevolutionary breakthroughs and to facilitate the transfer of researchresults to support air force challenges and needs.in fy 2004, afosr managed funding for approximately 1,350 grants,cooperative agreements, and contracts. the total funding of $394 millionwas distributed to approximately 380 academic institutions and industrialfirms. as shown in figure 81, the afosr fy 2004 budget authority included$205 million for 6.1 defense research and $104 million for university researchinitiatives (uri), both distributed in the form of extramural grants to universities, contracts to industry, and intramural grants to air force inhouselaboratories. afosr also executed approximately $85 million for otherprograms, such as the small business technology transfer (sttr) programand programs at darpa.one task given to the committee was to recommend an appropriatebalance of funding mechanisms for is&t research. the committee wasbriefed by john tangney of afosr on funding mechanisms used by theafosr directorate of mathematics and space sciences, and it had thebenefit of several reports,1 excerpts from afosr baa 20051, notes from1among them, national research council, review of the u.s. department of defense air,space, and supporting information systems science and technology program, nationalacademy press: washington, d.c. (2001).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.funding mechanisms87figure 81funding for all of afosr in fy 2004.49%27%9%15%33%16%51%universitiesindustry/otheroperationsresearch(muri)educationdefenseresearchsciences, 6.1universityresearchinitiatives$205 million$104 millionair forceinhouseinstrumentationa review of the partnership for research excellence and transition (pret)for advanced concepts in space situational awareness, which a memberof the committee attended, and an overview briefing of afosr.the current afosr is&t program is executed through a variety ofmechanisms:¥individual investigator grants at universities, at air force laboratories,and in industry. a large majority of these grants are held by academic researchers. the committee agrees with that choice, becausethe academic setting is well suited for longrange, basic researchand has a timetested record of success. a small number of grantsare held by investigators within afrl, which is appropriate fortopics that require indepth understanding within the air force orthat have not yet caught the attention of strong academic researchers.¥multidisciplinary university research initiatives (muris). these longerterm group grants (up to 5 years) provide a good mechanism forinvestigating challenges requiring an unusual and/or concertedmix of efforts.¥university centers. these grants enable the air force to establish acritical mass of expertise focused on particular air force challengesat selected institutions. those institutions in turn become a resourcefor inhouse air force scientists and engineers.¥partnerships for research excellence and transition (prets). thismechanism brings together mixtures of academic, industrial, andair force researchers to jointly develop a new area of research (e.g.,space situational awareness) while also establishing some pathbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88basic research for air force is&t needsways for technology transition. the industrial partners must contribute resources.¥smallbusiness research, dod experimental program to stimulate competitive research (depscor), and grants designated for historicallyblack colleges and universities or minority institutions (hbcu/mi).these research mechanisms allow afosr to tap into a broaderportion of the research community while, in the first case, alsoincreasing the potential for technology transition.finding. the committee concluded that all of these mechanisms providevalue of different sorts to the air force and that afosr program managersunderstand their pros and cons and use the mechanisms appropriately.therefore, the committee concluded that the current choices appear to begood ones and that afosr staff should continue to be given the latitudeto make choices.recommendation. the committee recommends that afosr consideraugmenting these choices by implementing a young investigator awardalong the lines of the national science foundationõs faculty early careerdevelopment program or the office of naval researchõs young facultyinvestigator program. such a program in the afosr would help attractyoung science and engineering faculty of exceptional promise to work onair force research problems early in their careers. in particular, the navyõsprogram, which includes a basic award of $75,000 per year for 3 years,coupled with possible equipment support and additional funding if theinvestigator receives support from another part of the navy, is a veryinteresting model to consider since it includes incentives to connect tonavy laboratories and systems commands.the committee also offers two related recommendations for consideration in planning and executing an expanded program in is&t:recommendation. using whichever funding mechanisms are appropriate,afosr should maintain a healthy balance between theory, experimentation, and transition efforts. this balance can be achieved only by providing freedom to program managers to resist pressures toward shorttermgoals, which in the long run will not serve the air force well because theair force longterm challenges are dominated by is&t. this recommendation is almost a repeat of one from a 1996 review of afosrõs mathematical and computer sciences program.22national research council, review of afosr programs in mathematical and computersciences, national academy press: washington, d.c. (1996).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.funding mechanisms89recommendation. to accommodate the challenges of an expanded program in is&tñwhich is called for because of the pervasiveness of is&t innetworkenabled air force operationsñafosr should not only continueto build a strong, worldclass base of pis but should also develop highlyinteractive research communities of pis with common goals and benchmarks, probably focused on the grand challenges suggested in chapter 7.in some cases this will be possible through multidisciplinary activities(muris, prets, etc.). in others it will be essential to develop teams ofresearchers, perhaps on the scale of muris, to meet the challenges posedby the air force longterm goals.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.909future considerationsprogram organizationchapter 2 explained why the air force is growing increasingly relianton is&t. consistent with this explanation is the committeeõs recommendation that afosr significantly increase the air force investment in basicresearch in is&t, supporting such areas as decisionsupport systems forall levels of command, realtime control of air and ground systems withor without humans in the loop, humansystem interfaces and interactions,and ubiquitous connectivity of commanders, deployed forces, and mannedand unmanned systems.currently, afosr is organized into four directorates: physics andelectronics, aerospace and materials sciences, chemistry and life sciences, and mathematics and space sciences. the mathematics and spacesciences directorate has a mix of programs that include topics such asdynamics and control, systems software and reliability, artificial intelligence, and information fusion. nowhere in this breakout of topics doesthe term is&t appear. in fact, as noted elsewhere in this report, the is&tefforts are spread over multiple programs, such as those listed above. asit reviewed the available afosr information by topic and by budget, thecommittee had difficulty in determining the full scope of what could becategorized as is&t research. while this might not hamper staff withinafosr and afrl, it could be an unnecessary hurdle for interfacing withoutside organizations.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.future considerations91recommendation. given the air forceõs increasing reliance on is&t, itsrole in enabling revolutionary concepts in military affairs, and thecommitteeõs recommendation to significantly increase the investment inbasic research for is&t, the committee recommends that afosr consideridentifying is&t as a major area within afosr. in fact, as the investmentin that area increases over time, afosr should consider organizing aseparate directorate for is&t and related topics. given the committeeõsrecommendation regarding humansystem interfaces and interactions, itwould seem appropriate to also consider alignment of all humansystemand humaneffectsrelated research within this separate directorate.recruitment of program managerswith the recommended increase in funding for is&t and the corresponding increase in scope of the research investment, afosr will befaced with a staffing challenge. this challenge can be viewed as an opportunity to reach out to the is&t research community to recruit new programmanagers. the darpa model for recruiting and rotating program managers has quite successfully made use of the intergovernmental personnelact and the more recent experimental personnel hiring authority. theformer has been used to recruit candidates from universities and nonprofit organizations such as federally funded research and developmentcenters (ffrdcs), while the latter has been used to bring candidates fromindustry to government for a limited term to participate as programmanagers in exciting new areas of r&d. these tools have been used at theprogram manager and higher levels with great success. aside from attracting the best and brightest from universities, nonprofits, and industry,these tools also rotate program managers out of the agency and back toendeavors of their choice when their term is completed. afosr then hasan opportunity to both staff the recommended growth in is&t and maintain the vitality of the area by bringing in new program managers asreplacements for those who are rotating out.recommendation. afosr has an opportunity as well as a challenge tostaff the recommended increase in funding for research in is&t. the committee recommends that afosr take advantage of mechanisms such asthe intergovernmental personnel act to recruit new program managersand, possibly, directorate directors for some if not all of the expandedinvestment in is&t. this approach would facilitate continued vitality inthis important and growing area of research.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92basic research for air force is&t needsa mechanism for fosteringexperimental research in is&tthe committee recommends that afosr encourage and supportmore experimental science in its is&t program. while visiting the aircombat command in april 2005, the committee was briefed on an interesting approach to collaboration, the information operations innovationnetwork. this network, while not a research effort, facilitates collaborationand coordination among technologists and operators in the developmentof experiments and supporting capabilities; it is used for carrying out technology demonstrations of new concepts in response to capability gaps.because the specifications for teamfocused, networkenabled systems arepoorly defined both technically and operationally, there is a real need forjoint experiments involving r&d staff and air force operations personnelworking with early prototype systems. the experiments would then helpto define the system requirements, and researchers would gain a tangibleunderstanding of air force goals and emerging capabilities. the challenges posed by distributed information systems and their underlyingscience and technology require a new approach, and the committee recommends establishing teamfocused experimental environments for r&d,data collection, experimentation, and demonstration of new concepts.examples of issues that present a serious challenge to both researchersand air force operators include these:¥how to control distributed systems with or without humans in theloop.¥how to support decisionmaking by sharing information andintentions.¥how to fuse and manage heterogeneous information.¥how to test and evaluate techniques for offensive and defensiveinformation warfare.the committee uses the label òdistributed research and experimentationenvironmentó (dree) to describe a shared computation infrastructurethat supports experimentation within a community of researchers. as thename implies, drees could be virtual centers (geographically distributed), and they could involve a mixture of physical and simulated assets.in some cases, the scale or complexity of the experimental environmentmight be too great to emulate in a dree. in such cases, modeling andsimulation might enable experimentation and collaboration among distributed participants through micro world descriptions that are domainfaithful but presented in an unclassified environment. such modeling andsimulation capabilities would enable a proactive discovery processthrough which air force it challenges come into clearer focus. in addibasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.future considerations93tion to their technical goals, drees would themselves add to the airforceõs experience base in teamfocused, networkenabled systems andcontribute to interactions across various air force r&d communities.such collaborative experimental arrangements are not unprecedentedin research. for instance, consider the following from the economicsresearch community:1computational laboratories (cls) are computational frameworks thatpermit the study of complex system behaviors by means of controlledand replicable experiments. agentbased computational economics(ace) is the computational study of economies modeled as dynamicsystems of interacting agents. ace researchers generally conduct theirstudies in the context of cls.research groups frequently cite the need for support to create shareddata sets, testbed environments, and other infrastructure that will facilitate access to larger, scalable problems and community sharing. forexample, consider the following excerpt from a 2003 report on strategicdirection for artificial intelligence research at cornell university:2a common theme that emerged in all workshop sessions was the importance of data sets and testbeds. . . . data sets and testbeds also have apowerful multiplier effect on research progress. a compelling, freelyavailable data set may motivate hundreds of separate research studies,most by researchers with no connection (funding or otherwise) to theoriginal producers of the data set. particularly in areas where it is difficult to identify in advance the most promising technologies, the resultingbreadth of voluntary effort can be crucial. . . . support for the creation offreely available, sharable resources is likely to do more to move forwardai research in areas of interest to the air force than any other singleaction.there are several examples of analogous testbeds already in use inthe is&t research community:¥many researchers in robotics are participants in periodic robocups.3these events are exciting, involve a large community of researchers,and provide a challenging shared domain for research in perception, adversarial planning, cooperative agent behavior, andmachine learning.1available at http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/acedemos.htm.2available at http://www.cis.cornell.edu/iisi/srdaiworkshop/srdaiiisireport2003.doc.3available at http://www.econ.iastate.edu/tesfatsi/acedemos.htm.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94basic research for air force is&t needs¥similar benefits of sharing and leverage were seen in the darpaspoken language experiments from the early 1990s. a large dataset based on military messages was prepared each year, and thiswas used in a communitywide competition to benchmark progressin spoken language research. darpafunded research groupswere expected to participate, and leading commercial groups joinedin; competition was intense and progress was rapid. the darpainvestment was in creating and providing data sets that wereshared with the research community. sharing in this domainrequired no expensive testbeds or equipment, only shared data setsand performance metrics. replication of experiments was encouraged and, in fact, conducted intensely. it created an understandingof how different approaches could achieve communityleadingperformance according to the metrics.¥in the domain of network services, planetlab4 has evolved as acommunitysupported, distributed multiuser platform that servesas a testbed for overlay networks. it currently consists of 578machines hosted by 275 sites in more than 25 countries. most of themachines are hosted by research institutions, although some areelsewhere (e.g., on internet2õs abilene backbone). the key objective of the communitydeveloped and communityshared softwareis to support distributed virtualizationñthat is, to allocate a sliceof planetlabõs networkwide hardware resources to an application.this allows an application to run across all (or some) of the machinesaround the globe, where at any given time multiple applicationsmay be running in different slices of planetlab. the advantage toresearchers using planetlab is that they are able to experiment withnew services under realworld conditions and at large scale. anarrangement offering capabilities would be of great value to theair force as it tries to develop a better understanding of the design,operation, and management of large, complex networks and systems and of the incorporation of such systems into air force operations. although planetlab is more limited in scope than what thecommittee has in mind, it is given here as an example that works.these examples have three things in common:¥each is directed at an exciting problem area.¥each involves a research community that is willing, or encouraged,to share research ideas, experiments in which they investigate those4available at http://www.planetlab.org.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.future considerations95ideas, and results. ad hoc teams focused on similar problemsspawn new ideas at the boundaries of their own idea sets.¥each research community supports an infrastructure that can beshared, which may be as modest as data sets and repositories forreports and shared code.the committee urges afosr to work with other parts of the air forceto establish drees as analogous testbeds that will allow researchers andair force users to experiment with prototype is&t concepts and systems.besides the inherent benefit of adding this experimental component toother is&t research efforts, such an approach would serve as an intellectualcrossroads between the scientific and operational communities in supportof the scientific discovery process. the approach also gives researcherssomething very concrete to work on, perhaps including real air forcedata and proposed system specifications, so they can measure the qualityof their solutions. the committee was encouraged by a presentation of theafrl chief technologist, who described how a c2 wind tunnel could provide a computationally based experimentation framework for exploringnew technologies and their operational utility. this is an area of greatinterest to senior air force leadership, which has requested a study in2006 by the air force scientific advisory board on rapid, affordable experimentation.the committee believes that drees would be useful for each of themain areas of research covered in this report. a dree for informationmanagement, for instance, would enable the associated communityñincluding universities, afrl directorates, and perhaps ffrdcsñto createsample data sets and develop associated queries that illustrate how thedata are to be integrated. a dree related to networkcentric systemswould allow exercises that might generate concrete performance requirements, which are otherwise difficult to identify. while exercises areongoing, operational air force participants could clarify their real, nothypothetical, needs; is&t applied researchers could investigate engineering issues with the prototype network; basic researchers in is&t couldexperiment with fundamental changes (to, for example, communicationprotocols); and hsi researchers could instrument the experiments andlearn from them.the dree approach to experimental science should not be prohibitive in cost, because the necessary network infrastructure is rapidly falling into place and it may become possible to leverage the investments intestbeds by other afrl directorates. for example, a research version ofthe distributed mission training (dmt) environment housed in afrlõshuman effectiveness directorate might support experimental science inareas ranging from control of uavs to decisionmaking in realtime envibasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96basic research for air force is&t needsronments. the committeeõs intent is that drees be established withoutexpending basic research funds, which would only be used to support theinvolvement of basic researchers. planning for such facilities should becoordinated with afrl and the air combat command and funded with6.2 and 6.3 money.recommendation. the committee recommends that as afosr expandsits investment in basic is&t research, it work with its 6.2 and 6.3 partnersto establish drees, which will not only speed the pace of research butalso facilitate the transition of critical technology. the committeeõs intentis that 6.1 money not be used to establish these drees; they would be setup by the technical directorates of afrl or by operational arms of the airforce, which would use them to exercise early prototypes of complex,softwareintensive systems and provide feedback and guidance to theresearch community. basic researchers supported by 6.1 funds would contribute to those exercises and extract lessons for further research.the concepts proposed for experimentation can start small and laterscale up to fully supported drees, as deemed appropriate to supportexperimental research. therefore, the committee recommends that afosrstart small but soon. in its next broad agency announcement that dealswith is&t research, afosr could request an optional taskñnamely, anexperiment that the proposer would create, publish, and share with otherresearch groups. afosr could also consider holding summer workshopson dree topics for doctoral students. for instance, afrlõs human effectiveness directorate is interested in revolutionary approaches to dmt andwould like a capability that is more like a freeplay video game than thecurrent tightly scripted scenarios. students at a summer workshop couldlearn about air force needs in dmt, discuss and debate basic researchissues that have to be resolved to advance the associated technology, andconstruct a dree that they would take back to their respective universities for use in their research. in short, afosr, using only modest funding,could seed the development of a dree and its associated community.afosr should collaborate with other organizations to support thedevelopment and use of drees. for example, dodõs high performancecomputing modernization office (hpcmo), through its defense researchand engineering network, supports over 4,300 scientists and engineers atgovernment laboratories, universities, and industrial research laboratories. hpcmo sponsors an annual call for òchallenge problemsó andinvests up to 25 percent of its funding to solve these challenge problems.afrl might consider leveraging its own funding with some of hpmcoõsòchallenge problemó funding to create one or more drees focused on airforcespecific is&t needs.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.99ameeting agendasmeeting 1rome, new yorkthursday, february 24, 2005closed session8:00 amworking breakfastopen session9:30car pool to afrl information directorate (afrl/if)10:00welcome and introductions (alan mclaughlin, committeechair)10:10charge to the committee and discussion of goals (cliffordrhoades, head of mathematics and space sciences directorate,afosr).10:30overview of air force is&t priorities and air force longterm challenges (robert herklotz, afosr).11:15overview of the afrl/if and its response to air force is&tpriorities and air force longterm challenges (nort fowler,chief scientist, afrl/if).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100basic research for air force is&t needs12:30 pmlunch1:15parallel sessions. committee breaks into groups to learn moreabout afrl/ifõs major areas.3:15break3:30overview of is&trelated research sponsored by the afosrmathematics and space sciences directorate (afosr/nm);summary of investments and funding mechanisms; discussion of afosr/nmõs programplanning process and reviews(clifford rhoades, head, afosr/nm).4:30discuss with air force staff the flow of knowledge betweenafosr/nm and afrl/if, afrlõs connections to the broaderresearch community, the transition of advances from afosrand afrl into air force technology, and other issues raisedduring the day.5:30adjournclosed session7:00 pmcommittee working dinnerfriday, february 25, 2005open session8:00 amworking breakfast8:30discussion with brendan godfrey, afosr director, on interplay between afosr and other afrl directorates in addressing air force s&t goals and how the air force decides whetheror not it needs to sponsor or conduct r&d in a given area,particularly for r&d related to is&t and command and control.9:15discussion with shankar sastry, university of california atberkeley, and janos sztipanovits, vanderbilt university,both members of the air force scientific advisory board, onthe recent review of afosrõs is&t research.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a1019:45discussion with clifford rhoades and other afrl/if andafosr/nm staff, as needed, about the information receivedon february 24 to identify gaps and how to fill them. identifysite visits, telephone calls, and background information thatthe committee should pursue.11:00breakclosed session11:15committee discussion of preliminary impressions12:15 pmlunch1:00report from elwyn berlekamp, who attended the januaryprogram review of afosrõs research consortium on spacesituational awareness.1:30develop initial points of committee consensus and identifytopics for investigation.3:00develop plans for site visits and identify any additionalinformation needs.3:30adjournmeeting 2hampton, virginiatuesday, april 26, 2005closed session7:45 amworking breakfastopen session8:45committee will be picked up by a shuttle from the hotel lobbyfor travel to langley afb.9:15welcome (alan mclaughlin, committee chair)overview of the air combat command (janet fender, accchief scientist, and gen maluda, head of acc communications and directorate).basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102basic research for air force is&t needs9:45presentation on communications and information systems(col kemp).10:30presentation on the air force information warfare center(john kretzer).11:15presentation on the operations directorate for informationoperations (lt col lance).11:45presentation on requirements, acc information operations(col anninos and lt col sowell).12:15 pmlunch with open discussion1:00presentation on selected is&t challenge areas identified bythe c2isr center (jon vona).3:00presentation on funding mechanisms used by afosr/nm(john tangney), followed by general discussion with afosr/nm program managers.4:00wrapup discussions5:00adjournclosed session7:00working dinnerwednesday, april 27, 2005closed session8:00 amworking breakfast8:30discussion of preliminary draftsnoonlunchbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a10312:45 pmcontinue discussions. develop plans for additional information gathering and writing. issue assignments.2:00adjournmeeting 3washington, d.c.monday, june 6, 2005closed session8:00 amworking breakfast8:30discuss progress since last meeting and plan for the currentmeeting.9:45breakopen session10:00discuss goals of study with tom cruse, chief technologist,afrl. brendan godfrey, head of afosr, will also participate.closed session11:15discuss chapters 1 and 2 of the draft report12:15 pmlunch1:00impressions of afrlõs human engineering directorate(steve cross, based on his recent visit there).1:30discuss chapters 3, 4, and 5 of the draft report3:30break3:45discuss chapters 7 and 8 of the draft report5:00identify questions for tomorrowõs discussion with afosrprogram managers.basic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104basic research for air force is&t needs5:30reception6:30working dinner8:00adjourntuesday, june 7, 2005open session8:00 amworking breakfast8:30discussion with afosr program managers regarding theircurrent program and the committeeõs open questions.closed session9:30revisit topics from mondayõs discussion10:00break10:15discuss chapter 6 of the draft report; convergence on researchpriorities under different funding scenarios.noonlunch12:45 pmidentify additional research topics and/or informationgathering trips needed to explore topics or develop background.identify other issues and recommendations.2:00detailed plans for completing the report3:30adjournbasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.105bacronymsaccair combat commandafosrair force office of scientific researchafrlair force research laboratoryafrl/ifafrl information directorateafrl/nmafosr mathematics and space sciences directorateajantijammingbaabroad agency announcementc4isrcommand, control, computing, communications, intelligence,surveillance, and reconnaissancedarpadefense advanced research projects agencydepscordod experimental program to stimulate competitiveresearchdmtdistributed mission trainingdoddepartment of defensedosdenial of servicedreedistributed research and experimentation environmenteaienterprise application integrationeiienterprise information integrationetlextract, transform, and loadgigglobal information gridgpsglobal positioning systembasic research in information science and technology for air force needscopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106basic research for air force is&t needshbcu/mihistorically black colleges and universities or minorityinstitutionshcihumancomputer interfacehpcmohigh performance computing modernization officehsihumansystem interactionsioinformation operationsis&tinformation science and technologyisrintelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissanceitinformation technologyjbijoint battlespace infospherelpdlow probability of detectionlpilow probability of interceptmacmedia access controlmavmicro air vehiclemimomultiple input, multiple outputmobiesmodelbased integration of embedded softwarempeg7moving picture coding experts group standard no. 7murimultidisciplinary university research initiativenrcnational research councilpertprogram evaluation and review techniquepretpartnership for research excellence and transitionr&dresearch and developmentrpcremote procedure calls&tscience and technologysoaserviceoriented architecturesoapsimple object access protocolsttrsmall business technology transfertcptransport control protocoluavunmanned air vehicleuriuniversity research initiativeuwbultrawidebandxmlextensible markup language