detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11680the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies andevolving policies  report of a symposium194 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309100878 | doi 10.17226/11680charles w. wessner, editor, committee on the telecommunications challenge,changing technologies and evolving policies, committee on measuring andsustaining the new economy, national research councilthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on the telecommunications challenge:changing technologies and evolving policiescommittee on measuring and sustaining the new economyboard on science, technology, and economic policypolicy and global affairscharles w. wessner, editorthe national academies presswashington, d.c.www.nap.eduthe telecommunicationschallengechanging technologies and evolving policiesreport of a symposiummeasuring and sustaining the new economythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils ofthe national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the instituteof medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen fortheir special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by: contract/grant no. cmrc50sbnb9c1080 between thenational academy of sciences and the u.s. department of commerce; contract/grantno. nasw99037, task order 103, between the national academy of sciences andthe national aeronautics and space administration; contract/grant no. cmrcsb134105c0038 between the national academy of sciences and the u.s. department ofcommerce; ofed13416 between the national academy of sciences and sandia nationallaboratories; contract/grant no. n0001400g0230, do #23, between the nationalacademy of sciences and the department of the navy; contract/grant no. nsfeia0119063 between the national academy of sciences and the national science foundation;and contract/grant no. doedefg0201er30315 between the national academy ofsciences and the u.s. department of energy. additional support was provided by intelcorporation. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in thispublication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number 0309100879 (book)international standard book number 0309656281 (pdf)limited copies are available from board on science, technology, and economic policy,national research council, 500 fifth street, n.w., w547, washington, dc 20001;2023342200.additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press,500 fifth street, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or(202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.educopyright 2006 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americathe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandatethat requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.dr.ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of thenational academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it isautonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with thenational academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. thenational academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meetingnational needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciencesto secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinationof policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be anadviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medicalcare, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute ofmedicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy’spurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become theprincipal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the nationalacademy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and thescientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by bothacademies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. wm. a. wulf arechair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on the telecommunications challenge:changing technologies and evolving policies*william j. raduchel, chairchairman and ceoruckus networkmark e. domssenior economistfederal reserve bank ofsan franciscokenneth flammdean rusk chair in internationalaffairslbj school of public affairsuniversity of texas at austindale w. jorgensonsamuel w. morris university professorharvard universitycherry a. murraydeputy director for science andtechnologylawrence livermore nationallaboratorymark b. myersvisiting executive professor ofmanagementthe wharton schooluniversity of pennsylvaniamichael r. nelsondirector of internet technology andstrategyinternational business machineswilliam j. spencerchairman emeritus, retiredinternational sematech*as of november 2004.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicommittee on measuring and sustaining the new economy*dale jorgenson, chairsamuel w. morris university professorharvard universitym. kathy behrensmanaging director of medicaltechnologyrobertson stephens investmentmanagementkenneth flammdean rusk chair in internationalaffairslbj school of public affairsuniversity of texas at austinbronwyn hallprofessor of economicsuniversity of california at berkeleyjames heckmanhenry schultz distinguished serviceprofessor of economicsuniversity of chicagorichard levinpresidentyale universitydavid t. morgenthalerfounding partnermorgenthaler ventureswilliam j. spencer, vice chairchairman emeritus, retiredinternational sematechmark b. myersvisiting executive professor ofmanagementthe wharton schooluniversity of pennsylvaniaroger nollmorris m. doylecentennial professor of economicsstanford universityedward e. penhoetchief program officerscience and higher education programsgordon and betty moore foundationwilliam raduchelchairman and ceoruckus networkalan wm. wolffmanaging partnerdewey ballantine*as of november 2004.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiproject staff**as of november 2004.charles w. wessnerstudy directorsujai j. shivakumarprogram officerken jacobsonconsultantmcalister t. clabaughprogram associatedavid e. dierksheideprogram associatethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiifor the national research council (nrc), this project was overseen bythe board on science, technology, and economic policy (step), a standingboard of the nrc established by the national academies of sciences and engineering and the institute of medicine in 1991. the mandate of the step board isto integrate understanding of scientific, technological, and economic elements inthe formulation of national policies to promote the economic wellbeing of theunited states. a distinctive characteristic of step’s approach is its frequent interactions with public and privatesector decision makers. step bridges the disciplines of business management, engineering, economics, and the social sciencesto bring diverse expertise to bear on pressing public policy questions. the members of the step board* and the nrc staff are listed below:dale jorgenson, chairsamuel w. morris university professorharvard universitym. kathy behrensmanaging director of medicaltechnologyrobertson stephens investmentmanagementkenneth flammdean rusk chair in internationalaffairslbj school of public affairsuniversity of texas at austinbronwyn hallprofessor of economicsuniversity of california at berkeleyjames heckmanhenry schultz distinguished serviceprofessor of economicsuniversity of chicagodavid t. morgenthalerfounding partnermorgenthaler ventureswilliam j. spencer, vice chairchairman emeritus, retiredinternational sematechmark b. myersvisiting executive professor ofmanagementthe wharton schooluniversity of pennsylvaniajoseph newhousejohn d. macarthur professor ofhealth policy and managementharvard universityroger nollmorris m. doylecentennial professor of economicsstanford universityedward e. penhoetchief program officerscience and higher education programsgordon and betty moore foundationwilliam j. raduchelchairman and ceoruckus network*as of november 2004.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixstep staff**as of november 2004.stephen a. merrillexecutive directorcraig m. schultzresearch associatemcalister t. clabaughprogram associatecharles w. wessnerprogram directorsujai j. shivakumarprogram officerdavid e. dierksheideprogram associatejack schulerchairmanventana medical systems, inc.alan wm. wolffmanaging partnerdewey ballantinethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xicontentsprefacexvlist of acronymsxxiiii.introduction1ii.proceedings27introduction29dale w. jorgenson, harvard universityoverview: òthe end of stovepipingó31william j. raduchel, ruckus networktechnological change and economic opportunity:the view from the federal communications commission38peter a. tenhula, federal communications commissionpanel i: new technology trends and implications56moderator: mark b. myers, the wharton school,university of pennsylvaniathe record to date: qualityadjusted prices for equipment56mark e. doms, federal reserve bank of san franciscothe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiicontentstechnology trends, emerging standards, and their impact60jeffrey m. jaffe, lucent technologiesfour futures for the network68david s. isenberg, isen.companel ii: the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?77moderator: kenneth flamm, university of texas at austinthe broadband problem: market failures and policydilemmas80charles h. ferguson, the brookings institutionthe broadband challenge: a telecom perspective87mark a. wegleitner, verizona paradigm challenge: municipally owned fiber91h. brian thompson, itown communicationsthe wireless wildcard99david lippke, highspeed americau.s. cable: bringing the bits home103mike lajoie, time warner cablepanel iii: the waterfall effects117moderator: cherry a. murray, lucent technologiesmoving computing to the grid117michael r. nelson, international business machinesis voip the future?124louis mamakos, vonagedigital entertainment131andrew schuon, international music feedserving consumers on broadband136lisa a. hook, aol broadband (retired)the view from the copyright industry139steven j. metalitz, smith & metalitzthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxiiipanel iv: participantsõ roundtable147moderator: dale w. jorgenson, harvard universityh. brian thompson, itown communicationsdavid s. isenberg, isen.comlisa a. hook, aol broadband (retired)jeffrey m. jaffe, lucent technologiesandrew schuon, international music feedwilliam j. raduchel, ruckus networkconcluding remarks157dale w. jorgenson, harvard universityiii.appendixes161a.biographies of speakers163b.participants list178c.selected bibliography183the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvprefacesignificant and sustained increases in semiconductor productivity, predictedby moore’s law, has ushered a revolution in communications, computing, andinformation management.1 this technological revolution is linked to a distinctrise in the mid1990s of the longterm growth trajectory of the united states.2indeed, u.s. productivity growth has accelerated in recent years, despite a seriesof negative economic shocks. analysis by dale jorgenson, mun ho, and kevinstiroh of the sources of this growth over the 1996 to 2003 period suggests that theproduction and use of information technology account for a large share of thegains. the authors go further to project that during the next decade, private sectorproductivity growth will continue at a rate of 2.6 percent per year.3 the “new1this is especially so for the computer hardware sector and perhaps for the internet as well, althoughthere is insufficient empirical evidence on the degree to which the internet may be responsible. for adiscussion of the impact of the internet on economic growth see the economist, “a thinker’s guide,”march 30, 2000. for a broad study of investment in technologycapital and its use in various sectors,see mckinsey global institute, u.s. productivity growth 1995ð2000: understanding the contributionof information technology relative to other factors, washington, d.c.: mckinsey & co., october2001.2see dale w. jorgenson and kevin j. stiroh, “raising the speed limit: u.s. economic growth inthe information age” in national research council, measuring and sustaining the new economy:report of a workshop, dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds., washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press, 2002.3dale w. jorgenson, mun s. ho, and kevin j. stiroh, “will the u.s. productivity resurgencecontinue?” frbny current issues in economics and finance, 10(1), 2004.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviprefaceeconomy” is, thus, not a fad, but a longterm productivity shift of majorsignificance.4the idea of a new economy brings together the technological innovations,structural changes, and public policy challenges associated with measuring andsustaining this remarkable economic phenomenon.•technological innovation—more accurately, the rapid rate of technologicalinnovation in information technology (including computers, software, and telecommunications) and the rapid growth of the internet—are now widely seen asunderpinning the productivity gains that characterize the new economy.5 theseproductivity gains derive from greater efficiencies in the production of computersfrom expanded use of information technologies.6 many therefore believe that theproductivity growth of the new economy draws from the technological innovations found in information technology industries.7•structural changes arise from a reconfiguration of knowledge networksand business patterns made possible by innovations in information technology.phenomena, such as businesstobusiness ecommerce and internet retailing, arealtering how firms and individuals interact, enabling greater efficiency in purchases, production processes, and inventory management.8 offshore outsourcing4the introduction of advanced productivityenhancing technologies obviously does not eliminatethe business cycle. see organisation for economic cooperation and development, is there a neweconomy? a first report on the oecd growth project. paris, france: organisation for economiccooperation and development, 2000, p. 17. see also m. n. baily and r. z. lawrence, “do we havean economy?” nber working paper 8243, april 23, 2001, accessed at <http://www.nber.org/papers/w8243>.5broader academic and policy recognition of the new economy can be seen, for example from the“roundtable on the new economy and growth in the united states” at the 2003 annual meetings ofthe american economic association, held in washington, d.c. roundtable participants includedmartin baily, martin feldstein, robert j. gordon, dale jorgenson, joseph stiglitz, and lawrencesummers. even those who were initially skeptical about the new economy phenomenon now findthat the facts support the belief that faster productivity growth has proved more durable and hasspread to other areas of the economy—e.g., retail, banking. see the economist, “the new ‘neweconomy’,” september 11, 2003.6see, for example, stephen oliner and daniel sichel, “the resurgence of growth in the late 1990s:is information technology the story?” journal of economic perspectives, 14(4), 2000. oliner andsichel estimate that improvements in the computer industry’s own productive processes account forabout a quarter of the overall productivity increase. they also note that the use of information technology by all sorts of companies accounts for nearly half the rise in productivity.7see alan greenspan’s remarks before the white house conference on the new economy, washington d.c., april 5, 2000, accessed at <www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2000/20000405.htm>. for a historical perspective, see the proceedings section of this volume. ken flammcompares the economic impact of semiconductors today with impact of railroads in the nineteenthcentury.8see, for example, brookes martin and zaki wahhaj, “the shocking economic impact of b2b,”global economic paper, 37, goldman sachs, february 3, 2000.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexviiof service production is another manifestation of structural changes made possible by new information and communications technologies. these structuralchanges are still emerging as the use and applications of the internet continue toevolve.•public policy plays a major role at several levels. this includes thegovernment’s role in fostering rules of interaction within the internet9 and itsdiscretion in setting and enforcing the rules by which technology firms, amongothers, compete.10 more familiarly, public policy concerns particular fiscal andregulatory choices that can affect the rate and focus of investments in sectors suchas telecommunications. the government also plays a critical role within the innovation system.11 it provides national research capacities,12 incentives to promoteeducation and training in critical disciplines, and funds most of the nation’s basicresearch.13 the government also plays a major role in stimulating innovation,most broadly through the patent system.14 government procurement and awardsalso encourage the development of new technologies to fulfill national missions9dr. vinton cerf notes that the ability of individuals to interact in potentially useful ways withinthe infrastructure of the still expanding internet rests on its basic rule architecture: “the reason it canfunction is that all the networks use the same set of protocols. an important point is these networksare run by different administrations, which must collaborate both technically and economically on aglobal scale.” see comments by dr. cerf in national research council, measuring and sustaining thenew economy: report of a workshop, op cit. also in the same volume, see the presentation bydr.shane greenstein on the evolution of the internet from academic and governmentrelated applications to the commercial world.10the relevance of competition policy to the new economy is manifested by the intensity of interestin the antitrust case, united states versus microsoft, and associated policy issues.11see richard nelson, ed., national innovation systems, new york: oxford university press,1993.12the step board has recently completed a major review of the role and operation of governmentindustry partnerships for the development of new technologies. see national research council,governmentindustry partnerships for the development of new technologies: summary report,charles w. wessner, ed., washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2003.13national research council, trends in federal support of research and graduate education,stephen a. merrill, ed., washington, d.c.: national academy press, 2001.14in addition to governmentfunded research, intellectual property protection plays an essentialrole in the continued development of the biotechnology industry. see wesley m. cohen and johnwalsh, “public research, patents and implications for industrial r&d in the drug, biotechnology,semiconductor and computer industries” in governmentindustry partnerships in biotechnology andinformation technologies: new needs and new opportunities, charles w. wessner, ed., washington,d.c.: national academy press, 2002. there is a similar situation in information technology withrespect to the combination of generally nonappropriable governmentoriginated innovation andappropriable industry intellectual property creation. the economic rationale for government investment is based on the nonappropriablity of many significant information technology innovations,including the most widely used idiomatic data structures and algorithms, as well as design andarchitectural patterns. in addition, the it industry relies on a number of technical and processcommonalities or standards such as the suite of internet protocols, programming languages, coredesign patterns, and architectural styles.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviiiprefacein defense, health, and the environment.15 collectively, these public policies playa central role in the development of the new economy.the new economy offers new policy challenges. modern information andcommunications technologies make the globalization of research, developmentand manufacture possible at scales that are unprecedented. this reality hasprompted some analysts to argue that information and communication technologyand software production are not commodities that the united states can potentiallyafford to give up overseas suppliers but are an essential part of the economy’sproduction function. they believe that a loss of u.s. leadership in informationand communication technology and software will damage the nation’s futureability to compete in diverse industries, not least the information and communication technology industry. given the pervasiveness of semiconductorbasedtechnologies, collateral consequences of a failure to develop adequate policies tosustain national leadership in information and communication technology is likelyto extend to a wide variety of sectors from financial services and health care toautomobiles, with critical implications for our nation’s security and the wellbeingof our citizens. understanding and responding to this policy challenge requires amultidisciplinary approach to the interconnections among science, technology,and economic policy.the context of this reportsince 1991 the national research council’s board on science, technology,and economic policy (step) has undertaken a program of activities to improvepolicymakers’ understanding of the interconnections among science, technology,and economic policy and their importance to the american economy and its international competitive position. the board’s interest in the new economy and itsunderpinnings derive directly from its mandate.this mandate has previously been reflected in step’s widely cited volume,u.s. industry in 2000, which assesses the determinants of competitive performance in a wide range of manufacturing and service industries, including those15for example, government support played a critical role in the early development of computers.see kenneth flamm, creating the computer, washington, d.c.: the brookings institution, 1988.for an overview of government industry collaboration, see the introduction to the recent report on theadvanced technology program, national research council, the advanced technology program:assessing outcomes, charles w. wessner, ed., washington, d.c.: national academy press, 2001.the historical and technical case for governmentfunded research in it is well documented in reportsby the computer science and telecommunications board (cstb) of the national research council.in particular, see national research council, innovation in information technology, washington,d.c.: the national academies press, 2003. this volume provides an update of the of the “tire tracks”diagram first published in cstb’s 1995 brookssutherland report, which depicts the critical role thatgovernment funded university research has played in the development of multibilliondollar itindustry.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexixrelating to information technology.16 the board also undertook a major study,chaired by gordon moore of intel, on how governmentindustry partnerships cansupport growth enhancing technologies.17 reflecting a growing recognition ofthe importance of the surge in productivity since 1995, the board launched amultifaceted assessment, exploring the sources of growth, measurement challenges, and the policy framework required to sustain the new economy. the firstexploratory volume was published in 2002.18 subsequent workshops and ensuingreports in this series include productivity and cyclicality in the semiconductorindustry, deconstructing the computer, and software, growth, and the future ofthe u.s. economy. the present report, the telecommunications challenge,examines the importance of telecommunications to the continued expansion inu.s. productivity growth and related policy issues needed to sustain the benefitsof the new economy.symposium and discussionsbelieving that increased productivity in the semiconductor, computer component, and software and telecommunications industries plays a key role insustaining the new economy, the committee on measuring and sustaining thenew economy, under the auspices of the step board, convened a symposiumnovember 15, 2004 at the national academy of sciences, washington, d.c. thesymposium on the telecommunications challenge drew together expertise fromleading academics, national accountants, and innovators in the informationtechnology sector (appendix b lists these individuals). a major purpose of thissymposium was to draw together expert knowledge to inform the committee,which will issue its findings and recommendations on measuring and sustainingthe new economy in a final consensus report of this series.19the “proceedings” chapter of this volume contains summaries of theirworkshop presentations and discussions. given the quality and the number ofpresentations, summarizing the workshop proceedings has been a challenge. wehave made every effort to capture the main points made during the presentationsand the ensuing discussions. we apologize for any inadvertent errors or omissionsin our summary of the proceedings. the lessons from this symposium and others16 national research council, u.s. industry in 2000: studies in competitive performance, davidc. mowery, ed., washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1999.17 for a summary of this multivolume study, see national research, governmentindustry partnerships for the development of new technologies, summary report, op. cit.18 national research council, measuring and sustaining the new economy: report of a workshop, op. cit.19 national research council, enhancing productivity growth in the information age: measuringand sustaining the new economy, dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds., washington,d.c.: the national academies press, forthcoming.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxprefacein this series will contribute to the committee’s final consensus report onmeasuring and sustaining the new economy.acknowledgmentsthere is considerable interest in the policy community in developing a betterunderstanding of the technological drivers and appropriate regulatory frameworkfor the new economy, as well as in a better grasp of its operation. this interest isreflected in the support on the part of agencies that have played a role in thecreation and development of the new economy. we are grateful for the participation and the contributions of the national aeronautical and space administration,the department of energy, the national institute of standards and technology,the national science foundation, and sandia national laboratories.we are indebted to ken jacobson for his preparation of the meeting summary.several members of the step staff also deserve recognition for their contributions to the preparation of this report. we wish to thank sujai shivakumar for hiscontributions to the introduction to the report. we are also indebted to mcalisterclabaugh and david dierksheide for their role in preparing the conference andgetting this report ready for publication.nrc reviewthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for theirdiverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with proceduresapproved by the national academies’ report review committee. the purpose ofthis independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assistthe institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensurethat the report meets institutional standards for quality and objectivity. the reviewcomments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of theprocess.i wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report: jaisonabel, analysis group; david clark, massachusetts institute of technology;shane greenstein, northwestern university; robert sparks, california medicalassociation foundation; and william taylor, nera economic consulting.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report,nor did they see the final draft before its release. the review of this report wasoverseen by the national academies, which was responsible for making certainthat an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance withinstitutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered.responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoringcommittee and the institution.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefacexxistructurethis report has three parts: an introduction; a summary of the proceedings ofthe november 15, 2004 symposium; and finally, a bibliography that providesadditional references.this report represents an important step in a major research effort by theboard on science, technology, and economic policy to advance our understanding of the factors shaping the new economy, the metrics necessary to understandit better, and the policies best suited to sustaining the greater productivity andprosperity that it promises.dale w. jorgensonthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxiiibeabureau of economic analysis of the department of commercecleccompetitive local exchange carriers: a telephone company thatcompetes with an incumbent local exchange carrier (ilec) such as aregional bell operating company (rboc), gte, allnet, etc.dbsdirect broadcast satellite; describes smalldish, digital satellite systemssuch as directv and dish networkdsldigital subscriber loop; refers to a family of digital telecommunications protocols designed to allow high speed data communication overthe existing copper telephone lines between endusers and telephonecompaniesfccfederal communications commissiongnpgross national productispinternet service provideritinformation technologyituinternational telecommunications unioniptvinternet protocol television; a common denominator for systems wheretelevision and/or video signals are distributed to subscribers or viewersusing a broadband connection over internet protocollist of acronymsthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xxivlist of acronymsllulocal loop unbundling is the process of allowing telecommunicationsoperators to use the twistedpair telephone connections from the telephone exchange’s central office to the customer premises. this localloop is owned by the incumbent local exchange carrier.rbocregional bell operating companiessetisearch for extraterrestrial intelligence. the seti institute is dedicatedto explore, understand, and explain the origin, nature, and prevalenceof life in the universe.stepthe board on science, technology, and economic policy of thenational academiestcp/iptransmission control protocol/internet protocol; a protocol for communication between computers, used as a standard for transmitting dataover networks and as the basis for standard internet protocolsubeunbundled network elements are a requirement mandated by the telecommunications act of 1996. they are the parts of the network that theilecs are required to offer on an unbundled basis. together, theseparts make up a loop that connects to a dslam (digital subscriberline access multiplexeror), a voice switch, or both. the loop allowsnonfacilitiesbased telecommunications providers to deliver servicewithout laying network infrastructure (copper/fiber).voipvoice over internet protocol; this refers to a category of hardware andsoftware that enables people to use the internet as the transmissionmedium for telephone calls by sending voice data in packets ratherthan by traditional circuit transmissions.wifiwireless fidelity; a term for certain types of wireless local areanetworks that use specifications conforming to standards set by theinstitute of electrical and electronics engineerswimaxworldwide interoperability for microwave access is a certificationmark for products that pass conformity and interoperability tests forstandards set by the institute of electrical and electronics engineersconcerning pointtomultipoint broadband wireless access.3gthird generation; usually used in reference to the next generationdigital mobile networkthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iintroductionthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3telecommunications in the new economythe new economy refers to a fundamental transformation in the unitedstates economy as businesses and individuals capitalize on new technologies,new opportunities, and national investments in computing, information, and communications technologies. use of this term reflects a growing conviction thatwidespread use of these technologies has made possible a sustained rise in thegrowth trajectory of the u.s. economy.1to understand this phenomenon better, the board on science, technology,and economic policy (step) of the national academies has held since 2000 aseries of symposia on measuring and sustaining the new economy. thesesymposia have examined key issues related to semiconductors (the base technology driving the pace of technological development) as well as computers,software, and telecommunications. taken together, these meetings have produceda comprehensive picture of what is known about the drivers of the new economy.1in the context of this analysis, the new economy does not refer to the boom economy of the late1990s. the term is used in this context to describe the acceleration in u.s. productivity growth thatemerged in the mid1990s, in part as a result of the acceleration of mooreõs law and the resultingexpansion in the application of loser cost, higher performance information technologies. see dale w.jorgenson, kevin j. stiroh, robert j. gordon, daniel e. sichel, òraising the speed limit: u.s. economic growth in the information age,ó brookings papers on economic activity, 2000(1):125ð235.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4the telecommunications challengethis knowledge can help develop policies needed to sustain the benefits of thenew economy.new telecommunications technologiesñthe subject of stepõs fifth conferenceñhave contributed significantly to the new economy. these contributionsinclude the advantages of new product capabilities for businesses and consumersas well as new, more efficient forms of industrial organization made possible bycheaper and more versatile communications. thus, while the telecom sectoraccounts, by various measures, for about one percent of the u.s. economy, it isestimated to be responsible for generating about ten percent of the nationõs economic growth.2 a key policy question, therefore, is how to sustain or improve onthis multiplier of ten, even as new technological innovations are ushering a majorshift from a vertical model to a horizontal model of production and distribution inthe communications and entertainment industries.3 this task of adapting policiesand regulations regarding the communications industry to new realities is mademore challenging given its long legacyñone that goes back past alexandergraham bell to benjamin franklin, the first postmaster of the united states.this introductory essay highlights selected issues discussed in the course ofstepõs conference on telecommunications and the new economy.4 the conference emphasized two transformations in communications: first, it emphasizedthe potential and challenges in the diffusion of broadband and voice over internetprotocol (voip). second, it emphasized the transformation from verticalindustrial organization in print, radio, entertainment, and broadcasting to morehorizontal internet based platforms. speakers at the conference included industryrepresentatives, lawyers, and technologists, as well as some academics. theypresented a variety of views on the challenges, opportunities, and policy prescriptions needed to sustain u.s. leadership in telecommunications.5in this introductory summary, we first review progress in the measurementof communications equipment in the national accounts. we then look ahead tosome emerging information and communications technologies and their possiblecontribution to sustaining the productivity improvements associated with the new2see comments by dale jorgenson in the proceedings section of this volume.3dale jorgenson, òconcluding remarks,ó in the proceedings section of this volume.4the enormous breadth of issues taken up at the conference leads to a tradeoff in the depth to whichthe conference or this introduction can cover them. we acknowledge this reality.5at the same time, the conference was necessarily limited in time and focus. there are of course avariety of issues concerning the telecomm sector, not all of which can be addressed at any onedayevent. for example, the conference did not cover a discussion of recent commercial history of theindustry such as the dotcom boom and bust, the worldcom fraud trials, and the legislative and legalhistory surrounding the 1996 telecommunications act. it also did not fully address all aspects of theimpact of new forms of communications and media on regional economies and selected mediamarkets. another limitation was the relative focus on household use of the internet and new mediaoverbusiness use of broadband, even though important productivity gains and economic advance oftenfollow from business use of new information and communication technologies.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction5economy. this then leads us to examine the reasons for the broadband gap in theunited states and some alternative ways of bridging this gap. finally, we highlight some of the policy challenges that emerge with òend of stovepipingó asinformation technologies and communications networks converge.measuring telecom priceshow do new information and communications technologies translate intoprices and hence consumer welfare? mark doms of the federal reserve bank ofsan francisco provided the participants of the step conference an overviewofwhat the current official numbers say, and the challenges of coming up withgood price indexes for communications equipment and services. he noted thatwhile investment in communications in the united states had been substantialñaround $100 billion per year, representing a little over 10 percent of total equipment investment in the u.s. economyñit had also been highly volatile. duringthe recession of the early 2000õs, he noted, it investment fell about 35 percentfrom peak to trough. (see figure 1.) doms noted that this recession might well beremembered as the hightech recession, adding that òcertainly what happened tocommunications played a major role in what happened to the hightech sector.ó6measuring the dollars spent on communications technologies in the unitedstates every year is difficult because the technology itself is rapidly changing. asdemonstrated earlier in his study, a computer costing a thousand dollars today isa lot more powerful and versatile than a similarly priced one of 10 years agoñand this is no less true for communications equipment.7 twentyfive years ago,most long distance communications was handled through landline phones, in starkcontrast to the diversity of means of communications in use today. as domsõanalysis points out, between 1996 and 2001 alone, there were tremendousadvances in the amount of information that could travel down a strand of glass6the rise of the internet persuaded many investors in the late 1990s that demand for datanetworkbackbone capacity was about to explode. many anticipated internet traffic to double every 100 daysña belief reinforced by an april 1998 report, òthe emerging digital economy,ó by the department ofcommerce, u.s. department of commerce, the emerging digital economy, washington, d.c.: u.s.department of commerce, 1998. resulting large investments led to a fivefold increase in the amountof fiber in the ground. at the same time, technological advances increased the transmission capacityof each strand of fiber 100fold, so total transmission capacity increased 500fold. but over the sameperiod demand for transmission capacity merely quadrupled, a rise that could easily be accommodated by existing networks. when it became clear that the predicted explosion of demand was notgoing to happen, operators frantically cut their prices, hoping to fill their empty pipes. equipmentmakersõ sales collapsed and their share prices tumbledñleading to the burst of the telecom bubble.see the economist, òbeyond the bubble,ó october 9, 2003.7jack e. triplett, òperformance measures for computersó in national research council,deconstructing the computer: report of a workshop, dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner,eds., washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2005.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6the telecommunications challengefigure 1annual percent change in it investment.note: percent changes based on yearend values.source: mark doms, òthe boom and bust in information technology investment,ófrbsf economic review, 2004: 19ð34. bureau of economic analysis.percent40302010ð10ð2001991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003nominal it investmentreal it investmentyearfiber, adding that the price of gear used to transmit information over fiber fell, onaverage, by 14.9 percent a year over this fiveyear period. the fast speed of technological change makes the job of tracking prices complex because the capabilities of the equipment change dramatically under the same rubric of òcomputeró oròrouter.ó whereas money spent on telecommunications was relatively easier totrack 25 years ago when most purchases were of telephone switches, todayõstelecommunications equipment includes a wide array of technologies related todata, computer networking, and fiber optics.current methodologies for making intertemporal comparisons in price andquality understate true price declines because they do not fully track these technological changes. while the bureau for economic analysis has estimated thatprices for communications gear fell an average of 3.2 percent per year between1994 and 2000ñin sharp contrast to the 19.3 percent fall in computer pricesñdomõs analysis, which takes fuller account of technological changes, suggeststhe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction7that that communications equipment prices actually fell on the order of 8 to10percent over that period.8while this new estimate is a step in the right direction, more refinement isnecessary in measuring prices. as doms notes that the job of keeping track ofthese developments is growing more difficult for statistical agencies, especiallyin light of their limited budgets and the rapid development of technology. òunlessthe statistical agencies get increased funding, in the future, they are not going tobe able to follow new, evolving trends very well,ó he concluded.indeed, as we see below, current trends in information and communicationstechnologyñbenefiting from mooreõs lawñwill continue to disrupt incumbentbusinesses and traditional business models.communications technology: a vision of the futuremooreõs law, which in its modern interpretation anticipates the doubling ofthe number of transistors on a chip every 18 months, has spurred the modernrevolution in digital technologies for over forty years.9 it is likely to continue foranother ten to twenty years, according to experts in the semiconductor industry.10this pace of ever faster and cheaper semiconductors and semiconductor relatedtechnologies is likely to continue to have significant impacts, not least on communications technologies. as william raduchel noted at the conference on telecommunications and the new economy, the endurance of mooreõs law meansthat òthe most powerful personal computer thatõs on your desk today is going tobe in your cell phone in twenty years.ó technologies for display, storage, andtransmission of data are also expected to show rapid improvement, he added,though their rates of improvement are likely to abate sooner than that of semiconductors.118mark e. doms, òcommunications equipment: what has happened to prices?ó frbsf workingpaper 200315.9while by no means dictating an actual law, gordon moore correctly foresaw in 1965 the rapiddoubling of the feature density of a chip, now interpreted as approximately every 18 months. observing that the number of transistors per square inch on integrated circuits had doubled every year sincethe integrated circuit was invented, gordon moore predicted in 1965 that this trend would continuefor the near future. see gordon e. moore, òcramming more components onto integrated circuits,óelectronics, 38(8), 1965. the current definition of mooreõs law, which has been acknowledged bydr. moore, holds that the data density of a chip will double approximately every 18 months. manyexperts expect mooreõs law to hold for another 15 years.10see, for example, robert doering, òphysical limits of silicon cmos semiconductor roadmappredictionsó in national research council, productivity and cyclicality in semiconductors: trends,implications, and questions, dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds., washington, d.c.:the national academies press, 2004.11for a discussion by representative from these industries of the rate of technological change inthese and other computer related industries, see national research council, deconstructing thecomputer: report of a workshop, op. cit.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8the telecommunications challengeraduchel predicted that enhanced digital sampling, skyrocketing storagecapacity, and expanded packet switching technologies will change the way wewill work, communicate, and entertain ourselves in the future.12 faster computersmean that digital sampling for recording, playback, looping and editing of musicwill improve to the point where it is nearly error free, changing the way music isheard and distributed. advances in storage capacity and speed will lead to newproducts (as already previewed with todayõs ipods and tivos) that will likelychallenge existing business models of how music and video entertainment is packaged and distributed, and ultimately consumed. in addition, advances in packetswitching, where information is commoditized for transmission, will likely meanthat òradio, television, classified information, piracy, maps, . . . anythingó can bemoved around a communications infrastructure with no distinction as to whatthey are. these developments, in turn, will require greater attention to the issue ofstandards that can allow for coherence as well as future growth and innovation.these advances in capturing and distributing information and entertainmentin commoditized packets build on the concept of the stupid networkñwhere theintelligence is taken out of the middle of a communications network and put atthe endsña design principle that has already guided the development of theinternet.13 according to david isenberg, such an endtoend network allows fordiversity in the of means of transmissionñincluding varieties of wired andwireless technologiesñwith this diversity creating greater robustness against thefailure of any one element. as we see next, enhancements in packet switchingcapabilities are already making such novel technologies as voice over internetprotocols and grid computing technically and commercially feasible for widespread use.14voip (voice over internet protocol)in internet telephony, voice is broken into digital packets by a computer andconveyed over the digital network to be reassembled at the other end. the voicenetwork of the future will run over the internet protocol, according to jeff jaffe oflucent technologies. since this technology has a completely different capabilitythan traditional landlines when it comes to voice quality, cost, and reliability, hepredicted that it will bring about a generational change in voice communications.louis mamakos of vonage (a company that has introduced voip to commercial markets in the united states and elsewhere) cited two sources of opportunitythat arise with voip: one is through sharing infrastructure, which comes fromchopping up audio into packets and transmitting it over an existing packetbased12see remarks by william raduchel in the proceedings section of this volume.13david isenberg, òrise of the stupid network,ó computer telephony, (august):1626, 1997.14the wall street journal, òvonage plans to file for ipo,ó august 25, 2005.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction9box a: voipña disruptive technologyvoip has the potential to undermine the business model underpinningthe telecommunications industry. factors such as the length of the call orthe distance between callers, key determinants of cost today, areirrelevant with voip. in addition, voip augers more widespread use ofvideoconferencing as well as new applications such as unified messagingand television over internet protocol (iptv).many analysts believe that the question is not whether voip will displace traditional telephony, but how quickly. this disruptive potential ofvoip is a challenge for telephone, mobile, and cable incumbentsñwithsome attempting to block the new technology and others moving toembrace it.aathe economist, òhow the internet killed the phone business,ó september 15, 2005.see also dale w. jorgenson, òinformation technology and the world economy,ó leonkozminsky academy distinguished lecture, may 14, 2004.network, which yields significant cost advantages compared with traditional telephony. but equally powerfully, he contended, are opportunities that come fromusing software to provide a variety of services for the consumer. for example, bymarrying it with the computer, phones could be programmed to control who cancall through and when.15grid computinggrid computing, which allows users to share of data, software, and computing power over fiber optic networks is expected to be another major developmentin information and communications technology. mike nelson of ibm likens gridcomputing to a utility supplying electricity, noting that logging onto the gridcould provide a user access to far more computing power than is possible from asingle computer system.15òfor the incumbent telecoms operators, though, what is scary about vonage is not the companyitself but the disruptiveness of its model. vonage is a telecoms company with the agility of a dotcom.everyone in the telecoms industry has heard of it, and has wondered what will happen if the model iswidely adopted.ó see the economist, òbetween a rock and a hard place,ó october 9, 2003. wemany not have to wait much longer to see what will happen. see the financial times, òthe internetõsnext big talking point: why voip telephony is quickly coming of age,ó september 9, 2005, whichreports on the entry of microsoft and google into the voip market.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10the telecommunications challengea widely known (but limited) instance of concept of grid computing is thecurrent seti (search for extraterrestrial intelligence) @home project, in whichpc users worldwide donate unused processor cycles to help the search for signsof extraterrestrial life by analyzing signals coming from outer space. the projectrelies on individual users to volunteer to allow the seti project to harness theunused processing power of the userõs computer. about 500,000 people havedownloaded this program, generating an amount of computing power that wouldhave cost $100 million to purchase.grid computing is likely to have fewer nodes that are tied together than in theseti case, said ibmõs nelson, but because the size of the machines can belargerñincluding large servers, storage systems, and even supercomputersñhighlevels of computing power can be generated. further, since the systems involvedin grid computing will be more tightly coupled and more general purpose, theycan be far more versatile. the next step in grid computing, he predicted, is theòholy gridó where everything is connected to everything, running common software, able to tackle a wide range of problems. with the advent of such a grid,both small and large companies would be able to buy the computing power theyneed and get the software they need over this grid of network systems as neededon a payasyougo basis.in ibmõs view, a part of the larger vision of grid computing includesautonomic computing, where integrated computer systems are not only selfprotecting, selfoptimizing, selfconfiguring, and selfhealing, but also come closeto being selfmanaging. another important component of this vision is pervasivecomputing, where sensors embedded in a variety of devices and products wouldgather data for analysis. these sensors will be located all around the world andthe data they generate will have to be managed through the grid. as nelsonpredicts, òsoon we will have trillions of sensors, and that is what we really relyon the ônet for.óthe predicted arrival of grid computing means that firms in the computerindustry have an enormous stake in the future of telecommunications networks.with the grid, the future of computing lies in complex networkbased technologies, such as web services, which tie together programs running on differentcomputers across the internet, and utility computing to provide computing poweron demand. with telecommunications firms becoming more dependent on information technology, and vice versa, the two industries are likely to become evermore closely intertwined.getting to the futurewhile these and other emerging technologies offer alluring prospects for amore vibrant and productive future, a major focus of the step conference ontelecommunication technologies concerned the regulations that condition thespeed at which these technologies and others can be adopted as they becomethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction11available. as dr. jorgenson pointed out in his introductory remarks, the issue ofregulation is particularly germane to telecom, which is regulated at both thefederal and state levels. broadband regulation, in particular, was identified byseveral conference participants as a bottleneck to realizing the benefits of newinformation and communications technologies in the new òwiredó and òwirelessóeconomy.sustaining the new economy:the broadband challengebroadband, which refers in general to highspeed internet connectivity, alreadysupports a wide range of applications ranging from email and instant messagingto basic web browsing and small file transfer, according to mark wegleitner ofverizon.16 in the near future, he said, improved broadband networks can lead totrue twoway videoconferencing and gaming as well as voip. the future ofbroadband, he predicted, includes multimedia web browsing, distance learningand telemedicine. beyond these applications, he noted, lay the possibility ofimmersive gaming and other types of information and entertainment delivery thatcomes with high band output combined with highdefinition receivers.17can we indeed arrive at this promising future? charles ferguson of thebrookings institution noted that while many foresee what a òradiant futureóshould look like, there exists an enormous gap for many between this vision forbroadbandbased technologies and the lack of adequate highbandwidth access toa broadband network.the global broadband gapindeed, as many conference participants pointed out, the united states isfalling behind other nations in access to highbandwidth broadband.18 jaffe drew16individuals and businesses today variously connect to the nationõs fiberoptic network throughtelephone lines (via digital subscriber lines or dsl), though television coaxial cables, and by fibertothe home, depending on the availability of these services within different jurisdictions. wireless connections are also emerging as a viable alternative, as discussed later in the text.17many of these applications are already emerging, although the potential of many of these applications can be more completely realized through networks that are faster, carry more information, andreach more users.18commenting on a discussion of the united states slippage in broadband penetration rates,dr.kenneth flamm of the university of texas noted that it is important to carefully define what ismeant by broadband. broadband, he noted, describes a wide spectrum of bandwidth, with significantdifferences between its high and low end. in addition, he noted that while 99 percent of the u.s.population was connected by telephone or cable, and thus were potentially connected to the internet,the issue of bandwidth size determined the types of applications that could be made practical tohouseholds and businesses.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12the telecommunications challengebox b: the demand side of the broadband gapwith much of the discussion on how to address americaõs apparentlag in broadband adoption focusing on alternative models of service provision, the issue of broadband adoption among users has been relativelyobscured. according to the pew internet projectõs recent survey, the rateof growth in penetration of highspeed internet at home has slowed andcould slow further.a while 53 percent of internet users had highspeedconnections at home in may 2005, this level rose only modestly from50percent in december 2004. this is a small and not statistically significant increase, according to pewõs john horrigan, particularly whencompared with growth rates over a comparable time frame betweennovember 2003 and may 2004 when the adoption rate rose from 35percent to 42 percent. dr. horrigan concludes that there is less pentupdemand today for highspeed internet connections in the population ofdialup users and that this trend is likely to continue. he notes as well thatcurrently 32 percent of the adult u.s. population does not use the internetat all, and that number is increasingly holding steady.ajohn b. horrigan, broadband adoption at home in the united states: growing butslowing, washington, d.c.: pew internet and american life project, september 24, 2005.paper presented to the 33rd annual telecommunications policy research conference.attention to the reality that the united states had fallen far behind other leadingnations in broadband penetration. isenberg underscored this point, reporting thatthe international telecommunications union (itu) had, in fact, ranked the unitedstates in thirteenth place in 2003 and that the u.s. had likely since fallen tofifteenth place in broadband penetration. citing the itu figures for 2003,ferguson reported that the penetration of digital subscriber lines (dsl) in theunited states was 4.8 per 100 telephone lines, in contrast to south korea wherethe penetration rate is 27.7 per 100 telephone lines. he noted that the unitedstates had also fallen behind japan and china in the absolute number of digitalsubscriber lines.acknowledging that this low figure for dsl is explained in part by the factthat a majority of u.s. residential broadband connections are through cablemodems, ferguson nevertheless contended that that this fact did little to changethe overall picture. in the first place, he explained, when business connectionswere included, the percentage of total u.s. broadband connections provided bycable was relatively low. in the second place, even in the residential market thepercentage of connections provided by cable had been holding roughly constant,the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction13figure 2the broadband gap: why arenõt current services good enough?source: paul green, ftth council consultant.internal transfer speed desktop/laptop computer with todayõs hard drive13 gbpssymmetricalixc and metropolitan fiber network transmission speed per optical wavelength15 gbpssymmetrical~13 mbps asymmetricalcablemodem/ dslin last milecurrent copper wire based cable modem and dslòbroadbandótechnologies choke information transferaccess remains the weak link info superhighwaydesktop/laptopas had the cable systemõs growth rate in respect not only to connections but alsoto bandwidth levels.ferguson observed that bandwidth constraints rather than computer hardware frequently dominate the total cost of adoption of a new network computingapplication. personal computers were adequately powerful and relatively inexpensive, he noted, but given bandwidth constraints, deploying a highperformance,highquality videoconferencing system or other applications could nonethelessprove extremely expensive.adding his own negative assessment of the u.s. competitive position,h.brian thompson of itown communications noted that while (what is commonly called) the information superhighway is capable of handling very highcapacity in its fiber optic network, and while most desktops and laptops couldfunction at between 1 and 3 gigabits per second, the problem was that there wasoften less than 1 megabit of connectivity between the two. this weak linkñthebroadband gapñwas illustrated schematically by thompson at the conference.(see figure 2.)in his remarks at the conference, mark lajoie of timewarner cablecautioned that national aggregations showing the united states in thirteenth placethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14the telecommunications challengeworldwide do not tell the whole story. differences in regulatory climate, the history and condition of infrastructures, the way in which products are used, as wellas population densities are all factors influencing measures of broadband penetration. highdensity cities like tokyo and seoul were likely to have higher levels ofpenetration, as do similar urban areas in the united states, he said, and added thatwhile the infrastructure in europe and asia were newer, u.s. cable and telecomfirms were making significant investments in expanding broadband capacity.agreeing that there are many ways to spin the numbers on broadbanddeployment, mark wegleitner of verizon nonetheless acknowledged that òwearenõt leading in what we have to perceive as one of the key technologies for anynational economic environment going forward.ó he noted that his company,verizon, was spending $12 billion annually on improving the broadband infrastructureñincluding expanding fiber to the homeñthereby helping the unitedstates catch up with other leading nations. at the same time, he predicted thatòbandwidth demands are just going to grow and grow and grow,ó as new applications come into use.implications of the broadband gapif broadband can serve as an engine for the nationõs future growth and competitiveness, as emphasized by several participants at the conference, a lack of anadequate access to the broadband network may lead to a loss of this economicopportunity.19 assessing the impact of the broadband gap, charles ferguson notedthat the òlocal bandwidth bottleneckó is having a substantial negative effect onthe growth of the computer industry and of various other portions of the information technology hardware and software sectors. while conceding that computingan estimate of this impact in a rigorous way would be extremely difficult, henevertheless asserted that òyou can convince yourself easily that this effect issomething on the order of onehalf of 1 percentñor even up to 1 percentñperyear in lost productivity growth and gnp.ócommenting on the national security implications of the broadband gap,jeff jaffe reminded the audience that the 9/11 commission had recommendedthat the nationõs digital infrastructure be prepared to deal with simultaneousphysical and cyber attacks. in the case of a national emergency it will be important for first responders and other individuals to communicate effectively witheach other and a high bandwidth, interoperable system is essential for this task,he said, adding that such a network is still not in place today.19dr. raduchel, for example, noted that new technologies, like embedded sensors which rely on acapable broadband network, could emerge as the source of the next round of productivityimprovements.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction15some explanations for the broadband gapwhile many of the participants at the conference concurred that the unitedstates faces a broadband gap, views varied as to the reasons and well as solutionsto this situation. some suggested that the broadband gap has emerged becausesome telecom and cable companies have been reluctant to provide adequate interface between user and the fiber optic cable networks. others suggested that thebroadband gap arose from the consequences of federal and state regulations.flawed market motives of telecom and cable companieswhat is holding back highbandwidth broadband penetration in the unitedstates? dr. isenberg noted that the rise of the stupid network makes it difficult forthe telephone or fiber company to sell anything other than commodity connectivity.in the new internetworked model, it was the internet protocolõs job to make allthat was specific to a single network disappear and to permit only those thingscommon to all networks come to the surface. since the internet ignores whateveris specific about a single network, including features that had formed the basis ofcompetition for the telephone or cable companies, these companies have little tosell beyond access, he argued, and therefore faced little incentive in providing thepublic access to highbandwidth broadband. the result, he said, was a cripplednetwork with far less bandwidth available than technology would allow or than isavailable in other technologically advanced countries.ferguson suggested that flawed markets were behind the high cost of securing adequate bandwidth in the united states. he noted that both the telephoneand cable companies had òsevere conflicts of interests,ó and that they largelyavoided competing with each other. even competition for residential markets wasòquite restrained, and much less substantial than you might suspect.óthe conflict of interest for the telephone companies is òfairly obvious,óferguson asserted. incumbent businesses were providing very expensive voiceand traditional data services. very rapid improvements in price/performance ofbandwidth would undercut their dominant businesses in a major way. the samewas true of the cable system: it provided video services that could easily be provided over a sufficiently highperformance internet protocol network.consequences of unbundling network elementsin the discussion following the second panel, kenneth flamm noted thatmore than one speaker had spoken of a tendency to dismantle some of the opening up of the local loop that had been the centerpiece of the 1996 telecommunications reform act. the act required incumbents to make parts of its networkthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16the telecommunications challengeavailable to competing operators, in particular the òlocal loopsóñthe wires thatrun from telephone exchanges into homes and offices.20the 1996 act sought to promote competition by asking incumbents to sharethis part of their networks with rivalsñtechnically known as òlocal loop unbundlingó(llu)ñgiven that the expense for competitors to build their own networks wouldbe very high in the short term. in practice, however, most incumbent operatorssaw unbundling as robbery, according to thompson. this meant (as the economist describes it) that òthe incumbent must, in effect, give its rivals a hand as theytry to steal its business. not surprisingly, most incumbents find procedural, legal,and technical reasons for being slow about it.ó21 though intended to promotecompetition in the short run, local loop unbundling may have inhibited investments in alternate infrastructure that competitors might otherwise have made overthe longer term. and because it forced incumbents to share their networks withrivals, this may have also deterred them from investing in new equipment. anunintended consequence of the 1996 telecommunications act may well havebeen to inhibit investment needed to provide high bandwidth broadband accessover the local loop, although the issue of whether mandatory unbundling increasesor decreases the roll out of broadband network access remains an open empiricalquestion.even so, one of the authors of the telecommunications act of 1996, charlesthompson, conceded that the concept of unbundled network elements, introducedin that legislation was moribundñthat he òwould be the first to put flowers on thegrave of unbundled network elements.óoutdated standards and regulatory uncertaintyoutdated standards and a regulatory uncertainty may be retarding progress inaddressing the broadband gap, according to some conference presenters. on theissue of standards, peter tenhula of the federal communications commission(fcc) acknowledged that wireless technology regulation was still being governedby a ninetyyearold spectrum management regime rather than one òrooted inmodernday technologies and markets.ó such outdated regulations, he noted, failto capitalize on technological advances in digital technologies such as those thatallow for greater throughput of information, interference management, andspectrum sharing.20local loops can be either òlegacyó copper loops or newer fiber broadband connections. the 1996telecom act created considerable uncertainty for the unbundling broadband services. see, forexample, the press release of april 8, 2002 by the telecommunications industry association, òtiatells fcc that unbundling rules discourage broadband investment,ó which recommends that thefcc not apply its network unbundling rules to new facilities used for the provision of broadband andhighspeed internet access services, and to apply them to legacy systems including copper loops, so asnot to inhibit investment in wireline broadband networks.21the economist, òuntangling the local loop,ó october 9, 2003.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction17regulatory uncertainty is also holding down the installation of fiber all theway to the curb, noted dr. jaffe. clear regulation is needed, he stated, to encouragesufficient nearterm investment in fiber infrastructure. this regulatory environment may have been further clouded in recent years by increasing federal concernsabout infrastructure protection, disaster recovery, and emergency services in thewake of recent concerns about terrorism. according to jaffe, vendors such aslucent face uncertainties in developing new products at a time when regulatoryimperatives are very slow to come out.another important source of regulatory uncertainty is the patchwork of localregulation issued by individual municipalities. cable infrastructure is oftengoverned by cityspecific franchise agreements, while telephone companies andother broadband providers may in some cases prefer statewide or even nationalauthority as a means towards greater regulatory simplicity and predictability.in addition, as verizonõs wegleitner observed, prevailing uncertainties inupdating regulation make it difficult for his company to invest in the development of an effective broadband network. incremental rulemaking in the transitionfrom the old regulatory regime to a new one often creates ambiguities, withinvestments of millions or even tens of millions of dollars hinging on the interpretation of words that, while written only a few years before, were alreadytechnically obsolete. òit is that interpretation that is going to determine the pathforward of the networkõs evolution.ó this òunnecessarily complex regulatoryenvironment,ó did not make sense in that it discouraged investment.thompson objected, however, arguing that large telecom and cable companies are not passive recipients of federal and state regulation and that, moreover,the current regulatory environment are greatly affected over the years by thepower of incumbents on all sides. to the extent that incumbents influence regulation, the current uncertainty in regulation may well reflect the uncertainties thatmajor cable and telecom providers are facing in coming up with a viable businessmodel that allows profits in an arena that has been transformed by new technologies. lisa hook, recently of aolbroadband, noted in this respect that firms inthe broadband industry were struggling at the service layer to find business modelsand revenue streams based on new technologies that would justify the investmentneeded to make nearly unlimited bandwidth widely available.some alternative solutions to closethe broadband gapaccording to ibmõs michael nelson, the internet revolution is less than eightpercent complete, with many new applications still to be enabled by future technologies like the grid. realizing this vision of the nextgeneration internet willrequire both new technologies as well as significant investment, he cautioned, asit will entail providing whole neighborhoods with gigabitspersecond networksthat are affordable and reliable as they are ubiquitous. ògetting there is going tothe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18the telecommunications challengerequire more intelligent, more consistent policies than we have today,ó hedeclared. participants at the conference considered a variety of means by whichthe nation could close the broadband gap, of which some key approaches arepreviewed below.directed government incentivesferguson suggested that the nations that were ahead of the united states inbroadband penetration shared two characteristics. the first was that their governments are òmuch more heavily involved in providing incentives and/or moneyand/or direct construction of networks than is the case in the united states.ó thesecond was that their internet providers are under government pressure to improvetheir price and performance. for example, he said that the chinese governmenthad made it clear to the countryõs principal telecommunications providers thatbroadband deployment was a major national priority. the situation was similar injapan and korea, adding that government encouragement in canada and thescandinavian countries had also enabled those countries to surge ahead oftheunited states in highbandwidth broadband penetration.22for the united states, ferguson recommended a variety of policy measuresto bridge the broadband gap. initiatives could include subsidizing the deploymentof municipal networks and offering investment incentives to public and privateproviders. putting more pressure on incumbents to open up their networks so thatthere is an open architecture broadband system that is more analogous to thestructure of the internet is another avenue.faith in efficient marketsin contrast to this more policydriven approach, verizonõs wegleitner notedthat broader technical, financial, and regulatory improvements would reduceuncertainty and allow markets to function efficiently. while admitting that current challenges resisted simple solutions, he put forward what he called a shortanswer to the problem: òlet the markets rule.ó by this, he envisioned the internetof the future as an interconnection of commercial networks such as verizonõsrather than the confederation of commercial providers that it is now. he addedthat the future requirements for services offered customers via broadband wouldbe of such quality and scope that only an interconnection of commercial networkscould provide this service.23 to make this network of the future possible,22for an assessment of japanese policies to catch up and surpass the united states in broadbandconnectivity, see thomas bleha, òdown to the wire,óforeign affairs, 84(3), 2005.23the current internet is based on a confederation made up of multiple service providers. theirability (or inability) to maintain their interconnection arises from commercial issues, and not from thecurrent design of the internet.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction19wegleitner recommended further development of appropriate standards for communication protocols and a new way of levying tolls on customers for use of theinfrastructure that belongs to companies like verizon, combined with a lightregulatory touch.networks in the hands of customersin the discussion that followed the first panel, jay hellman, a real estatedeveloper, observed there exist business opportunities both in laying fiber to thehome and making sure it functions. he likened the duo of fiber and services to apublic roadway where service companies like fedex and ups competitively plytheir fleets. it was desirable, he added. that the street be accessible to as manycompetitors as possible. he also added that his own frustration with the capacityoffered by existing providers had prompted him to start his own small telecommunications company. responding to this comment, david isenberg notedthat the development of technologies that allow customers to create their ownnetworks and that create opportunities for individuals to provide service innovations was important to sustain innovation and provided a broader, more genericsolution to the broadband challenge.municipally owned fiberthompson proposed a different approach, recommending the developmentof nonprofit publicprivate partnerships at the local level to stimulate the development of broadband to the home. these partnerships would serve as a utility,lighting fiber but not provide any service on that fiber except those municipalservices that the town or community base chose to provide. the network wouldbe open to any and all service providers with an internet protocol basisñbe theytelephone companies, cable companies, software companies, or others providingonline entertainmentñand it would be used by all under the same terms andprices. communities could build this network, just as municipalities build andmaintain roads and sewers, he added. citing the case of ireland where, thompsonsaid, such partnerships have been successfully developed to provide broadbandaccess.while separating the network access component from retail services mayhelp municipal providers of network infrastructure, more needs to be learnedabout the feasibility of this idea in the united states, including whether customerswant to buy their services in this way. the issue of whether the municipal provision of infrastructure will in fact lead to more competition for broadband accessalso remains to be studied.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20the telecommunications challengethe wireless wildcardña silver bullet?wireless broadband access can be a third tier that competes with cable anddsl, according to david lippke of highspeed america.24 in this way, wirelessbroadband can help overcome the limitations associated with traditional wiredbroadband access. while wireless broadband has been in limited use so far due torelatively high subscriber costs and technological limitations such as problemswith obstacle penetration, rapid advances in technology are likely to overcomesuch challenges. mooreõs law applies to wireless no less than other forms oftelecommunications, he noted, predicting that wireless data rates would reach allthe points through which traditional telecom had passed.in particular, scientists and engineers working on the upcoming wimaxstandard have resolved a number of problems that had bedeviled existing wirelessprotocols such as wifi. the prospect of reaching gigabit speeds was now beingmentioned, and other quality of service issues as well as lower costs of installation are being addressed. to the extent that these predictions are realized, thewimax protocol may well offer an effective wireless solution to the broadbandgap, especially for smaller towns and communities across the united states.the end of stovepipingthe move from analog to digital information and communication technologies is ushering a major transformation disrupting how telecom, cable, and musicand video entertainment companies, among others, do business. because analogsolutions were all that existed until recently (except in some fields of computing),these industries each matured into separate industries, with separately evolvedbusiness models and regulatory frameworks. in the digital age, however, basictechnologies like digital sampling and packet switching enable the commoditizationof voice, data, and images into digital packets that resemble each other. thesepackets can be sent over the internet with no distinction as to what they are, to bereassembled at the intelligent ends of the network.drawing on these observations, william raduchel noted at the conferencethat the information and communications technology revolution will usher theend to stovepiping as service and content providers shift from vertical integrationto a greater reliance of horizontal platforms. this change, he noted, will give riseto a variety of public policy issues as individuals and businesses in the economyrestructure to take advantage of the potential offered by new technologies.25 he24also mentioned at the conference was broadband over power lines, which at the time was beingreviewed by the fcc.25a key example of contemporary relevance is the offshore outsourcing issue. for a discussion of thisissue, see national research council, software, growth, and the future of the u.s. economy: report ofa workshop, dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds., washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2006. see also catherine l. mann, high technology and the globalization of america, forthcoming.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction21box c: some factors affecting the end of stovepipingwhile the digital transformation has the potential to disrupt traditionalverticallyintegrated industrial organizations, some factors may inhibit atransformation to a fully horizontal platform.¥open network architecture: the horizontal organization of communications requires a relatively open network architecture. however, ifsystems or content providers do not have access to physical or logicalpipes, those providers cannot reach their customers.a¥separation of carriage from content: some customers may preferto purchase services in bundles that include access, as noted by lisahook. here, verticallyintegrated firms may have a competitive advantage over firms that supply pipes or content exclusively.¥social policies that favor universal access: where social policiesset access price below a competitive market price, the supplier of theaccess must also be able to cover its total cost from the supply ofsome other highermargin services or receive a subsidy.¥economies of scope: there may be economies of scope betweenproviding communications services and network facilities.aconsider, for example, the fccõs video dialtone initiative in the 1990s, whichattracted substantial investment from incumbent telephone companies until it was determinedthat some portion of the bandwidth had to be made available to competing content providers.for a wider discussion of the limitations of open access cable, see thomas w. hazlett andgeorge bittlingmayer, òthe political economy of cable ôopen access,õó stanford technologylaw review, 4, 2003.also noted that the speed of change is likely to be such that the economy may notbe able to adjust to it readily. among the issues to be addressed is the challenge tointellectual property rights and question of regulation, which is expected to bevery challenging.the potential and implications of the move from analog to digital informationand communication technologies were discussed by several of the conferenceõsparticipants. key points from these discussions are summarized below. as in anyconference that includes a variety of perspectives, some of these policy recommendations are mutually contradictory, and evidence may be required regardingtheir efficacy.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22the telecommunications challengeconvergence and competitionraduchel sees the internet as having two complementary aspectsñit is botha physical set of networks as well as a protocol known as tcp/ip. at the present,the physical network can only support movies and other applications at low bitvolumes and is often not cost effectiveñalthough this can be expected to changeas technology improves and the broadband gap is overcome. the significance ofthe internet protocol, he said, is that it makes all networks look the same andallows interoperability. it was for this reason that the telecommunications worldcould be expected to move to one set of interconnected webs, he said, predictingthat ò5 to 10 years from now, we will be online all the time.óthis convergence is challenging the traditional business models of firms inthese industries. how would telecom companies, for example, deal with newtechnology that makes cell phones work perfectly everywhere or with muchcheaper voip service? the next decade, warned dr. raduchel, would be markedby òlots of dislocationó as firms attempt to adjust to new technological andcommercial realities.according to mr. lajoie, the convergence of data, voice, video, wireless,public networks, and private networks in an endtoend infrastructure was changing the terms of competition across industries. where there was once a bigseparation between what the telecom and cable industries did for example, ònoweverybody is in everybody elseõs business.ó while cable television, internet,cellular, wifi, and satellite transmission businesses were once distinct, lajoiebelieves that they are all destined to overlap and offer similar kinds of products,suggesting with some optimism that the economic rewards that will arise fromthis competition would be what drives continued innovation, the advent of newservices, and increased broadband connectivity.the potential end of stovepiping also poses new challenges for consumers.many consumers, faced with a proliferation of internet services, operatingsystems, and devices will want a service that is easy to use and integrated, predicted ms. hook. she noted that companies like aol broadband see a marketopportunity as aggregators, packaging a variety of content and communicationsservices over the internet and protection against viruses and spyware that areeasy to launch and use.intellectual property in the era of digital distributionin addition to disruption in the business models of firms that deliver a digitalsignal is the disruption to business models of firms that provide the content. indeed, the music and entertainment industries are among those that are alsoundergoing a fundamental shift in the digital age. andrew schuon of the international music feed television network noted that while the publicõs desire toconsume music has never been greater, with new technologies allowing userstotake an entire music collection with them anywhere they go, the key problemthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction23for content providers is how to make money selling music in the new mediumñgiven that technology already available has allowed consumers to share musicand other content with each other for free. at present, he noted, legitimate downloads account for only a few percent of all downloads from the internet.he noted that technology developed for building legitimate services makes itnow possible to protect intellectual property, to monetize it, and to track licenseswhile, at the same time, creating a good experience for the consumer. however,this technology has to catch up with consumer expectations that have developedin the absence of such constraints: òif you steal the content, you can do anythingyou want with itñput it into any portable device, put it on as many computers asyou have, use the content as you see fit.ó the challenge for the music industry isto find a way to get the consumer to pay for its product while at the same timebeing more creative than the illegitimate download sites. the music industry,mr.shuon said, has to offer the modern customer the flexibility to use the contentin the way they want to, in addition to offering superior content and a fair price.steve metalitz, of the law firm smith and metalitz, agreed that developing alegitimate market for copyrighted materials over broadbandñfor entertainment,services, software, video games, research, and reference worksñwas indispensable for the longterm viability of these industries. acknowledging that piracywill continue to be a problem, he added that the challenge for the future of broadband is to achieve a relatively low level of piracy and a very high level oflegitimate products. addressing this challenge requires:¥developing legitimate markets for copyrighted materials over broadband;¥providing greater security for delivering content to an enduser includingmeasures to ensure that the incomegenerating potential of material going into thepipe did not vanish forever;¥creating a usable legal framework to protect the technological measuresused to control access to copyrighted material in the network environment;¥focusing enforcement of piracy problems on organized criminal groupsas well as dedicated amateurs who play a role in making the system insecure; and¥improving public education to make consumers aware that certain typesof file sharing is illegal and the need to secure permission to avoid copyrightinfringements.cooperation, mr. metalitz concluded, is needed among providers of networkservices along with better communication with policymakers to advance theseobjectives.the challenge for regulationaccording to peter tenhula of the fcc, the challenge for regulation concerns the migration from decades of regulatory stovepipes towards a new visionthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24the telecommunications challengeof a variety of applications and services (covering voice, video, and data amongothers) that are provided over multiple and competing telecommunications platforms (including cable, satellite, dsl, and power lines). for this idea to work,content or service providers need a choice of mechanisms by which they canreach their customers. rather than preserve the artificial vertical integration thathad existed for decades and had created silos that grew up over the years,mr.tenhula suggested that it made better sense to let the natural layers fall asthey might. (see figure 3.) replacing sectorspecific communications regulationwith a layered regulatory model, he added, would better complement the networked characteristic of the new economy.the fccõs agenda, he said, was to guide and propel the journey from a slow,conventional analog world to a digital world with significant opportunities forfaster, more reliable, higher quality information and communications, with theoverall goal of providing substantial benefits for american consumers.conclusionconcluding the conference, dale jorgenson noted that the new economyhad witnessed a huge shift from a vertical model to a horizontal model in thecomputer, semiconductor, and communications industries. in this new model, hesaid, most of the interesting innovations were disruptive. the challenge for businesses in this changing environment was to figure out how to make money, whichwas hard given that consumers were both clever and unpredictable. it was òtoobad,ó he said that the consumer ends up carrying away most of the welfare, whichthen cannot be delivered to shareholders. but in another respect, he added, thefact that òconsumers emerge over and over again as the big winners . . . [is] agreat thing about the new economy.ójorgenson characterized the policy issues in the telecommunications challenge as particularly difficult. while many economists are prone to offer privatefigure 3vertical silos to horizontal layers.private/commercialradio multichannel video: cable/dbsphysicallogicalapplication servicescontentaudio/video:broadcastingtelephony/commercialcarrierthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction25property as an answer to policy dilemmas, the presence of common property inthe form of the digital communications infrastructure made matters more complex, he noted, adding that a way had to be found of maintaining common facilities within a market based approach. the transmission of property such as data,software, and music across this network also raised questions about its protection,while ensuring privacy for users. taken together, these issues provide a robustagenda for further study and consideration about the new economyñwhich, henoted, has been a central aim of the national academiesõ board on science,technology, and economic policy.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiproceedingsthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.29introductiondale w. jorgensonharvard universitydr. jorgenson welcomed the audience to the fifth in a series of symposiasponsored by the national research councilõs board on science, technology,and economic policy (step) and devoted to the theme òmeasuring and sustainingthe new economy.ó to counter the view that the new economy had òdisappearedin the year 2000,ó he pointed out that recent figures indicated that, since the endof the previous recession in 2001, productivity growth had been running abouttwotenths of a percentage point higher than in any recovery of the postworldwar ii period. he therefore applied the label òalive and welló to the neweconomy, which, he noted, step had been tracking almost from the time thephenomenon was recognized in the policy community.reviewing stepõs previous symposia on the new economy, dr. jorgensonrecalled that the first had taken place in the year 2000 and had resulted in thepublication of measuring and sustaining the new economy. the thesis of thatbookñwhich, he said, still held up very wellñwas that technology is the mainsource of the development denoted by the term ònew economy,ó and that the keytechnologies center on semiconductors. the second symposium, addressing semiconductors specifically, dealt with speed at which semiconductor technologydevelops, which is described by mooreõs law. that topic is critical to telecommunications technology, the focus of the current symposium, just as it is tothe development of technologies related to computing.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30the telecommunications challengethe subject of the third symposium in the series, which was held about a yearafter that on semiconductors and for which a report was yet to be published, wascomputers. according to the future it sketched out for mooreõs law, the accelerated pace of development of semiconductor technology that started in the mid1990s was to continue; and, in fact, the rate of progress between that meeting andthe present had proved this expectation correct. addressing those in the audiencewho tracked semiconductor technology, dr. jorgenson observed that robertdoering of texas instruments and other leading authorities in the field hadprojected semiconductor development to continue at that accelerated pace for atleast another decade or so, something of extreme relevance to the dayõs topic. thefourth symposium of the series, held in february 2004, examined developmentsin software technology, which he described as a òmuch less tractable topic.ó stepwill publish a report on that meeting as well.the new economy: a comprehensive picturetaken together, the work sponsored by step under the rubric measuringand sustaining the new economyñexamining the specifics of semiconductortechnology, the base technology driving the pace of technological development;computing; software; and, at the current meeting, telecommunicationsñhasproduced the most detailed and comprehensive picture available to date of whatis known as the new economy. and true to the components of stepõs name, thisstudy had encompassed economics, about which a great deal had been learned inits course, as well as technology, which had been the focus of much of thedeliberation.turning to policy, dr. jorgenson raised the issue of which policies conditionthe speed at which new technologies are adopted as they became available. thisis particularly germane to telecommunications, which is regulated not only at thefederal level, a subject to be addressed shortly by peter tenhula of the federalcommunications commission, but also at the state level. and, in addition to theinvolvement of many different regulatory bodies, there is that of congress, whichhas passed major legislation, and the courts, which have always been the arena oflast resort. so stepñthe board on science, technology, and economic policyñwas bringing all three together in the dayõs symposium.thanking dr. charles wessner of the step staff and dr. bill raduchel, amember of the board, for organizing the symposium, dr. jorgenson turned thefloor over to the latter, the subject of whose talk was the end of stovepiping.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.31dr. raduchel recalled that he had joined the step board around the time ofthe first of the workshops on measuring and sustaining the new economy andnoted his pleasure at watching the boardõs journey down the path thatdr.jorgenson had described as it tried to increase its understanding of the forcesshaping the economy.to get his talk under way, he called attention to a recent agreement betweentwentieth century fox and vodaphone under which the studio would developoneminute original episodes of the television show 24 for distribution beginningin 2005 over cell phone handsets in the u.k. he expressed doubt that, 5 yearsbefore, many people would have imagined themselves watching an episode of atelevision show that was not going to be available via television, let alone thatthere would be a major new form of entertainment having mobile handsets as itsplatform. he said he expected these oneminute episodes, which in and of themselves he found mindboggling, would be available on verizon wireless in theunited states later in 2005. with others working on all sorts of things to distributevia mobile phones, he said, it was a question as to what the real market would turnout to be. citing the foxvodaphone deal as an example of òthe ultimate in howconvergence is happening,ó he underlined the difficulty of predicting òwhatõsgoing to drive the world going forward.óoverview: òthe end of stovepipingówilliam j. raduchelruckus networkthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32the telecommunications challengetechnology: six major themesdr. raduchel briefly introduced the six themes that he would address in hispresentation:¥innovation happens when it can, which means that if technology enablesit, someone is going to do itña fact that, he said, òpeople who study technologyreally do understand.ó¥digital sampling and packet switching are fundamental changes, anda new wave that would bring the latest of their many impacts was just becomingvisible.¥technology change is not over, as dr. jorgensonõs words had justevidenced.¥all networks collapse to one set of interconnected webs, as he hadobserved on a recent visit to south korea. that country was on course to beentirely lit by 2006, so that the user would be able to go seamlessly from evdo1to a specifically korean wimax standard that was evolving. òif youõre koreanand you have the right gear,ó he remarked, òyou will be online everywhere yougo in the country.ó¥convergence is coming.¥regulation is going to be very challenging.innovation happens when it canamong practical examples of what science has enabled have been telephony,records, radio, tv, mobile telephony, cds, and dvds. students of informationtechnology understand that specialized solutions are possible years or decadesbefore generalized solutions, dr. raduchel observed, so that applications willalways emerge òin a way that looks unique in the beginning but over time becomesblended in with the overall theme of information technology.ó because analogsolutions (which was all that existed until the 1980s except in some limited fieldsof computing) were available before digital solutions, each developed into a separate industry. in truth, however, they are not separate.digital samplingto evoke this phenomenon, dr. raduchel harked back to high school mathclass, when students learn to approximate a curve by placing rectangles underneath it. if the rectangles used are sufficiently narrow, the approximation can beso close that its difference from the actual curve is negligible. the principle in1evdo or evolution data only or evolution data optimized is a fast wireless broadband access(3g) without needing a wifi hotspot. for additional information, access <http://www.evdoinfo.com>.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview: òthe end of stovepipingó33digital sampling is similar: instead of trying to keep track of a curve of, say,sound or video, one approximates it. as computer speed increases, the approximation improves to the point that the reproduction attains the same quality, andñsomething very important from the viewpoint of the consumerñit tends to beerror free.unanticipated consequences of changesuch advances can have unanticipated consequences that many have difficulty perceiving except in retrospect. drawing an illustration from the recordingindustry, dr. raduchel recalled inviting friends over to hear the òvirgin playó of anew vinyl record, which could be 20 to 40 percent better than any subsequentplay, depending on the quality of the phonograph. òmusic was a form of primaryentertainment,ó he said, òbecause people would get together and listen, since thatfirst play was so special.ó but the onehundredth play of a cd is the same as thefirst, so it no longer matters whether one is hearing it the first time, or thehundredth time, or the twentieth time. he speculated that recorded music has lostits place as a primary source of entertainment because, through a change in technology, the special appeal of listening to it the first time has disappeared.packet switchingthis technology, the foundation of the internet, applies the same basic idea.a signal is transmitted over the air or through a wire as small packets that are thenreassembled at their destination. this process commoditizes information, sinceall forms of it are turned into packets and each packet resembles the next. all thatis done by this huge worldwide network, the internet, is to move the packetsaround without distinction as to what they are. òthey can be radio, television,classified information, piracy, maps, anything,ó dr. raduchel stated, adding thatòeverything is just bitsó in the world that has resulted from this òvery profoundtechnology change.ótechnology change is not overdr. raduchel noted that intel had recently made public its engineersõ prediction that the minimum 30 percent annual rate of improvement sustained by semiconductor performance for the previous two decades would remain a constant forat least 10 and, possibly, 20 more yearsñthat is, that mooreõs law would continue in force. the result of maintaining this rate of improvement, which equatesto 97 percent per decade, is that òthe most powerful personal computer thatõs onyour desk today is going to be in your cell phone in 20 years.ó and recallingpresentations at an earlier symposium in the current series, òdeconstructing thecomputer,ó he said that display, storage, and transmission could be expected tothe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34the telecommunications challengeshow even more rapid improvement, although their rates of improvement werelikely to abate sooner than that of semiconductors themselves. òin general,ó hestated, òwe will probably see a twoorderofmagnitude drop using conventionaltechnology in computing, transmission, and storage.óinnovations that were in the offing for the following 3 years would proveboth interesting and disruptive. for ultrawideband wireless, familiar to technologywatchers as usb/1394, standards had been agreed, and products would hit themarket the following year. these technologies were described by dr. raduchel asòa way of going from your personal computer to your tv set seamlessly,wirelessly, instantly.ó also coming was wireless broadband beyond wimax, òoneof the most fascinating developmentsó and among the topics to be addressed byanother of the dayõs speakers, dave lippke of highspeed america. wimax itselfwas capable of speeds up to 250 mbit per secondñòreally highspeed transmission,ó he observed, òlighting the whole country.óstorage capability skyrocketingthe advances in storage would be as large as those in any other technology.the capacity of the serial ata disk drive, representing the newest generation ofthat product, would grow to approach terabytes in size over the following 5 years.because the price of a disk drive had frozen at around $80, producers competedthrough growth in speed and capacity. it was for this reason, dr. raduchel pointedout, that the music industry was so nervous. òthe personal computer you buy in3years will be able to hold every song ever made,ó he predicted, òand still have alot of room left on its disk drive.ó meanwhile, hard drives would appear that weresmall enough to fit into cell phones but could store gigabytes of data.dr. raduchel then turned to silicon tuners, which he said provide the abilityto tune television signals off a satellite, over the air, or over cable. noting thatthese devices become cheaper as they are moved into small computers, he said itwould soon be possible to record 16 channels simultaneously. òthose of you withtivos,ó he advised, òthink ôtivo on steroids.õówith these changes, the cost per bit keeps dropping. an email is, in general,a few thousand bytes; a song, about 4 megabytes; a dvd movie, about 5,000megabytes; and an hd movie, about 50,000 megabytes. that, for instance, thehd movie is 10 times the bytes of a dvd movieñbut is still a movieñindicatesthat the value per bit being transmitted has, with the move into entertainment,declined massively from where it was when the internet started.all networks collapse to one set of interconnected websthe internet itself is two things, a physical set of networks and a protocolknown as tcp/ip, both of which were designed mainly for email. while theinternet was workable for movies at low volumes, it was ònot yet costeffectivethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview: òthe end of stovepipingó35over the long haulóñalthough, dr. raduchel noted, òthat could change.ó broadcast remained very efficient as a means of delivering large volumes of bits and,combined with large numbers of hard drives, òthey begin again to approximatethe same thing. thatõs one of the battles youõre going to see in the next 5 years.óthe strength of internet protocols, however, is that they make all networks lookthe same and allow interoperability, and it was for this reason that the telecommunications world could be expected to move to one set of interconnectedwebs. òfive to 10 years from now,ó he predicted, òwe will be online all the time.óvoice providers understood that their industry was on the verge of becominga feature, something not without precedent in the technology sector. òif youõre inthe industry,ó dr. raduchel stated, becoming a feature òis not good.ó by way ofillustration, he pointed to skype, a company employing eight programmers inestonia that had become a provider of international telecommunication servicesand had grown to the point that it was disrupting the industry in the united states.and on the way was a generation of phones that would allow users to roam to802.11b or 802.11g networks, the wireless networking, or wifi, that had becomecommon in hotels, offices, and homes.days numbered for landlines?this would not be as minor a change as it might seem, for it would improvecell phone service significantly in suburbs, where resistance to the placing of celltowers had been common. the many people who had been holding onto landlinesbecause their cell phones did not work well in their homes would suddenly beable to roam to a broadband connection and have their cell phones work perfectly. he called this prospective development òa major threat to the establishedtelecomsó because, as he said: òif your cell phone works perfectly, why do youuse anything else?ó and every major player had entered the market for anotherform of very cheap telephony, voice over ip, or voip. they were not sure howthey were going to make money, but they were sure that theyõd better be there.speakers from both verizon and vonage were to address the subject later intheday.dr. raduchelõs current professional activity involves serving college students,who represent the next generation of technology users. òthey live on their pcand their cell phone,ó he said, explaining that their primary music and videodevice is the former, and that their main communication takes place via instantmessaging and cell phone. the students spend about 6 hours a day online asopposed to less than 6 hours a week watching television in the traditional sense;live sports account for half of that viewing time. they almost never pay for media.òthey see everything as a victimless crime and donõt worry about it,ó he observed,noting that òdarknet copying abounds: inside the dorms, where you have veryhigh speed network connections, these kids copy everything and copy it a lot.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36the telecommunications challengeconvergence is comingdr. raduchel stated that mobile phones would be òthe first truly convergeddevices.ó it is expected that, as of 2006, onethird of cell phones in south koreawould be able to receive 13 video channels, 25 audio channels, and 3 datachannels via directtomobile broadcasting (dmb). broadcasting would be fromsband satellites, employed in the united states by xm and sirius, to cell phonesin cars. soccer was to be among the offerings on the video channels, but otherwise programming had not yet been set. in addition, sim cards like those used ingsm phones were expected to be made available to cell phone users by southkorean banks; installing the card would equip a phone with a fingerprint readerlinked to the bank, thereby turning it into a banking terminal. òthe mobile phonewill begin to become the dominant way of conducting transactions,ó he asserted,òbecause it will be more secure, more reliable, and easier to use than anythingelse out there.óconsumer broadband would follow the cell phone as a vehicle of convergence; and, in fact, this process had already gotten under way with voice over ip.in television, the newest competitors were dell and hewlettpackard, which wereaccustomed to coping with much thinner margins than, and were able to producein high volume better than, consumer electronics companies. òthere is no difference between a flatpanel television and a pc except the packaging and the software,ó said dr. raduchel, òso dell and hp represent major threats to theseindustries.ó he again pointed to the entry of skype into competition for globallongdistance services.public policy issues straightforwardthe public policy issues looming over the landscape of convergence,dr.raduchel said, were relatively straightforward:¥the speed of change was such that the economy was unable to adjustto it readily. òyou canõt have this much change in this little time without havinglots of disruption,ó he opined.¥increased options for consumers were being traded off against theloss of capital and jobs. the outstanding fixed debt of telecommunications firms,he said, had reached around $60 billion or $70 billion worldwide.¥intellectual property rights (ipr) were a widening concern. whilemusic and films were in the spotlight, the challenge to ipr had reached everything that could be copied.¥growing complexity had its cost to the economy. pain was a relatedissue, he said, pointing to a wall street journal column in which walt mossbergexplained why the pc is the consumer device on which we are most dependentand that we most hate.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.overview: òthe end of stovepipingó37¥security and reliability, while they might seem farfetched concerns,were very real. that consumer pcs connected to broadband could be turned, byan attacker unleashing them all simultaneously, into a massive weapon againstthe u.s. economy was òa doomsday scenario [but] not an implausible doomsdayscenario.ó dr. raduchel recalled that the counterterrorism expert richard clarke,while working for the u.s. government, had been òpassionateó about the risk thata socalled distributed denial of service attack might pose. this prospect, whichcasts òmicrosoft windows as the greatest threat to national security that existstoday because of the degree of vulnerability in it,ó was the source of great worryamong experts, he said, adding: òi donõt know what we can do about it.óregulation is going to be very challengingthe questions of how these industriesturnedfeatures were to be regulated,and of who would do it, were very profound.as was typical of the step symposia on measuring and sustaining the neweconomy, dr. raduchel reflected, there was virtually no possibility of resolvingall the issues aired, but there was an opportunity to do a good job of beginning toframe the questions that should be asked about them. then, thanking the audience,he turned the podium back to dr. jorgenson.remarking that dr. raduchelõs presentation had set the stage for a discussion of policy, dr. jorgenson proposed leaving comments and questions untilafter the following speaker, peter tenhula of the federal communicationscommission.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38technological change andeconomic opportunity:the view from thefederal communications commissionpeter a. tenhulafederal communications commissionmr. tenhula expressed his pleasure at having been invited by the step boardto present a perspective from the federal communications commission (fcc)on the telecommunications challenge the symposium was exploring, although healso voiced regret that michael powell, the commissionõs chairman, had not beenable to attend and to share his views. he speculated that mr. powell, along withother fcc staff, were on their way to nashville to attend the annual conventionof the national association of regulatory utility commissioners, whose members are the state telecom regulators. as the commission had ruled the previousweek that the states could not regulate internet telephone services and other ipenabled services, the convention would òprobably be like a lionõs denó for thoserepresenting the fcc, he said. òbut knowing the chairman as well as i do, ipredict that he will be as safe as daniel among those lionsóñeven if he wouldmost likely have preferred attending stepõs symposium instead.having spent 5 years as mr. powellõs senior legal adviser, which mr. tenhulacalled òby far the most valuable experienceó to date of his 14 years at the fcc, hewas now working on spectrum policy reform. warning that he might spend adisproportionate amount of time on spectrum, he apologized in advance, whilealso promising to try to shed some light on the wireless issues raised by dr. raduchel.he said he would do his best to depict in full the attempt of the fcc, a ò70yearold regulatory agency . . . to catch up and keep up with technological changes.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity39in light of both the subtitle of his presentation, òthe view from the fcc,óand his position as a career employee, mr. tenhula said he wished to call particularattention to the agencyõs standard disclaimer: òthis presentation and the viewsexpressed by the presenter do not necessarily reflect the views of the fcc, thechairman, individual commissioners, the fcc staff or the administration.ómr. tenhula said he would begin by highlighting how the fcc was embracing and fostering technological change and innovation, borrowing a metaphorfrom mr. powell that had been guiding the commission for the previous fewyears: the great digital migration. he would then briefly describe how the fccõspolicies were fostering economic opportunity and entrepreneurship in line withanother of mr. powellõs themes, power to the people, and with the ideal ofconsumerdriven innovation. then he would discuss wireless as a successfulderegulatory model for telecom, along with some current challenges of spectrumpolicy reform. finally, he would share his personal take on some of the futureissues and opportunities being generated by new technologies and on the regulatory, technical, and economic challenges that the fcc, congress, the administration, the telecom industry, and academia might be in a position to address.the great digital migrationto illustrate the challenging regulatory transition dubbed by chairmanpowell as òthe great digital migration,ó mr. tenhula projected a graphic representing the òwinding road from decades of regulatory stovepipes to a heavenlyvision of a wide variety of applications and services being provided over aplethora of competing telecommunications platformsó (see figure 1). mr. powell,he said, had been framing the fccõs agenda around this concept with the intention of properly guiding and propelling the journey from a slow, conventional,analog world to a digital world with significant opportunities for faster, morereliable, higher quality information and communications. accompanying thischange would be an inevitable and radical transformation resulting in substantialbenefits for american consumers. while he acknowledged that there were potholes depicted along the roadñsomething he associated with the quality of roadsin washington, d.c.ñhe stressed that the vision adopted by mr. powell was aòvery optimisticó one. òhe could easily have adopted the more pessimistic imageof an impending train wreck,ó mr. tenhula pointed out.mr. tenhula expressed one of this approachõs two guiding principles throughthe phrase òmultiple platforms are the key.ó the goal was to have additionalphysical platforms generate tremendous consumer benefits by delivering multiplefacilitiesbased competitors. the transformative impact would scream out forderegulation because it would be accompanied by:1.increased need for risky and heavy capital investment;the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40figure 1the great digital migration.voicecoppervideocoaxtv/radiospectrumpoliticalanxietyrisk anduncertaintyconsumerconfusionanalog worlddigital worldnarrowband broadbandtransition ¥competitionñlimited/govt. sanctioned monopolies¥market structuresñbalkanizedñ2dimensionalñone network/one service¥consumerñregulated prices; no/little product differentiation; limited innovation¥innovationñsignificant but slow¥ubiquitous networksñuniversal service subsidies¥regulatoryñheavily regulated with strong jurisdictional boundaries (state and federal)incumbentdilemmamassivecapitalinvestmentpotholesplatformscable dsl powerlaserfixeddtv3gftthanything else!applicationsvoice; video; data; audio; etc.competitionñmultiple facilitiesbased¥¥market structuresñconvergedñ3dimensionalñone network/many services¥consumerñlower bundled prices; more innovation/product differentiation; personalization/customization¥innovationñdynamic at all levels (network/applications/cpe)¥ubiquitous networksñtechnological advances¥regulatoryñless regulatedñboundaries blursatellitewifi meshuwbplatformsstovepipeslayers?the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity412.demonstrable positive competitive effects and better ways to deal withdemonstrable competitive harms; and3.the anxiety and uncertainty of neverending regulatory proceedings.the initial step under the second guiding principle, that of òavoiding reflexivesymmetry,ó was to allow significant development, then assess market conditionsand determine what, if any, regulation might be appropriate. a good example ofthis, wireless, will be discussed further in a moment. in the wake of the initialstep, it would be important not to burden new services and applications with thephysicallayerbased stovepiped regulations of yesterday.mr. tenhula listed some wireline migration matters in which the fcc wasinvolved:¥the triennial review, a followup to the 1996 telecommunications act,was a òvery litigiousó proceeding involving deregulation of local loops as well asdelegation to and regulation by the states of unbundled network element and itspricing.¥the brand x appeal, in which a petition of certiorari was pending beforethe u.s. supreme court, involved the appeal of a ninth circuit case dealing withwhether cablemodem service was defined as an òinformation serviceó or a òtelecommunicationó service under the telecommunications act.2¥a universal service review was undertaken by the fcc in order toensure the ubiquity of the next generation of technologies, as intended under theoriginal 1934 telecommunications act.¥intercarrier compensation dealt with how carriers compensate each otherfor exchanging traffic, as well as how to deal with legacy access charges andother approaches to compensating carriers participating in the networks of networks.¥the ipenabled applications/services proceedingñcovering all applications over internet protocol, notably voice over internet protocol (voip)ñwasthen pending. the fcc, as mr. tenhula had mentioned, had indicated where itsjurisdiction lay in a couple of cases, having told the states to stay out of voip andother ipenabled applications in a ruling on the vonage case just the week before.as yet unresolved, however, were many other, tangential issues, among themuniversal service, communications assistance for law enforcement (calea),and enhanced 911 (e911).¥broadband over powerlines, a rule making recently taken up by thefcc, dealt with the provision of very high speed bandwidth over the electricalgrid. the issue facing the commission here, rather than whether to allow this newbroadband competitor, was the leakage of signals from power lines that interferedwith other spectrumbased services.2the supreme court since ruled in the fccõs favor on june 27, 2005.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42the telecommunications challengehe then turned to examples of issues concerning mass media migrationthat were occupying the fccõs attention:¥digital television transition and cable must carry were tied together.the fcc, which was contemplating a òhard dateó for the conversion from analogto digital highdefinition television, was looking at a time frame of around 2009,but the staffõs proposal was òvery tetchy.ó also controversial was the mainquestion regarding what cable must carry: how much of that digital signal mustcable operators carry?¥direct broadcast satellite (dbs) providers echostar and directv hadproved effective competitors against the cable video platform, while other highdefinition, focused, directbroadcast satellite competitorsñvoom, for oneñwere getting set to come online.¥digital satellite radio, as represented by xm and sirius, was òtaking offlike gangbusters.ó¥digital terrestrial radio, also called òhighdefinition radio,ó wouldbring crisp, clean, cdquality music to homes and automobiles.¥media ownership battles were continuing.¥video over dsl was showing a great deal of promise.¥wireless mobile media, an example of which was the oneminute tvepisode had been the object of recent announcements by texas instruments,qualcomm, and infineon, which also planned to transmit highquality video tothe small screens on cell phones.observing that he was òstill talking in stovepipesñôwirelines,õ ômass media,õôwirelessõóñmr. tenhula moved on to issues affecting wireless migration:¥the process had started about 10 years before with personal communications services (pcs); having worked on that issue, he took great satisfactionin òsee[ing] everybody walking around with these little phones.ó¥already being rolled out in europe and asia, and on its way in the unitedstates, was third generation (3g) or advanced wireless communications,which promised to be the mobile broadband platform of the ensuing few years.¥broadband satellite services had had some òfits and startsó but mightbegin to fulfill their promise before long, especially to rural areas.¥an auction of returned tv spectrum, a byproduct of the media migration that related to the digital tv transition, would be undertaken by the fcc. agreat deal of spectrum from tv channels 52 to 69 would be on the block, something that dropped òanother hot topic,ó public safety and homeland securityapplications, into the fccõs lap. òsome would call it a pothole, some would callit a detour on this road,ó acknowledged mr. tenhula, òbut itõs a very importantelement of serving specialized enterprises with wireless communications.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity43¥secondary markets were enhancing flexibility in the use of radio spectrum by making it possible to lease spectrum, and to trade it freely, as if it wereòany other raw material.ó¥cognitive radios would increase spectrum sharing, since they were ableto find holes in the spectrum and thereby allow the use of spectrum as available.¥unlicensed devices and òhot spotsó would also demand the fccõsattention.¥ultrawideband devices and applications, among other new technologies, had recently been provided more access to the spectrum and authorized.¥transitioning from commandandcontrol regulation of the spectrum.power to the peopleturning to the theme of consumerdriven innovation that mr. powellemblematized in the slogan òpower to the people,ó mr. tenhula began with thequestion: òhow are the fccõs policies empowering economic opportunities andentrepreneurship?ó in an address at the national press club earlier in 2004, thefcc chairman had talked about getting communications and computing poweròto the edges.ó resting in the hands of consumers, of end usersñrather than inthe hands of large, centralized institutionsñwould be the power of the siliconchips, massive storage, and speedy connections that combine to produce smaller,more powerful devices and very exciting applications. there were already òtonsóof examples of this change, including:¥digital cameras and photo printers, which had allowed photography tomove from the darkroom into the home;¥ipods, mp3 players, and downloadable services, which were combiningto replace cds;¥peertopeer communications and file sharing;¥personal video recorders, such as the tivo, which give users control ofwhat they want to watch and when they want to watch it;¥private movie theaters, found in family rooms and minivans;¥gps satellite receivers, which were becoming standard on tractors, allowing farmers to know exactly where to plant their seeds; on automobiles, allowingdrivers to know their location should they get into trouble; and in cell phones,fulfilling e911 requirements that the user be locatable through the phone in anemergency; and¥wifi voip phones that can bypass public networks.such were their economics that these devices were likely to become increasingly more powerful and less expensive, and they would require networks ofnetworks to serve them and applications to ride on them. consumers had beenembracing them, and incumbents, in addition to entrepreneurs, were providingthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44the telecommunications challengethem. a desire to regulate them, which he attributed to òspeculative fears,ó hadraised its head.fcc chairman powell believed the benefits to americans of such innovation to be enormous, as it furnished them with more choices, better value, andmore control to tailor how they communicate and get information. òcredit forthese successes rests primarily with entrepreneurs,ó mr. powell had said in aspeech. òbut governmentõs commitment to focus on innovation in its regulatorypolicies, remove unnecessary regulatory chains, place faith in the free market,and promote technology solutions has paid dividends.ó the fccõs objective, asdescribed by mr. tenhula, was òputting the ôpublicõ back into the ôpublic interestõthrough inevitable innovation.ówireless: a model for deregulationlooking ahead to the remaining challenges of spectrumpolicy reform, hesuggested that òthe wireless way of getting to multiple broadband platforms,ówhose results he judged to be òpretty promising,ó offered a successfulderegulatory model for the rest of telecommunications based on flexible, marketoriented regulations, as opposed to òcommandandcontroló restrictions of thepast. although the number of national providers of wireless telephone serviceshad shrunk to five with the cingularatt merger, the country still had multipleregional and rural providers of wireless services, as well as dozens of nicheplayers, especially in the middleware and applications layers. such variety meantthat consumers would enjoy lower prices and more choices, and also that therewould be greater innovation and deployment, with both taking place at higherspeed since flexibility means that the regulator need not be consulted at everyturn. since the fccõs first auction of licenses for pcs, in 1995, subscribershiphad risen by 407 percent, from 28 million to more than 142 million; the percentage of the u.s. population with access to three or more providers had increased to97 percent from 2.5 percent; and, currently, 78 percent had access to five or morewireless providers. meanwhile, the average price per minute of services haddecreased from 47 cents to 11 cents. òweõve got more [flexible] spectrum in theauction pipeline,ó he said. he cautioned that òmost [spectrum] was still under aôcommandandcontrolõ regimeó in need of its own transition.reforming spectrum policy was, therefore, a key item on mr. powellõsagenda. even as òdemand for spectrum [was being] driven by an explosion ofwireless technology and the everincreasing popularity of wireless services,ó hehad observed in late 2002, it was still under òa spectrum management regime that[was] 90 years oldó rather than one òrooted in modernday technologies andmarkets.ó going down the lengthening list of factors that were propelling demandfor wireless services, mr. tenhula cited the rise of the service sectors, which areòcommunicationsintensiveó; the increasing mobility of the u.s. workforce; consumersõ speed in embracing the convenience and increased efficiency of wirelessthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity45devices and services; technological changes that had increased the diversity ofservice and device offerings; and the increasing prevalence in both businessesand homes of multiple computers and wireless local area networks. at the sametime, he said, technological advances opening the door to changes in spectrumpolicy included the increased use of digital technologies with the potential forgreater throughput of information; the improvement of interferencemanagementopportunities; and the advent of spectrumsharing technologies, an example ofwhich was cognitive, or ôsmartõ radio.fcc spectrum policy task forcethe fccõs spectrum policy task force (sptf), of which mr. tenhula wasdirector, issued three main recommendations in november 2002:¥migrate from the current commandandcontrol regulatory model to theuse both of a marketoriented, exclusiverights modelñwhich some would call aòpropertyrightsó modelñand of an unlicensed devices, or òcommons,ó model.¥implement a new paradigm for interference protection.¥implement ways to increase access to the spectrum in all dimensions forusers of both unlicensed devices and licensed spectrum.when it came to the regulatory models, mr. tenhula said, the task force hadstressed that one size does not fit all. it had, in fact, recommended striking abalance among the three general approaches in assigning spectrumusage rights.under the exclusiverights model, licensees would hold exclusive yet transferable and very flexible usage rights to specified spectrum bands within definedgeographic areas. these rights would be governed primarily by rules protectingusers against harmful interference. under the commons model, unlimited numbersof unlicensed users would share frequencies. usage rights would be governed bytechnical standards or etiquettes for devices, and there would be no right to protection from interference. only very limited use of the commandandcontrolmodel, the traditional regime under which the government picks the use and usersof spectrum, was recommended by the task force, which would confine itsapplication to the areas of publicsafety, internationalsatellite, and broadcastingservices.moving to marketbased modelsthe consequence of using the commandandcontrol model, mr. tenhulaexplained, was the building up of silos. òweõve got labels like ôbroadcastspectrum,õ ôcellular/pcs spectrum,õ ôpublic safety spectrum,ó he said. òfolkscome to the fcc begging on hand and knee: ôcan we increase power?õ ôcan wehave some more spectrum?õ ôcan we change the service?õ and the fcc takes athe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46the telecommunications challengefigure 2spectrum usage models: transition to marketbased models.uses & users limited by regulationflexible, marketbasedservicesunlicensed, consumerdeviceslowmediumhighlowmediumhighòpowerósensitivity to interferencelowmediumhighsensitivity to interferencelowmediumhighòpoweróvery long time.ó the goal of the commission under mr. powell was to transitionto marketbased models by limiting use of the commandandcontrol model toòhighpower, highsensitivity applicationsó and by moving more toward flexible,marketbased services and unlicensed consumer devices (see figure 2). the taskforce under mr. tenhula (and former task force director dr. paul kolodzy) hadalso concluded that increased access to spectrum could mitigate the scarcity ofspectrum resources. with most òprimeó spectrum already assigned, it had becomeincreasingly difficult to find spectrum that could be made available either for newservices or for the expansion of existing ones. the task forceõs recommendationwas to improve access to spectrum by permitting licensees greater flexibility andto promote access in all dimensions through smarter technologies.in the wake of the task forceõs report, the fcc had been eliminating barriersto secondary markets; designating additional spectrum for unlicensed devices;improving access to spectrum in rural areas; studying receiver interference immunity performance issues and interference temperature concepts; facilitating smarterradio technologies; and conducting service and bandspecific proceedings throughwhich it was implementing these principles. in implementing the first of thesecourses of action, increasing access to spectrum through secondary markets, thecommission had:the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity47¥authorized spectrum leasing in a broad array of wireless services;¥streamlined to a single day processing of most license transfer and assignment applications;¥improved the functioning of secondary markets to facilitate access tospectrum by new technologies that make òopportunisticó use of unused spectrum;this involved a concept that it called the òprivate commonsó and under whichlicensed spectrum was used for a commonslike, infrastructureless approach;¥authorized public safetytopublic safety leasing; and¥facilitated infrastructure sharing, especially in rural areas.the sptf also had an initiative underway in the area of research and development, in conjunction with which it was awaiting a study from the computerscience and telecommunications board of the national research council. thissptf report had been òinspiring a lot of study and debate around the world,ómr.tenhula said, remarking that articles related to it were landing on his deskweekly. a parallel effort, the presidentõs spectrum management reform initiative, was taking place within the executive branch; it was related to presidentbushõs goal of furthering broadband as well. the fcc had been collaboratingwith the national telecommunications and information administration, a bureauof the department of commerce (doc), on making more radio spectrum available for wireless broadband technologies. in july 2004, doc had issued a pair ofreports containing recommendations focused on improving spectrum management, especially within the government. implementation of those recommendations had begun (see figure 3).spectrum issues and opportunitiesmr. tenhula, reminded the audience of the disclaimer, òthe views expressed bythe presenter do not necessarily reflect the views of the fcc, its chairman, individual commissioners, the fcc staff, or the administration,ó then went down hisown list of òissues and opportunitiesó relating to the spectrum policy, some of whichreflected ideas that the sptf had not examined. as areas of opportunity, he named:¥trends toward òlayeredó approaches and other regulatory frameworks;¥the question of where spectrum fit within broader discussions of telecommunications policy;¥multimode intermodal broadband mania, and the question of how todefine supplyanddemand problems and the relevant markets; and¥the question of whether there was a need for a new telecommunicationsact in an ipbased world.moving to a òlayeredó regulatory model (see figure 4) from the stovepipedmodel (see figures 5ð6), a possibility that academics and some in industry hadthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48the telecommunications challengefigure 3presidentõs spectrum management reform initiative.¥june 24, 2004 ñdepartment of commerce submitted two reports to the president that presented recommendations for developing a u.s. spectrum policy for the 21st century:ñreport 1: òrecommendations of the federal government spectrum task forceóñreport 2:òrecommendations from state and local governments and the private sectorrespondersó¥recommendations focused on:ñmodernizing and improving the current spectrum management systemñestablishing incentives for achieving improved efficiencies in spectrum use and for providing incumbent users more certainty of protection from unacceptable interference ñpromoting timely implementation of new technologies and serviceswhile preserving national and homeland security, enabling public safety, and encouraging scientific research ñdeveloping means to address spectrum needs of critical governmental missionsfigure 4issues and opportunities: vertical silos to horizontal layersñi.¥layered model(s) should present an optimal regulatory framework for analyzing communications policy issues.¥policymakers need to separate (or òdelaminateó) the other layers (especially the services and content layers) from the physical layer(s) in order to make rational decisions in a converged (and continuously converging) world.contentapplications/serviceslogicalphysicalthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity49figure 5issues and opportunities: vertical silos to horizontal layersñii.figure 6issues and opportunities: vertical silos to horizontal layersñiii.physicalapplications/servicestelephony/common carrieraudio/video: broadcastingmultichannel video: cable/dbsprivate/commercial radiocontentlogicalphysicalapplications/servicescontentlogicalwhereõs the òspectrum?óòcellular/pcs spectrum?óòpublic safety spectrum?óòmilitary spectrum?óòbroadcast spectrum?óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50the telecommunications challengebeen exploring and that had entered into several fcc proceedings, would involvetranslating to a model of telecommunications regulation the open system interconnect [osi] stack or the ip layers approach in the internet. mr. tenhula,acknowledging a personal preference for the layered model, asserted that it couldpresent the optimal regulatory framework for analyzing communications policyissues because it would allow policymakers to separate the layers and therebyfocus decision making at the level of the problem. the current focus, he noted,was on problems at the physical layer, especially in the last mile.rather than preserve the artificial vertical integration that had existed fordecades and had created the silos that grew up over the years, mr. tenhula suggested, it would make òtotal senseó to let the natural layers fall as they might.replacing sectorspecific telecom regulation, a òspecialized, ex ante regime thatcanõt keep up with technology,ó with a regime whose layers were not tailored tocommunications would be in keeping with the ònew economyó: the notion thatòitõs all networkedó would parallel that of òitõs just commerce.ó in fact, aschematic depiction of such a layered model (see figure 7) resembled a similardepiction of basic industrial organization (see figure 8)ñin the latter, theanalogue to the ip stack is the sequence leading from raw materials, throughproduction and distribution, and on to endproduct services and the consumerinterface. òi donõt go to ôrestaurants,õó he said, displacing the metaphor forfigure 7issues and opportunities: a generic, commercebased layered modelñi.¥opportunity: the end of sectorspecific telecommunications regulation?¥the layered model(s) need notbe tailored only to communications regulation¥in the ònewóeconomy:ñitõs just òcommerceóñitõs all networked¥so, why a specialized ex anteregime that canõt keep up with technology?contentapplications/serviceslogicalphysicalspectruminterfaceinterfaceinterfaceinterfaceinterfacethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity51figure 8issues and opportunities: a generic, commercebased layered modelñii.end product/servicedistributionproductionraw materialsconsumer interfaceinterfaceinterfaceinterface¥opportunity: the end of sectorspecific telecommunications regulation?¥the layered model(s) need notbe tailored only to communications regulation¥in the ònewóeconomy:ñitõs just òcommerceóñitõs all networked¥so, why a specialized ex anteregime that canõt keep up with technology?purposes of illustration, òi go to a ôfoodarea networkõó through which the bitsare ôbitesõ at the consumerinterface level, having gone through many commercial ônetworksõ of producers and distributors to get to the table.the ubiquitous nature of spectrumadvancing another argument for revising the regulatory regime, mr. tenhulastated that in his view òspectrum is not only in the air, but everywhere: in twistedcopper pairs, in coaxial cable, in fiber cables in the form of colors, and inpowerlines.ó dsl is the highfrequency part of the twisted pair, coaxial cableòsome video channels that are set aside from spectrum for cablemodem service.óin support of this perspective, he posed the question: òshould the wirelessspectrum be privatized like wireline spectrum has always been?óother opportunities for studying alternative regulatory frameworks included:¥monitoring european union electronic communications directives andtheir implementation;¥weighing enforcement against rulemaking models of regulationñforexample, the antitrust vs. the quasilegislative approach taken by regulatoryagencies;¥reexamining the role of u.s. federalism in communications policy, something already in progress;the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52the telecommunications challenge¥considering more industry selfregulation, as well as the use of technicalstandards, to substitute for regulation; and¥asking whether sovereign nations and economic regions were betterlaboratories in a global economy, a question that recalled to him a supreme courtdissent from the 1930s in which justice brandeis suggested using the states as labs.mr. tenhulaõs suggestions for avoiding òthe pitfalls of the pastó in the comingbroadband, ipbased world were:¥òfocus on consumer welfare, the public interest, instead of producerwelfare, the special interest.¥òthink long term, and think globally.¥òlet them build it and see if they comeñand so what if they donõt, becauseothers will meet that unmet demand.¥òrecognize that killer apps will come and go, and doubt all predictions.¥òdonõt get bogged down in potential collateral problems like calea,e911, and universal service. just solve them, because true innovatorsñlike thosewho started mci to compete in longdistanceñwonõt wait, and the market wonõtwait, either.¥òallow for planning. providing time for old regulations to phase out andnew regulations to phase in has worked well in certain areas where regulation isnecessary.¥òexperiment on a casebycase basis, and allow for failure.óan uncertain legislative futureon the question of whether a new telecommunications act might be on thehorizon, mr. tenhula deferred, noting that bringing the 1996 act to passage tookmore than a decade. comparing the approaches of 1934 and 1996 acts, hedescribed the former as providing òvery broad delegation of authority; flexiblestandards; little determinacy; and permissive authority for the fcc [based on]trust in the agency as an enlightened group of individuals acting in the publicinterest.ó the 1996 act, he said, was characterized by òa comprehensive blueprint based on current technology; very prescriptive terms inviting litigation; veryparochial, special interests; restraint on the regulator; and the hope that competitive market forces will someday prevail.ówas there something better than the status quo? should the fcc become afederal communications corporation along the lines of fannie mae and freddiemac? should rules be abandoned in favor of an experimental expert tribunal thatwould resolve disputes? mr. tenhula predicted that a philosophical dispute,thatpitting free markets against industrial policy, would be determinant.his òpersonal pitch,ó which reflected his selfadmitted obsession with spectrumpolicy reform, was for the passage of a new act addressing spectrum managementthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity53problems. noting that title iii of the communications act, which dates to theperiod 1912ð1927, contains its oldest provisions, mr. tenhula set forth a potential framework for new legislation that would:¥end the government monopoly over spectrum allocation;¥end implicit subsidies and eliminate windfalls;¥allow for natural separation of the layers and sublayers;¥provide tools for policing anticompetitive denial of access to both thewireless and wireline spectrum that, however, would not deny the benefits ofefficient vertical integration; and¥maintain fcc jurisdiction over the service layers and protect consumersin cases of market failure.under such legislation, he asserted, the fcc might be able to act as an experttribunal to resolve actual disputes in a timely manner.leaving the podium, mr. tenhula thanked the audience and offered thefollowing valediction: òiõll see you on the road to the great digital migration,where spectrum policy will rule.ódiscussionbeginning the discussion period, dr. jorgenson explained that not much timeremained before the scheduled break and said that he would therefore enforce theòfamous white house ruleó: a limit on questions of one per person. he thenrecognized the first questioner.asked by hugh mcelrath of the office of naval intelligence to talk aboutthe use of spectrum by the military, mr. tenhula expressed his opinion that,although the military reservation of spectrum had òbeen there since the beginning,ó it was in need of reexamination just like every other aspect of spectrumpolicy. and this reexamination was, in fact, taking place: a task force workingunder the presidentõs spectrum management reform initiative was looking intoimproving efficiencies for spectrum management within the government. thewhite house could be expected to issue a memorandum soon, he said; it woulddirect agencies to do more efficient planning but would stop short of applyingmarket principles through imposing fees or allowing the trading of spectrum.thus, spectrum would probably continue to be, for the foreseeable future, aòunique [case] where a raw or natural resource is dedicated specifically in chunksfor military or government use.ó because such change did not appear likely anytime soon, other spectrum bands were under review, and it was spectrum that hadbeen moved from the government to the commercial side that was making wayfor thirdgeneration services.john gardinier, who identified himself as retired, observed that whilemooreõs law was in force for processing, and storage capability was growingthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54the telecommunications challengeeven faster, communications was really about input/output (i/o). òi canõt find anyway to speed up the video streams that are sometimes just not giving me theinformation as fast as i want to process it,ó he remarked, asking whether i/o ratescould be improved so as to take better advantage of available technologies.i/o restraints financial, not technicaldr. raduchel responded that telecommunications is in the end all silicon,meaning all computers, and that there was no technological constraint on movinginformation more rapidly, as òwhat can be put over the spectrum is driven bymooreõs law.ó the issues that mr. gardinier had raised were instead related toprovisioning decisions made by network operators and to cost decisions made byusers regarding the speed of the microprocessors they wanted put into theirdevices. òthe real limitation and constraint on the information ageó was, hepredicted, going to be battery life: òitõs clear that a cell phone that needs to berecharged during the day is of no use to consumers and they wonõt buy it.ó it wasbecause batteries sufficiently powerful to last through a day did not yet exist thatso much research had been going into fuel cells. he believed, however, that a waywould be found to get the information to mr. gardinier at the speed he demanded.richard lempert of the national science foundation said he had viewed thethinking behind mr. tenhulaõs presentation as focusing on efficiency, technology, and fairness as to who would get access to spectrum. while acknowledgingthe foregoing as òterribly important and understandable values,ó he pointed tothat moment in the 2004 presidential campaign when the owner of 61 tv stationsscheduled for broadcast as a documentary òwhat some people thought was acommercial.ó mr. lempert also related having read that òdue to threats from thefcc,ó saving private ryan was not shown on many networks. òonce one hasconcentration, which the auction method allows,ó he argued, òone also opensthings up to a cutting back of the diversity of views that can be presented.ó heasked to what extent these issues, which he called òneither economic nor technological,ó might be figuring in the commissionõs deliberations.mr. tenhula recalled his personal reaction to the two controversies thatmr.lempert had mentioned as: òthereõs 10 years more of the broadcast silo.óthe issue tied in the content layer, the very top layer of his model, with thephysical layer of spectrum at the bottom. while òbroadcast spectrumó is simply ameans of distributing video signals, he said, because of the traditional definitionof broadcasting such reactions would continueñuntil, perhaps, òviewership tipsoveró to cell phones, to cable, or to the internet. òwhat it does for me is it justperpetuates those old models in the regulation of the stovepipe,ó he said. òitmatters who has the spectrum, and then the content riding on top of that spectrumwill be regulated accordingly.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.technological change and economic opportunity55south korea reaches a tipping pointdr. raduchel interjected that south korea had become the first òmajorsocietyó to have reached a òvery interestingó tipping point: in 2004, daily internetusage there began to exceed daily television viewing for the society as a whole.this would happen elsewhere, he predicted.mark myers of the university of pennsylvaniaõs wharton school said thatthe move from a stovepiped to a horizontal regulatory model called to his mindhow the computing model went from vertical integrated systems to horizontal.but the latter model, he said, had begun to break up due to technology. òare suchmodels potentially limiting how we think and talk together about convergence aswe go towards the future?ó he asked, speculating that communicationsõ convergence with computing could jump to a òyetunpicturedó model.dr. raduchel said he thought the layered model was becoming dominant. òisee open source as the economyõs response to how you build integrated productsand sustain a layered model of technology,ó he stated. while observing that thefinal packaging might be changing as costs dropped and consumers wanted morecomplexity, he called the layered model òalive and well,ó adding: òif anything,itõs being more sustained by all the technology developments.ómarket model vs. legacy claimsjim snider of the new america foundation commented that while the fcchad talked òabout things like the importance of broadband internet in rural areasand flexibility,ó its tv translator decision of the previous september 30 would tieup hundreds of additional megahertz of prime spectrum for what he called anobsolete application. asserting that òthe translators got what the highpowerbroadcasters got in 1996 and 1997, which was digital flexibility and the option ofa second channel,ó he asked how the fcc squared this result with its stated goals.mr. tenhula, at pains to point out that as a staffer he did not have a vote,stated that digging into specific legacy uses and applications or into other specificproblems would lead to the realization that they were secondary. with that realization would come the conclusion that they would òhave to move out of the wayif the new guy comes,ó he said. and although òthey will move out of the way,óthe case cited by mr. snider had demonstrated that òtheyõre there until somebodyelse wants to use that spectrum.ó he expected to hear more about the kind oftransaction costs the decision would entail, especially in the vacated analog bands.dr. jorgenson closed this initial part of the program by thanking speakersand audience alike for their presentations and questions, which he said had combined to provide òan excellent overviewó of the dayõs subject.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56panel iñññññññññññññññññññññnew technology trends and implicationsintroductionmark b. myersthe wharton schooluniversity of pennsylvaniadr. myers opened the session by announcing that each presenter would have20 minutes and that the question period would come after all had spoken. he thenintroduced the panelõs first speaker, mark doms of the federal reserve bank ofsan francisco.the record to date:qualityadjusted prices for equipmentmark e. domsfederal reserve bank of san franciscodr. doms, thanking dr. jorgenson for the invitation and dr. wessner fororganizing the conference, began by noting that he would use the terms òtechnological changeó and òtechnological advancesó interchangeably. at the outset,the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications57he would tackle the question of why the link between technological change andprices is significant, so that he would then be able to explain how the advent ofòsome new geewhiz technologyó translates into prices and hence into consumerwelfare. thereafter he would talk about what the current official numbers said,about what other estimates were, and about the challenges of coming up withgood prices for communications equipment and servicesñagain, for the purposeof clarifying how a society benefits from innovations of the kind under consideration at the symposium. he would close by discussing the evolution of communications services and equipment.why do we care about prices? and why do we care about investment incommunications? first, investment in communications has been substantial, butalso very volatile, in the united states. as dr. jorgenson had said, one of thefirststep products in the new economy had been computers, but it was also truethat the countryõs investment in communications equipment had been of aboutthe same dollar magnitude as its investment in computers. from a gdp or nationalaccounts perspective, therefore, the two were pretty similar over the courseof the 1990s and had continued to be similar in the current decade. around $100billion per year, representing a little over 10 percent of total equipment investment in the u.s. economy, was being spent on communications; dr. doms termedthat òa fairly sizable chunk.óat the same time, there had been huge swings in the u.s. investment incommunications, making it one of the most volatile of all the components ofgdp. during the past recession, investment in communications gear fell 35 percent from peak to trough, òjust a very, very large number.ó as more years of datacame in, making possible a backward glance, the recession of the early 2000smight be remembered as a òhightech recession,ó dr. doms speculated, addingthat òcertainly what happened to communications played a major role in whathappened in the hightech sector.ócommunications investment and national economic performancethe other reason for interest in communications investment springs from theway in which it contributes to the performance of the u.s. economy. those economists who monitor the national economy, whether they work for a statisticalagency or for the federal reserve, look at measures of how many dollars arespent on communications in the united states every year. what makes their jobhard is that a dollar spent today on communications is not the same as a dollarspent yesterday; in fact, there is a great deal of change. dr. doms observed that acomputer costing $1,000 currently was a lot more powerful and a lot more usefulthan a computer that that had cost $1,000 five or ten years before. the same wasthought to hold true of communications gear; there had been enormous technological change, especially going back 25 years. at that time, most communications was done by landline telephone, a stark contrast to the diversity of means ofthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58the telecommunications challengecommunication currently available. so the problem that must be surmounted inorder to understand how communications affects gdp and productivity growth istranslating a given amount that was spent in a past year into todayõs dollars. òwebasically try to ask this question: if we have $100 billion today, what did thattranslate to in spending, say, four years ago?óeconomists are able to look at such trends over timeñto make òintertemporalcomparisonsóñby using price indexes. to illustrate, dr. doms turned to the technological change that occurred in fiber optics between 1996 and 2001. duringthat period, there were tremendous advances in the amount of information thatcould travel down a strand of glass fiber, owing to increases both in the number ofchannelsñthat is, in the number of wavelengths that could be transmitted along asingle fiberñand in the capacity of each channel. depending on how this changeis measured, on the point at which the measurement begins, and so on, òyoubasically get a doubling every year in the potential capacity of a single strand ofglass fiber,ó he said. during this fiveyear period, the price of the gear used totransmit information over fiber fell, on average, 14.9 percent per year.pointing out that the latter rate was clearly below the rate of increase incapacity, dr. doms underlined the importance of the lack of a onetoonerelationship between the change in technological capability and the price. òtheintuition is that if you have the option to buy a car thatõs twice as fast as yourcurrent car, you will not value that new, fast car twice as much as your old car,óhe said, because a form of diminishing returns sets in. in a similar way, the priceacts as an indicator of the value that society places on a technological change. itwas unfortunately probable, therefore, that the price indexes currently in use forlooking at productivity and at gdp understated the true price declines that hadoccurred for communications equipment.prices for computers vs. communications gearaccording to the u.s. bureau of economic analysis (bea), whose information on prices comes mainly from the u.s. bureau of labor statistics, prices forcommunications gear fell an average of 3.2 percent per year between 1994 and2000. that stood in sharp contrast to what had happened to computer prices,which fell an average of 19.3 percent during the same years. òwith all the innovations that happened in communications equipment, do we really think that theofficial number of 3.2 percent per year is accurate during this time period?ódr.doms asked, answering: òprobably not.ó work done by him and others indicated, rather, that communications equipment prices fell on the order of 8 to10percent, about half as fast as prices for computers. this movement stood incontrast to that of most other prices in an economy where prices tend to go up,and which was then showing an inflation rate of between 1 and 2.5 percent.dr. doms then turned his attention to the challenges of measuring prices.although made using òtraditional, standard methods and crude data,ó the estithe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications59mates of 8 to 10 percent per year through 2000 for the drop in prices of communications gear represented a step in the right direction. still, he acknowledged,more refinement was in order on that front. additionally, it appeared that no onehad a very clear idea of what had happened with regard to technological changein and prices of communications equipment from 2001 on. computing such pricesin order to see how much better off society was as a result of the technologicalchanges was a very hard job demanding a large number of personhours. òwe hadto purchase a lot of privatesector data,ó he recalled, describing the undertakingas òvery expensiveó and pointing out that statistical agencies such as bea and thenational bureau of economic research were òvery budgetconstrained.óan important challenge, looking into the future, was in the very speed atwhich technology was changing. òwe donõt know what technology is going toemerge three months from now, a year from now, two years from now,ó dr.domsremarked, òand itõs very hard for the statistical agencies to figure out what theyshould be following.ó was wifi going to take off any more than it had to dateñwas that going to be òthe next great thingó? just how quickly would fiber to thehome take offñand what would be the effect on the equipment involved in that?those studying the economyõs welfare would like to know what is going tohappen in the future so that they can start gathering the appropriate data, do theappropriate analysis, and construct the price indexes.communications prices past, present, and futureto illustrate the increasing difficulty of tracking both prices and technologicalchange, dr. doms displayed a table comparing the landscape for communicationsand communications equipment 25 years earlier, currently, and in the future (seefigure 9). a quartercentury back, when most of the money spent on telecommunications equipment went to switches for telephone centers, the industry was òalot easieró to track: òwe could see what happened when we went to digitalswitches.ó in the 1990s and into 2000, there was a movement away from spendingon telephone switches and toward spending on a wide array of telecommunications technologies, in particular those connected to data, computer networking,and fiber optics. following these developments was harder for the statistical agencies, especially in light of their budgetary problems. òunless the statisticalagencies get increased funding,ó he added, òin the future they are not going to beable to follow new, evolving trends very well.ósummarizing, dr. doms said that his efforts were aimed at improving understanding of how technology increases the economic performance of the country.the real terms in which gdp and productivity growth were discussed, he noted,were a tool used to control for what was happening to prices in the economy. thearea of communications equipment and services was one in which, he believed,prices were òvery much mismeasured,ó and hence this areaõs contribution tonational economic performance was probably greatly understated.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60the telecommunications challengefigure 9evolution of communications and communications equipment.???lucent, motorola, cisco, nortel, broadcomm, juniperma bell, nortelprimary makers of the gearcomputer network, lastmile solutions, wireless, ??? computer network, fiber optic, telephone switching, cellular, cable tvtelephone switching equipmentmajor expenditure categories for communications geardata, video, ???data, cellular voice, landline voice, cableland line voice, some dataprimary form of communicationfuturetoday25 years agotechnology trends, emerging standards,and their impactjeffrey m. jaffelucent technologiessaying he planned to talk about networking technologies, dr. jaffe indicatedthat he would focus on areas where issues concerning standards and lack of clarityin regulatory policy were retarding progress. in some of these areas, the wholeworld was being held back, while in others the united states was being held backrelative to the rest of the world. he hoped that exploring some of them wouldstimulate discussion, which might in turn lead to forward movement. hecomplimented dr.raduchel on his presentation, which he said made clear thatthe dramatic changes that had taken place in communications over the previouscouple of decades would continue for the next decade or two. he reiterated thathe would focus on the issue of networking, which he judged òprobably morecomplex than some of the enduser individual aspects.ó policy initiatives, headded, needed to keep pace with the rapidly evolving technological realities.explaining why he had labeled the changes òdramatic,ó dr. jaffe pointed outthat the voice network of the future would run over the internet protocol (ip).since this technology has a different capability when it comes to voice quality,cost, and reliability, this would be a major change, he predicted. more remarkablechanges were on the way. for example, developments in sensor networks andpersonal networks could mean that cell phones would soon to be sold with a builtthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications61in camcorder. òthink of having hundreds of millions of video broadcastersñbasically everybodyñbroadcasting to the grandparents whatever is going on intheir grandchildrenõs life, or personal video conferencing: think of the demandof all that on the network.ó in addition to commercial impacts, there would benationalsecurity impacts, he added, because sensor networks were also criticalfor homeland security. all these video cameras and sensor networks, he asserted,raised important issues concerning privacy and personal liberty. this means thatthe right standards and policy initiatives need to deal with not only the positivepotentials of the new technologies, but also some of the potential downsides.while wireless itself was òan absolutely wonderful technology,ó dr. jaffesaid, its potential is obscured because there are numerous standards for it. amongthese available standards are 3g1x, evdo, evdv, umts, hsdpa, 802.11,802.15, 802.16, 802.20, 802.21, and ofdm, in addition to publicsafety standards. the resulting confusion creates challenges both from a policy perspectiveand from the point of view of interoperability, he noted.contrasting paces of technology development, regulationmeanwhile, telecommunications services were increasingly becoming blended,with voice, data, videoñall mediañbecoming the same from the point of viewof the technology. in response, the thirdgeneration partnership program, one ofthe standards organizations, developed. a standardñip multimedia subsystem(ims)ñfor dealing with these blended services and converged access. all theseadvances in networking and services were taking place in a regulatory environment that was increasingly concerned about infrastructure protection, disasterrecovery, and emergency services. as a vendor, one of the things that lucentworried about, he said, was its need to develop new products and to recognizenew regulatory imperatives at a time when the regulatory imperatives were veryslow to come out. òthe innovators are getting out there with the innovations,ódr.jaffe noted, expressing concern about the cost of retrofitting regulatory disciplines that are later applied on the system.against this background, dr. jaffe proposed to talk about six areas where hebelieved regulatory and standards issues appeared to be standing in our way:1.voice over ip (voip).2.the new ims services.3.national emergency planning/firstresponder networks. major communications deficiencies in u.s. firstresponder networks were discovered on 9/11.4.fttx. fiber to the home or premises.5.government research funding for telecom. the industryõs movementto a horizontal model and elimination of stovepipes (as it implemented the innovations of the past 30 or 40 years) had been extremely efficient for the consumer.but, from a research perspective, a major issue had arisen: who was planting thethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62the telecommunications challengenew seed corn for tomorrow? òthat is something which i think that we as acountry need to be concerned about,ó he stated.6.spectrum policy.with the thirdgeneration partnership program standardizing ims, thevoiceoverip system was being built out. inside the network was a sophisticatedset of systems that handled the media control: session initiation protocol (sip),which was the signaling protocol for voice over ip, plus a variety of controllers,media servers, and application gateways (see figure 10). emergency planning,calea, disaster recovery, and e911 need to work seamlessly in this newenvironment.turning to security issues, he raised the problem of òspam over internettelephony (spit).ó he warned while many in the audience may not have heardthis term yet, they would likely make its acquaintance soon. this was becauseopening up a network to the internet protocol meant opening it up to misuse,òsomething that,ó he said, òwe need to be concerned about from a regulatorypoint of view.ó he also called protocol diversity an issue, pointing out that thosemost expert in the signaling protocol for the nextgeneration network, ip, werefigure 103gpp/ims provides next generation of blended services and voip.¥requires regulatory clarity to ensure no hiccups in deploymentðissues include emergency planning, calea, disaster recoveryðsecurity issues: spit, spam, authentication, denial of serviceðprotocol diversityserviceswitchapplicationserversroutingenginemedia gatewaygatewaycontrollermedia serversipsubscriberdata3gpp/imsnetworkpstnserviceswitchapplicationserversroutingenginemedia gatewaygatewaycontrollermedia serversipsipsubscriberdata3gpp/imsnetworkpstnpstnthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications63hackers. this was markedly at odds with the case of traditional voice networks,whose greatest experts comprised a closed society. while it is a good thing thatweõve opened it up, he said, we also need to have a thoughtful approach to dealing with the security issues.authentication: left out of the internetõs designas an example of an approach that qualified as thoughtful, dr. jaffe cited thedeliberation that led the european union to decide that authentication was amongits biggest issues. as authentication was not part of the internetõs design, with theinternet protocols it was easy for people to hide their identity. while the u.s.òdonot calló list had curbed telemarketing over the traditional voice network,81 percent of email today is spam, he said. and with the simultaneous occurrenceof three thingsñthe addition of voice over ip, mobility, and spitñit would òbevery easy for a user to spam every single cell phone in america with an sms[short message service] message.ó this, he noted, is ònot a great thing to have inyour network.óno one yet knew how to prevent this, and it would be particularly burdensome to those who had to pay when they received messages, as they would haveto start paying for spam. rather than decrying the technology, he said, he waspointing out the need to address the relevant policy issues and thereby to preventsuch things from occurring. a variety of solutions to authenticationñsingle signon, caller id, public key infrastructureñhad been available for some time, buttheir implementation had been very slow in terms of the reliability and the securityof the backbone.similarly, he said, it was important to start thinking about how to do thesignaling. for example, should there be some outofband signaling even withinthe internet protocol? should giving signaling packets priority over media packetsbe introduced? were there ways of introducing diversity?network capability and privacy: a tradeoff?dr. jaffe then enlarged his discussion of the basic voice network to considerthe services that allow the viewing of tv programs on cell phones, as mentionedby dr. raduchel. to be able to deliver these òlifestyleó services well, he said,ims was designing an approach that would feature:¥seamless control;¥data transparency, meaning that everything works even with differentprotocols and devices;¥immediacy, in that the user is always on the network; and¥nimbleness.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64the telecommunications challengeby its nature, however, this network would òunderstandó everything aboutthe user, which in turn raises an important social issue: if the network knows somuch about end users, what does that mean for privacy? although this is a difficult problem, he said, òi think it is absolutely vital that we address it.ódr. jaffe discussed u.s. and european privacy models. the u.s. modelallows customers to trade off their privacy for enhanced service. the europeanmodel featured very strict laws governing the gathering and sharing of personaldata. most notable in the u.s.õs market model was the sharing of responsibilities:the government provided an overall architecture defining roles and responsibilities for network operators, network vendors, users, and so on; operators needed toobey those policies, and network vendors needed to provide technology to makeit easy for users to specify their choices. he cited ibmõs hippocratic databaseand bell labsõ privacy conscious framework as examples of vendorsõ efforts tofill the vacuum by defining approaches that allowed users to customize theirprivacy.improving readiness for physical, cyber attacksmoving to the topic of emergency planning and first responders, dr. jaffepointed to the recommendation of the 9/11 commission that the nation beprepared to deal with simultaneous physical and cyber attacks. also needed, hesaid, were trusted networks and trusted devices that could keep the governmentfunctioning in the event of emergency, and which could help first responders,whose numbers, according to some scenarios, might reach 5 million. òwhat wesaw on 9/11 was that first responders couldnõt communicate with each other ifthey were from different services, and that was within a single city,ó he recalled.òcontrast that with the broadband mobile communications capability which isavailable commercially.ó what is currently available to protect the populationisa system that is not interoperable and which has very low bandwidth. by contrast, current commercial systems provide total interoperability and very highbandwidth, that offers realtime voice, video, and location services.this led him to put forward a òmodest proposaló: make available to firstresponders the very low cost, very efficient system of wireless communicationsthat had been developed for commercial needs and was principally provided bycellular vendors. in our federal system, such decisions are delegated to firstresponders in each locality, limiting the potential for a national interoperable system. that was a problem, he suggested, that the fcc might want to take on.emergency planning networks were going to have to evolve so that firstresponders could handle not only voice networks, currently their main function,but also sensor networks. the latter, networks of highly integrated microsensors,would be able to provide much useful information about potential physical attackson infrastructure. while there is a great deal of technology going into developingthe sensors, arriving at the right standards for taking all the sensor informationthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications65and feeding it into a national firstresponder network is hard. òwe desperatelyneed standards,ó he stated, òand the country is not moving quickly enough.óon the subject of fiber to the home, dr. jaffe remarked that residential use ofbandwidth had been on the same exponential curve for a long time (see figure11).the presence of an òinsatiable appetite for bandwidthó had become apparent overthe previous 20 years: òno matter how much broadband we give to people, theyõrewilling to use it up.ó despite steady improvement in modems, narrowband hadreached their limits. various forms of broadband had replaced it, but there seemedlittle reason to believe that demand for bandwidth would not continue to increase.this provided an inducement to achieve the highest bandwidth over the longestdistances, andñdespite the virtues of dsl, cablemodem, and copperñthere wasno question that the best bit rate for distance was provided by fiber (see figure 12).improving broadband capacitybut leaving aside fiber for a moment, dr. jaffe pointed to the major challengethe united states faces in broadband: the country had fallen to eleventh in theworldñor perhaps, as his fellow panelist david isenberg interjected, to fifteenthñin broadband capacity per capita. building costs were a factor in this, he said, butthere was another reason: while fiber tended to go into new construction, regulatory uncertainty appeared to be holding down the installation of fiber all the way0.11101001,00010,000100,000197019801990200020102020residential access average peak data rate vs. time data rate (kbps)yearnarrowband(dialup)broadbandsame spectrum with more bits/hz but same infrastructuremore spectrum (more hz) andmore bits/hz andnew infrastructuremore spectrum (more hz) andmore bits/hz but same infrastructure¥we have barely begun to tap the potential of broadband in 2004¥history indicates that we will reach 10ð100 mbpsper household but it will take decadesultrabroadbandfigure 11residential accessñperspective.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66the telecommunications challengebit rate (mb/s)distance (km)101001,00010,00011550nm850nmmultitwisted pair(dedicated bw)3010120singlemode fibermultimode fibercoaxial cable (shared bw)xdslcablemodemfttx1310nmnew infrastructure neededold infrastructure sufficesfigure 12fiber infrastructure is the enabler.note: plot assumes modulation at 1 bit/hz.to the curb in conjunction with rehabilitation of existing buildings (see figure13). in view of this, dr. jaffe made a second proposal: that there be clear,consistent regulation encouraging nearterm investment in a fiber infrastructure.the lack of regulatory clarity, and by the accompanying uncertainty, erodessome of our technology leadership. for purposes of illustration, dr. jaffe provided the audience with an explanation of a hybrid integration technology created atbell laboratories. fiber optics, he began, was very expensive technology becauseall the components are discrete. the cost of that expensive technology òdoesnõthurt you that muchó when used in a metropolitan network or in a longhaul network, because it is being amortized against billions of usages. but using thatsame technology at the home is very expensive because the amortization is lost.bell labs had developed technology in which optical components were put ontosilicon wafers, thereby achieving the efficiency of mooreõs law. according to agraph on a slide he displayed, with the new technology you could substantiallyreduce the cost if produced in large volume. however, slow regulatory changehas meant that sufficient investment in the technology has not been forthcoming.is fundamental research a casualty of deregulation?before concluding, dr. jaffe addressed the topic of funding for research anddevelopment, one that he said was not only very important but also close to hisheart. over the previous 25 years, the united states had substantially changed thestructure of its telecommunications industry from a single, verticallyintegratedcompany to numerous, horizontallyarranged companies. this was done for verythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications67good reasons and with very good results, as it substantially introduced innovationand reduced its cost. unfortunately, however, fundamental research had beenforgotten in the process.for many years, it was a tax on the telephone bill that had funded basicresearch in the telecommunications industry. after that, the venture model of theprevious decade had provided a very effective substitute for underwriting researchin communications: it had plowed billions of dollars, much of it focused on telecommunications, into numerous deals in the 1990s and early in 2000. since then,however, this model had collapsed. with both models no longer relevant, dr.jaffesaid, the united states needed a òmeans of cooperation across the partners in theindustry to improve on the research situation.ó europe, meanwhile, had adoptedthe explicit strategy of becoming more competitive in telecommunications andwas implementing it, in part, through the european framework programs.summarizing, dr. jaffe called voip the òvoice technology of the futureó butreiterated numerous policy issues: security, reliability, calea, e911, disasterrecovery, diversity, and authentication. he stressed that while new services wouldbe enabled through the networkõs òknowingó a lot about the user, it was necessary to ensure that this was handled appropriately. he termed emergency planning inadequate and called for a nationwide solution based on interoperable highbandwidth. he indicated that the united states could no longer afford òto keeplosing ground to the other countries of the worldó in fiber to the home. and,finally, he pointed out that much of the innovation the country had seen over thefigure 13fttp landscape.¥fttp is the most flexible solution for wired broadband services¥enormous, scalable bandwidth¥singlepipe integrated services (voice, data, video, ...)¥the u.s. is generally trailing the rest of the world (11thin total broadband deployment)¥2 scenarios:¥ògreenfieldónew construction¥fiber all the way to the building¥same cost to install fttp or copper access or both! ¥all new construction should have fiber installed, even if not yet used¥òrehabórebuilding existing copper access plant¥small part of access network (typically < 10%) is updated each year¥may use òdeep fiberóto the curb with copper for the last 100 to 1,000 feet to buildingthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68the telecommunications challengeprevious 20 years and would see over the ensuing 10 had resulted from its pastleadership in basic research in telecommunications. with this in mind, he advocated reexamining the current u.s. research model.four futures for the networkdavid s. isenbergisen.comdr. isenberg began by apologizing for having interrupted dr. jaffe, althoughhe explained that the occasion of the interruption, an allusion to the u.s. rankingin broadband per capita, was one of his òhotbutton issues.ó the data showing theunited states to be eleventh in the world were some three years old, and intheinterim this country had been growing at 42 percent per year, while a numberof the countries that had placed below it in those rankings had posted annualgrowth rates approaching 300 percent.the international telecommunication union, in a study issued early in 2004and reflecting 2003 data, had placed the united states thirteenth. but in makinghis own quick analysis of the threeyearold data, dr. isenberg had projected thatthe united states would fall within a year to last among the 15 nations considered. while he had not seen a listing of countries 16 through n, he said that hewould òguaranteeó that some on it were growing at tripledigit rates. he would, infact, ònot be a bit surprisedó to find that the united states, number three in broadband per capita as recently as 2000, had been knocked out of the top 15. òso, forall the wonderfulness of the communications revolution and all the improvements weõre seeing in this country,ó he declared, òweõre in a disaster: weõrelosing our national leadership.ótaking intelligence out of the networkoriginally, the title of dr. isenbergõs talk was to be òthe rise of the stupidnetwork.ó the òstupid networkó was more or less the result of applying the òendtoend principle,ó which states that òif you can do something in the middle of thenetwork or at the edge of the network, do it at the edge.ó borrowing a formulationfrom tim bray, he said that the way to explain the principle to a telephone company was to say that òyou want a fat pipe, you want it to be always on, and thenôget out of the way.õóthis principleñtake the intelligence out of the network and put it at theedgeñhad guided the internetõs success. jerome saltzer, david reed, and davidclark had articulated the principle, which dr. isenberg said was currently òthekey factor,ó in the late 1970s. while dr. raduchel and others might talk aboutdigitization and packetization as important, and while these were indeed necessary, a packetized, alldigitized network could still be a vertically integrated,the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications69stovepiped, closed network. to open up the network the endtoend principle isneeded. indeed, he asserted, the endtoend principle had been directly responsible for all killer applications of the previous decade, some of which he listed:email, ecommerce, web browsing, instant messaging, blogging, audio over ip,and internet telephony. not one among them had been invented by a stovepiped,verticallyintegrated network provider like a telephone company or a cable company. rather, each had been brought to market as an application on top of a stupidnetwork. the n10 network allowed future applications to be discovered.ôany application over any networkõconsidering the formulation òany application over any network,ódr.isenberg shifted focus from the first part of the phrase to the second, theòflipside,ó as he termed it: òover any network.ó he presented a second list comprising twisted pairs, coax, cat 5/6, fiber, hybrid fiber wireless (hfw), licensedwireless, unlicensed wireless, new wireless modulation techniques, and new wireless architectures. and, he said, more physical layers and new architectures alikeremained to be discovered. evoking the image of an hourglass, he placed theòcornucopia of applicationsó in the top, the internet protocol at the middle, andany network in the bottom.the result, said dr. isenberg, is physical diversity, which avoids dependence onone set of infrastructures such as ss7. the disadvantages of such dependencewere illustrated by the notorious incident in 1990 when a switch generic that wasmissing a semicolon caused a lengthy interruption of telephone service duringwhich tens of millions of calls were blocked. òphysical diversity is the only routeto absolute network reliability,ó he stated, òand you only get physical diversitywith the endtoend network.ó again, it had not been telephone or cable companies that had developed the most effective of these networks: internet, ethernet,and unlicensed wireless. moreover, future network technologies remained to bediscovered.disrupting the telco business modeldr. isenberg then offered a brief and, he said, somewhat oversimplified overview of how the n10 network disrupts the telephone companyõs business model(see figure 14). alerting the audience to what he termed the crux of his presentation, he explained: òthe ôstupidõ network, the endtoend network, makes itimpossible for the telephone company to sell anythingñit is left with nothing tosell other than commodity connectivity.ó describing the òoldó model, he said thatwhen a telco set up a call, it touched every element in every network. òthisallowed the owner of network c, for example, to introduce cool features so peoplewould prefer it to bad old network b, which didnõt have the features.ó in the new,internetworked model, it was the internet protocolõs job to make all that wasthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70the telecommunications challengefigure 14how endtoend disrupts.expense(subsidized byapplication)expense(subsidized by application)monthlyincomephysical layer: designed for voicenetwork layer: designed for voiceapplication: voicetelco modelnetwork layer: internet protocolbig question:whatõs the(business?)(operating?)modelcommonsproduct &serviceincomeinternetworking modelapplication: data, voice,video,. . . anything!physical layer:nonspecificendtoendconnectivity specific to a single network disappear and to permit only those things common toall networks to come to the surface. since the internet ignores whatever is specificabout a single network, including the features that had formed the basis ofcompetition, features lose relevance in an internetworked world.coming at the same point from another angle, dr. isenberg said that in thestovepiped, verticallyintegrated model a telephone or cable company soldtheapplication and then subsidized the underlying layers with the applicationrevenue. in an internetworked model users still buy the application, which stillproduces income; this is something the industry knows how to do. but as theapplications rest upon a commons, the internet, a òbig questionó remains: òwhatis the business or operating or functional model to get the physical connectivity?ófuture of the network: four scenariosas a prelude to sketching four scenarios for the future of the network,dr.isenberg characterized the status quo. the last mile was no problem anymore,as customers had 100megabit, even gigabit lans in their homes. nor was theprice of technology a problem, as these lans were available for $39 at officesupply stores. rather, the current hitch was located òin the middle of the network,ó at the level of access (see figure 15): òiõve got a gigabit in my macintoshsitting over there useless, because i canõt connect at a gigabit.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications71figure 15 connectivity today.backbone(terabits)customer(gigabit lan)telco/cableco accessunder the first of the four scenarios, competition as envisioned by the telecommunications act of 1996, a variety of pipes was to go into the home (seefigure 16). the result, as described by dr. isenberg: òmultiple players and everybody loses.ó the fundamental assumption of the 1996 act was, as he characterized it, that thanks to the marketõs òmagic hand,ó competition would do whatregulation could not. but he and others, among them roxanne googin, believedthat if the middle of the network was empty and the only thing occurring therewas the movement of bits back and forth, one was dealing in a pure commodityand it was very hard to have anything to sell. once a telephone company, or afiber company for that matter, had sold one fiber to a user, it would never sell thatsame user another. for, with more technology coming next year, the user wouldbe able to light the fiber twice as fast then, and even more technology would becoming the year after that. after the initial sale, therefore, the fiber vendor wouldbe out of business. this gave rise to a paradox: in order to survive in the competitive world of the òbest network,ó telephone companies would have either tocripple the network or to cripple competition.scenario two represented the future according to the telephone companies(see figure 17). òit is todayõs ôofficialõ future,ó said dr. isenberg, òif you getaround the fact that when they say ôcompetition,õ what they really mean isôcompetition where iõm the competitor.õó while there would be a modicum ofimprovement, far less bandwidth would be available than technology would allowor than was available in other technologically advanced countries. besides acrippled network, this scenario featured crippled competition: municipalitieswould not be allowed to compete, for example, and clecs (competitive localexchange carriers) would have been driven out of business.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72the telecommunications challengefigure 16 scenario #1: competition (as envisioned by 1996 telecom act).figure 17 scenario #2: telcotopiañthe òofficial future.óbackbone(terabit)customermultiple playerseverybody losesbackbone(terabit)customer3gtelcos bring a littleimprovementbut with crippled technology and crippled competitionentertaining a forbidden thought: monopolyscenario three, which he called òrethinking ônatural monopoly,õó wasòpolitically incorrect,ó dr. isenberg acknowledged, although he added: òwhat thehell.ó he averred that the bell system had, for 50 years, given the united stateswhat was arguably the worldõs best telephone system, albeit a vertically integratedone. he proposed, therefore, determining what the current natural monopoly wasand whether something useful could be based on it (see figure 18). pointing outthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications73backbone(terabit)customera wiselyrun, wellregulated monopoly that gets itfigure 18 scenario #3: reregulationñrethinking ònatural monopoly.ófigure 19 scenario #4: customertopia.that monopolies in themselves are not illegal but only become illegal when theyengage in certain behaviors, he posited that a monopoly might be crafted that waswisely regulated, well run, and public spirited.under the fourth scenario, technology will become so good that customerswould simply build and own the network (see figure 19). òweõll go down to thenetworks ôrõ us, buy a network device, plug it in, and be on the network.ó therewere reasons to believe, dating back to tim shepherdõs famous mit thesis in1995, that this was within the scope of current technology.backbone(terabit)customerowned networkstake over the access businesswired and wirelesscustomersthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74the telecommunications challengespeculating on what a future telecommunications act might mandate,dr.isenberg concluded with the following questions: òwill we be locked into anôeverybodylosesõ situation, or a ôtoolittletoolateõ situation, where the unitedstates loses its global leadership? or will we manage to come up with some kindof monopoly at the very lowest layers, perhaps a monopoly that just strings fiberbut doesnõt light it? or will we encourage the kind of technology whereby wedonõt even need a company to run our networks for us?ódiscussioncynthia de lorenzi introduced herself as chief executive officer of patriotnet,an independently owned internet service provider (isp), and as a representativeof the washington bureau for isp advocacy (wbia), an organization made upof òthe abundant small isps who helped grow the internet.ó she asked advice onwhat message she might take back from the symposium to her colleagues atwbia, to the clecs (competitive local exchange carriers) they worked with,and to others who, she said, òhelp drive this industry.ó voicing the claim that thesmall isps were actually the doorway to innovation, she asked what their futurewas and whether it was òtime for all of us independents to go away.ódr. isenberg stated that òif nothing else gets done and the current policydirections are carried out,ó the industry was moving towards a reverticalization inwhich it would makes sense only for connectivity providers to be isps. agreeingthat small isps were òvery proinnovation,ó he said he shared her worry.dr. jaffe, recalling technical challenges he had outlined concerning quality,security, reliability, understanding of users, providing privacy, and so on,remarked that there were many open issues in the next generation of network.innovative service providers large and small would likely have a very importantroleñòintroducing the necessary enhancements in an entrepreneurial wayóñandhe would, he said, encourage the small isps to look at such things as ways ofproviding òa better voip solution than the next guy.ó there would be a great dealof competition in that area, he predicted.transportation a substitute for bandwidth?jay hellman, who introduced himself as òa real estate developer with toomuch of a technology education to think like one,ó indicated that the theme of hisquestion would be the relationship between transportation and communication.office buildings, which he had been in the business of constructing, and computers are not nearly as different as they appear, he postulated. office buildingswere invented as a tool for what was then a new kind of work: processing andcommunicating information. òthe office building,ó he explained, òwas an information processing factory, and the paradigm was paperbased manual labor.ówhile it was a familiar fact that location is of paramount importance in real estate,the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.new technology trends and implications75he stated, òthe technology that defines location is transportation.ó it was a pointso obvious that one rarely thought about it: the easier it is to get there, the morevaluable the location is.turning to communications, mr. hellman said that he had been led to start atelecommunications company by his frustration with the attempts of existingtelecom companies to pass off dsl and cable modems as broadband. his conclusion, he said, had been that the last mile of the broadband network was neithercopper nor coax; it was asphalt. òwhen you need bandwidth,ó he explained,òyou get in your car and go there,ó stating that those in attendance had traveled tothe symposium òfor bandwidth.ó although personal, facetoface meetings wereundeniably of value, they were overused, with the consequence that the transportation network was òin complete congestive overload.ó a possible factor in thiswas the principle enunciated by dr. jaffe: no matter how much bandwidth peoplehave, they want more.it was in light of the relationship between communication and transportation,mr. hellman said, that he hoped the panel might address the issue of regulation.putting fiber into the home and making sure that it functions is a business, and itneeds to be a profitable business. but, comparing it to the building of streets, hesuggested that in the interest of ensuring a fair rate of return, it òought to be aregulated business, almost like the real at&t.ó carrying the analogy further, helikened the duo of fiber and services to that of the public thoroughfare and suchservice companies as ups and fedex that use it to compete; it was desirable, headded, that the street be as accessible to as many people as possible. what did thepanelists think, he asked, of the contention that the last mile of the network shouldbe not competitive but regulated, yet that it needed to provide significant bandwidth and to be ubiquitous?networks in the hands of customersdr. isenberg, acknowledging that mr. hellman was òonto something,ó namedtwo òantidotesó to the kind of regulation he had spoken of: (1) technologicaldecline and continuation of business as usual, and (2) the development of technologies that allow customers to own their own networks. he called mr. hellmana òpretty good exampleó of the latter, since he had started a telephone companyafter being unable to contract for the telecommunications services he needed.dr.isenberg hoped that the regulatory situation would, he told mr. hellman,òencourage people like you to do your own thing,ó adding that he was òon theright track as far as thinking about the larger, more generic solution.óbut regarding another of mr. hellmanõs points, that there was no such thingas too much bandwidth, dr. isenberg cautioned that telephone companies wouldtake exception. òif they served up too much bandwidth, then they wouldnõt haveanything to sell,ó he stated, arguing that òtelephone companies make their profitbased on scarcity.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76the telecommunications challengetoward more sophisticated price indexesdave wasshausen of beaõs national accounts staff registered his agreementwith dr. doms that having good price indexes for hightech communicationsequipment, computers, and software, is vitally important to measuring real investment in the national accounts. while admitting that his colleagues generally usedthe producer price index in their work, he noted that they were receptive to workon indexes being done by academics and in the private sector, and he pointed outthat they had incorporated dr. domsõs work into their price indexes for lanequipment, switch gear, and other types of hightech equipment. such symposiaas the present one were very important to him and his colleagues, as they wantedto learn more about how to measure such equipment. finally, recalling dr. domsõallusion to the budget constraints under which statistical agencies found themselves, he agreed that bea had to prioritize. from his own perspective, the highestpriority at that moment was price indexes for software; this matter had beentreated at the step boardõs symposium of february 2004, which he planned torevisit.dr. myers, returning to dr. jaffeõs comments on the demise of basic researchwithin corporations, observed that great basic research laboratories had beencreated and supported by monopolies. in addition to the at&t and ibmmonopolies, there had been a xerox monopoly and, for a number of years, amonopoly held by dupont. given the contemporary consumeroriented, marketfocus, he said, it was unlikely that a government monopoly would be created.òthe only monopoly i envision occurring would be a ômarket monopoly,õó hesaid, pointing to the òwinteló monopoly reigning in personal computing as anexample. expressing his doubt that this monopoly had created the kind of basicresearch evoked by dr. jaffe, he asked for the latterõs comments.new models for basic researchdr. jaffe praised the government for doing an òoutstanding jobó in fundingfundamental research within the university systemña role identified over half acentury before. as the nation moved toward having fewer natural monopolies, hesaid, it needed a way of funding basic research in the commercial sector, whichòbrings a different perspective than the university system.ó that challenge wascurrently being studied by a panel of the national research councilõs computerscience and telecommunications board, whose report was due out early in 2005.led by bob lucky, the panel was to consider the dimensions of telecommunications research and, in addition, the models that might be appropriate for it.dr. myers expressed the step boardõs appreciation to the panelists.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.77panel iiñññññññññññññññññññññthe broadband opportunity:what needs to be done?introductionkenneth flammuniversity of texas at austinconvening the panel, dr. flamm offered introductory remarks focusing onthe areas it was to consider. the first of these concerned the definition of broadband, and, specifically, the speed of transmission to which the term properlyapplied. discussion by the previous panel of the united statesõ slipping behind inpenetration rates for òsomething called, quote, broadband,ó he said, had failed toacknowledge that what qualified as broadband had been changing as well. someof the countries that were pulling ahead of the united states in penetration rateswere also offering higher quality, faster broadband connections. the fcc used200 kilobits per second (kbps) as its threshold speed for broadband. he pointedout, however, that according to this definition, the variation between fast broadband and slow broadband was greater than an order of magnitudeñand thus substantially wider than the variation between slow broadband and low speed dialup,since the former was only four times faster than the latter. òincreasingly,ó he said,òwhat broadband is, and the quality of broadband service, are going to be animportant issue.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78the telecommunications challengebroadband access: a rapidly changing landscapea second area, broadband access, had been an issue for many years in theunited states, but data that the fcc had been collecting on broadband availabilityhad shown that the landscape was changing very rapidly and that it might nolonger be an issue. at present, highspeed service was available in around 86percent of zip codes containing 99 percent of the u.s. population, and approximately 40 percent of u.s. internet households connected with broadband (seefigure 20). òso the question is,ó dr. flamm said, òif the definition of broadbandis one issue, and broadband access is no longer really an issue, what are theissues?ó the panel, he anticipated, would focus on pricing and on competition.the latter, as measured by the number of providers per zip code, had changedrapidly over the previous four years (see figure 21). still, there remained manyzip codes where the traditional duopolyñmade up of the telephone companyand the local cable companyñwere the sole providers of broadband services.he would take advantage of the occasion, dr. flamm said, to bring up whathe called a òvery important data issueó and to make a plea for funding. in 1999and 2000, the bureau of labor statistics had sponsored a survey sampling u.s.figure 2099 percent of population now has at least 1 provider in their zip code:populationweighted distribution of zip codes by number of broadband providers.01ð3456789101112131415161718192005101520253035404550percent of populationnumber of providersjune 2000december 2003the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?79figure 21rapid change in u.s. broadband penetration, competition over four years:distribution of zip codes by number of broadband providers.note: fcc numbers have been corrected to reflect undercounting of rural zip codeswith zero providers; corrections probably somewhat overestimate zip codes with zeroproviders.households that collected data on broadband prices. the question on broadbandprices had been discontinued in 2001, but why? his guess was that broadband washeld to be less important then than it had been in 1999 and 2000. òthere are someissues of priority in our statistical datacollection efforts,ó he declared, òthat needto be addressed.ódr. flamm then introduced the panelõs first speaker, charles ferguson, whomhe billed as òinteresting and often provocative.ó dr. ferguson had left mit tobecome one of the founders of vermeer technologies, where he had participatedin the creation of a software technology that had subsequently become known asfrontpage. vermeer, like quite a few successful startups, had been acquired subsequently by microsoft, and frontpage was being sold as part of the microsoftoffice suite. as a result of the sale of the company, dr. ferguson held a fairamount of microsoft stock; he declared, however, that he had no financial interestin any telecommunications provider.01ð3456789101112131415161718192005101520253035404550percentnumber of providersjune 2000december 2000june 2003december 2003the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80the telecommunications challengethe broadband problem:market failures and policy dilemmascharles h. fergusonthe brookings institutiondr. ferguson said that his talk would address three issues:1.the size of the problem that the united states was facing in the broadbandarea, which, as others had stated, was quite substantial;2.why that problem existed; and3,what could be done about it.he began with two points of presumed general understanding and agreement: that a rapid dematuring of traditional analog consumer electronics wastaking place; and that, technologically at least, the potential existed for dematuringof the analogue telecommunications industry, which had previously been dominated by telephone service. further, he postulated that a majority in the information technology industries would substantially agree on what the òradiant futureóshould look like, remarking that, in a few sectors, this future had already beenreached.united states lagging in broadband penetrationdr. ferguson pointed, however, to an òenormous gapó existing between thisvision of the sectorõs potential and its actual state, particularly in the united states.and perhaps of foremost interest, he said, was the extent of the gap between theunited states and other nations. those who had visited chinaõs large coastalcities in the previous two years understood the u.s. lag; the same was true forthose who had been to south korea, japan, taiwan, or other parts of industrialized asia, as this gap was very obvious.to illustrate, he posted graphics highlighting yearold data with the comment(see figures 22 and 23): òas mr. isenberg mentioned a few minutes ago, thingshave gotten substantially worse since then.ó these figures showed that, as of late2003, dsl penetration per 100 telephone lines had reached 27.7 in that categoryõsleading nation, south korea. the united states, which was not in the worldõs topten, had only 4.8 dsl subscribers per 100 phone lines and trailed china, whichwas at 5.1. moreover, when it came to the absolute number of dsl lines, bothchina and japan had surpassed the united states, which, dr. ferguson conjectured, had likely fallen in the intervening year from third place to sixth or seventh.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?81figure 22dsl penetration by countryñi.figure 23dsl penetration by countryñii.10.919,962,0722,170,243canada1011.82,850,000336,600finland912.33,100,000380,000israel812.61,927,200242,000singapore712.73,739,247473,481denmark614.471,149,00010,272,052japan515.45,132,427789,677belgium418.03,842,943690,000hong kong321.413,099,4162,800,000taiwan227.723,257,0006,435,955south korea1dsl per 100 phone lines 31 december 2003telephone lines 2001/02(itu)dsl subscribers31 december 2003countryglobal ranking31 december 20035.21,820,230uk1010.92,170,243canada98.32,280,000italy821.42,800,000taiwan79.63,262,700france68.44,500,000germany527.76,435,955south korea44.89,119,000usa314.410,272,052japan25.110,950,000china1dsl per100 phone lines31 december 2003dsl subscribers31 december 2003countryglobal rankingthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82the telecommunications challengeslow growth holding united states backaccounting for this drop were growth rates. the total u.s. growth rate fordsl lines, both in absolute number and in penetration per telephone line, wassomething on the order of 40 percent, with the rural growth rate at about twicethat. dr. ferguson acknowledged that the cable telephone system still providedthe majority of u.s. residential broadband connections; he contended, however,that that did nothing to change the overall picture. in the first place, he explained,when business connections were included, the percentage of total u.s. broadbandconnections provided by the cable telephone system was relatively low. in thesecond place, even in the residential market the percentage of connections provided by the cable system had been holding roughly constant, as had the cablesystemõs growth rate in respect not only to connections but also to bandwidthlevels.price/performance another u.s. weaknessin fact, although the u.s. cable television system had been improving itsbandwidth levels slightly faster than had the u.s. telephone system, the pricetoperformance ratio for broadband services abroad was enormously superior to thatin this country. depending on the nation and the service being compared, othernations were outpacing the united states by between 2 and 15 times. and the gapwas growing rapidly, because u.s. price/performance in local telecom servicesñnot only in digital services like dsl and local broadband, but also in voice telephony and such related services as voice mail and caller idñwas, òquite astonishingly,ó roughly flat. the total local telephone bill in the united states was flator even increasing, a surprising fact in that the underlying technology for all suchservices is computingñwhich was improving, depending on the technology being measured and the measurement being used, anywhere between 20 percent and50 percent per year. alluding to dr. domsõs discussion of the increase in thecapacity of fiberoptic cable deriving from increases of both the number of channels and the capacity of each channel, dr. ferguson said the technological improvement was, in some cases, as high as 100 percent per year.both dsl and cablemodem service, however, had displayed very low ratesof progress. on top of that, the benefit that those broadband services had provided relative to that a simple modem could provide had turned out to be, indr.fergusonõs words, òsurprisingly modest.ó modem technology had improvedat a rate of around 40 percent per year until reaching its limits at 56ð60 kbps;modem service, he pointed out, was òto a first approximation, symmetric.ó it hadthen taken several years for consumer dsl services to be introduced, and theyhad been relatively expensive upon introduction; furthermore, they are asymmetric,something he called ònot accidental.ó the result, combining all those factors, wasan annual improvement in the price/performance of bandwidth of some 10ðthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?8315percent yielded by either dsl or cablemodem service. not only was this ratealready far below that which the technology curve should have been providing,but it seemed to be in the process of slowing even more.bandwidth costs dominantdr. ferguson commented further that bandwidth rather than computer hardware frequently dominated the total cost of adoption of a new networkcomputingapplication. personal computers were powerful and cheap, but deploying a highperformance, highquality videoconferencing system could nonetheless proveextremely expensive. purely for purposes of illustration, he posited the use of t1service, whose price/performance, he pointed out, had improved very slowly if atall over the previous several years. if two t1 lines were required for pointtopoint connections between two personal computers, over a three or fouryearperiod the total costs of using that service would be completely dominated bybandwidth costs.competition in u.s. markets flawedwhat was the reason for this? while allowing that in various respects regulatory costs imposed on the entire system accounted for some degree of drag, thiswas ònot the principal storyó in dr. fergusonõs opinion. very simply, he stated,there were two monopoly industries providing broadband service in the unitedstates, both had very severe conflicts of interest, and they avoided competingwith each other except in the residential market. and even in the residentialmarket, their competition with one another was òquite restrained, and much lesssubstantial than you might suspect.óthe conflict of interest of the telephone companies was, dr. fergusonasserted, òfairly obviousó: they had incumbent businesses that were providingvery expensive voice and traditional data services, and very rapid improvementsin price/performance of bandwidth would have undercut their dominant businesses in a major way. the same was true of the cable system: it provided videoservices that could easily be provided over a sufficiently highperformance ipnetwork.additional conflicts of interest in both industries related not only to internettelephony but also to intellectual property rights and to proprietary intellectualproperty control. this was particularly so of the cable television industry, whichhad many proprietaryentertainment and other content assets. it was very afraidof the effects of piracy, and one consequence was that cable operators wanted toprovide downstreamweighted services, because òupstream service is what determines piracy levels when youõre using peertopeer networks,ó dr. fergusonstated. cablemodem service, like dsl, is a very asymmetric service and heavilyweighted downstream; and the reason that the telephone companies preferredthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84the telecommunications challengedownstreamweighted is that symmetric service would make it far easier to useinternet telephony.ôlocal bandwidth bottleneckõ hurts computingdistortions existed in both industries, he said, and not only about serviceõsprice/performance but also about its technical characteristics, its quality levels,and the degree to which it was symmetric. he judged the economic stakesinvolved in this question to be òquite largeó for the country. while computingthem in a rigorous way would be extraordinarily difficult, it seemed increasinglyclear that the òlocal bandwidth bottleneckó was having a substantial effect on thegrowth of the computer industry, of various other portions of the informationtechnology hardware sector, and of the american economy. òyou can convinceyourself reasonably easily,ó he stated, òthat this effect is something on the orderof onehalf of 1 percentñor even up to 1 percentñper year in lost productivitygrowth and gnp, which is a lot.óthis obviously had some effect, although it was not clear how substantial, onamerican job losses, dr. ferguson said, alluding to the prevailing debate overoutsourcing. there was no question that broadband infrastructure was having asignificant effect on the way industry was growing in china and southeast asia.while india had traditionally been far, far behind in telecommunications infrastructure and was still far behind both the rest of asia and the united states, evenit was gaining rapidly: although from a very, very low base, the number of broadband connections in india was going up quite rapidly, on the order of 300 percentper year.broadband shortcomings hurt national securityin addition to the direct economic effects, there were quite significant nationalsecurity effects arising from forgone opportunity and capability in the broadbandsystem under which the united states was laboring, dr. ferguson said. first, anymajor terrorist emergency, such as an attack that used weapons of mass destruction, would undoubtedly result in major quarantines and disruption of transportation systems. it would be imperative for many people to be able to talk to eachother and understand each otherõs concerns at high bandwidth across wide geographical distances and with impaired mobility; the utility of a nationwide broadband system in such a situation is obvious. then, in light of recent events in thepersian gulf, one might also ask about the impact of reduced transportationdemand on oil prices, oil security, and so forth. òonce again,ó he said, òone canconvince oneself that the issue here is really quite substantial.óto whatever extent the united states faced a problem of òdigital divideóñdisparity in broadband, internet, and computing access as a function of economicability and economic statusñthat problem was also coming to be increasinglythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?85dominated by the bandwidth question. the reason here, again, was that bandwidth dominated the total cost of adoption of new computing applications.can policy changes help united states?how, then, might the united states attempt to address this question, whichwas of such macroeconomic and military significance? the nations that wereahead of the united states, in what they had done in the broadbandpolicy arena,had evidenced two shared characteristics. the first was that their governmentshad been òmuch more heavily involved in providing incentives and/or moneyand/or direct construction of networks than is the case in the united states,ódr.ferguson said. the second, also related to governmental policy, was that theirsystems were much more competitive than that of the united states. there mightbe many more providers, but even when there was a relatively low number, theproviders were under government pressure to improve their price/performanceand to compete with each other.this was true even where there was no explicit antitrust policy. certainlynone existed in china, but the chinese government obviously had made veryclear to the countryõs principal telecommunications providers that broadbanddeployment was a major national priority and had put them under a great deal ofpressure to continue accelerating it. the case was similar in japan and korea, andeven in nonasian countriesñcanada, for instance, and the scandinavian countriesñthat had surged well ahead of the united states.dr. ferguson cited as a òsomewhat hopeful recent developmentó the fccõsunanimous vote to preempt regulatory control of voice over ip, òso at least therewill not be a patchwork of 50 different state regulations of internet telephony.óhe charged, however, that the united states had been ònotably absent from productive efforts in regard to broadband for quite some time.órbocsõ consolidation ôa major mistakeõthis was not specific to the bush administration, he said, although he gave itlower marks than its predecessor did. what had begun to undermine the potentialbenefits of the telecommunications act of 1996 in a significant way was theseries of mergers among regional bell operating companies that had effectivelyhalved their number to four.3 òthat consolidation was unopposed by the fcc andby the justice department,ó dr. ferguson observed, commenting: òthat, i thinkin retrospect, was a major mistake.ó a great deal of litigation had followed, andthere had ònot been much effort by the federal government and/or the fccñ3while consolidation among rbocs may have eliminated a source of potential competition, theissue of whether it eliminated actual competition and whether potential competition was likely orunlikely to begin with remains to be resolved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86the telecommunications challengedepending on whether you want to differentiate between the twoñto ensure thatthere is a competitive, openarchitecture system.ónonetheless, he did not see new legislationñeven if it might be helpful inproviding what he called òappropriate broadband policyóñas necessary. whatwas required instead was òsome kind of national political will.ó this could openthe door to a range of measures, among which might be:¥subsidizing deployment of municipal networks;¥offering investment incentives to any and all providers, whether public orprivate;¥constructing a large federal network; and¥putting more pressure on incumbents to open up their networks so thatthere was an openarchitecture broadband system in the united states that wasmore analogous to the structure of the internet itself.calling this last point critical to the future of network architecture andservices, he called for a òfar more openarchitecture, computerindustrylikestructure and feeló for the u.s. telecommunications system.commoditization no enemy of investmentin closing, dr. ferguson questioned mr. isenbergõs suggestion that, since thenetwork logically anticipated for the future would function as a commodity provider of bits, industry would likely be averse to committing to sufficient levels ofinvestment and research. the history of the computer industry did not supportthat proposition, he claimed, and neither did the behavior of those asian andeuropean nations with broadband service superior to that available in the unitedstates. on the contrary, most sectors of the computer industry were composed oflarge companies that produced commodity products in brutal competition. whilethere were a few notable, very profitable exceptionsñhe named intel andmicrosoftñmore typical as examples were dell, hewlettpackard, most of ibm,most of the semiconductor industry, the entire diskdrive industry, the displayindustry, and so on.òdisk drives are like disk drives, bits are like bits, drams are like drams,óhe stated. òand while those industries are volatile, one does not see any hesitancyfor entry or investment. indeed, competition in those sectors is quite healthy.ó ifthere were an appropriate government policy, he concluded, it would be reasonable to expect that levels of investment and technological progress in the industrywould be sufficient.dr. flamm, asking the audience to hold its questions, recessed the panelõsproceedings until after lunch.resuming the session after the lunch break, dr. flamm introduced markwegleitner, the chief technology officer of verizon, as the only one among thethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?87panelõs distinguished speakers about whom the previous presenter, dr. ferguson,had had many good things to say in his recently published book.the broadband challenge:a telecom perspectivemark a. wegleitnerverizonmr. wegleitner expressed his appreciation at having the opportunity to speakabout a subject that his company was pursuing with great vigor, spurred by aconviction apparently shared by many at the symposium: that broadband could bean engine for growth. there were two dimensions to broadbandõs contribution.one was in the capital investment required to build a network and the multipliereffect that could be expected to have on growth, jobs, and innovation. obviously,however, the investment was not an end in itself; the second dimension, at least asenvisioned by verizon, was the stimulation to the economy, as well as the socialgood, that would come of having a broadband network available.although the united states had traditionally been a leader both in communications and in attracting capital, it had not been holding onto that leading positionof late. mr. wegleitner displayed a chart based on international telecommunication network (itu) data that showed the united states to be thirteenth in theworld in broadband deployment. while acknowledging that there were òlots ofways to spin numbers,ó he stated that the conclusion to be drawn was òthat wearenõt leading in what we have to perceive as one of the key technologies for anynational economic environment going forward.óricher applications in broadbandõs futurebut a question underlay this last assumption: what did we think broadbandwas actually going to do for people? mr. wegleitner named applicationsñemail,instant messaging, basic web browsing, small file transferñwhose requirementscould be met by current broadband access technologies. such familiar applications, although important, could almost be characterized as modest. true twoway videoconferencing and gaming, as well as voice over ip, were the next stepup the ladder, but they would not in themselves exercise a huge demand on broadband. further along, however, lay multimedia web browsing, distance learning,and telemedicine. even beyond those would come immersive gaming and whatever means of information and entertainment delivery were to come after highdefinition television: 5megabit and 9megabit pixel tv, 3d tv, and/orholographics.òwe know that the bandwidth demands are just going to continue to growand grow and grow,ó said mr. wegleitner. with the richness of the future applithe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88the telecommunications challengecations he had listed would come a great deal of complexity, and it was complexity that, in the world of networking, drove broadband. but while it was certainthat more bandwidth would be needed over the coming two to ten years, no onecould predict with great accuracy how much. displaying a graph in which broadband requirements on the yaxis were plotted against historical time on the xaxis,he said that the middle of the scaleñwhere cablemodem and dsl technologyoperated in the 3 to 5megabit per second (mbps) rangeñhad been reached (seefigure 24).verizon expanding fiber to the premisesin its fibertothepremises (fttp) deployment verizon had set 30 mbps asthe top offering for the present but was building for 100 mbps. òthe 100megabitbogey has been something that weõve been kicking around inside verizon forsome time now,ó mr. wegleitner remarked. the company believed that fiber allthe way to the home or business was the way to satisfy that, and that the home, asthe òtrue massmarket representative,ó was really the key. verizon had announcedfttp deployment in nine states, had begun it in texas, california, and florida,and had been building in the east coast states. the company hoped to be in over100 central offices by the end of 2004, and its target was to pass 1 million homes.figure 24more bandwidth: multimedia applications.768k ð5m(dsl / cm)bandwidth (bps)5m ð100m(fttp)richness and complexitytoday200x56k(dialup)voice over ipinstant messagingnetwork hosted softwarebasic web browsingemailsmall file transferaudio/video ondemandremotely managed itstreaming audio/videovery large file transferhidef video streaming/multicastingimmersive gamingmedia web browsingtelemedicinemultigamingdistance learningvideo conferencingthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?89mr. wegleitner listed four things that can be done with data: it can beprocessed, stored, displayed, or moved. there had been great advances in the firstthree, in accordance with the wellknown phenomenon of mooreõs law, as theindustry had gone into more and more complex applications. but remaining to beanswered was what could be provided in the form of network capability for thelast, the moving of data. the objective of verizonõs business was to make surethat it was not the bandwidth bottleneck in the movement of data, which was whyit had taken such steps forward as deploying fiber to the premises.the shape of the internet to comemr. wegleitner next asked what the internet would look like in 2008 andbeyond. would it remain a confederation, a descendent of the arpanet? orwould it be a more rigorously maintained interconnection of commercial networks? his prediction was that there would always be some holdover of theinternet, but that the latter would be much more in evidence. the requirementsfor services offered customers would be for such quality and scope that only theinterconnection of networks could provide it. because verizon customers wouldneed to talk to customers of time warner, comcast, or whomever else might bea provider for individual users of the network, a means of reliable interconnectionwould have to be available. the ability to provide service with a high level ofquality would depend on an infrastructure that would go beyond what the currentinternet could provide. òmaybe the internet in itself will morph into that,ó heallowed, although in his own view it was more likely to be based on òinterconnectionagreements between commercial providers with the purpose of satisfying theirown customer requirements.óanother reason this sort of commercial enterprise would underpin the countryõsfuture communications infrastructure was that a way had to be found to collectfor services. the hope was that scale would drive the cost of services downdramatically and that applications, despite their increased sophistication, wouldbe reasonably priced owing to the economics of the technology. still, there had tobe a billing system appropriate to what the providers were attempting to accomplish.verizon, mr. wegleitner explained, was building aggregation networks atthe metropolitan level. it was building core networkñip backboneñnationwide,and ultimately would build or interconnect internationally as well. motivating thecompany was the change taking place in the traditional telephony business; havingexperienced this firsthand, verizon had seen that, to be a successful communications company, it would have to change along with the business. the $12 billionverizon was spending annually in its capital program was, to the companyõsknowledge, the largest sum spent by any u.s. corporation and, perhaps, the largestin the world. òwhat we need to do collectively,ó he stated, òis ensure that verizonputs that in places that serve not only verizonõs interests but the interests of theu.s. communications infrastructure as a whole.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90the telecommunications challengetechnical, financial, regulatory changesthree sorts of changes were needed to make this work. the first was technical: there were standards for particular communications protocols that neededto be taken further. one such standard, multiprotocol label switching (mpls),had not really been developed to accomplish the commercial interconnection ofnetworks described by mr. wegleitner. equipment adhering to such standardshad to become available, and it had to be deployed in the network, and agreements had to be struck among the interoperating carriers. the second wasfinancial: a way had to be found to replace the existing òeconomic ecosystem,ówhich featured access charges, a universal service fund, and other artifacts ofòthe way we have been operating as a communicating nation over the courseofthe last 50 or more years,ó as he put it. to move forward, a new economicsystem that supported the new technology deployment was needed.the third was regulatory: while there were òany number of thingsó to beworked on in this arena, verizon was concerned about òincremental rulemaking,ówhich was the path being followed to move from the old regime to the new, withthe unsuccessful result that the rules were insufficiently clear. in some cases,mr.wegleitner said, investments of millions or even tens of millions of dollarsmight hinge on the interpretation of words that, while written only a few yearsbefore, were already technically obsolete. òitõs that interpretation that is going todetermine the path forward of the networkõs evolution,ó he commented. havingwhat he called òan unnecessarily complex regulatory environmentó didnõt makesense in that it discouraged investment. for an example, he turned to unbundlingrequirements governing broadband: although the rules had begun gaining someclarity not long before, they had earlier tamped down investment by companiesand, as a consequence, scared off prospective investments. while admitting thatsuch problems resisted simple solutions, he put forward what he called a òshortansweró: òlet the market rule.ó it was, he asserted, to a very light regulatorytouch that the wireless industry owed its phenomenal growth, great innovation,and very competitive environment.concluding, mr. wegleitner said he imagined he was joining all those presentin voicing the belief that broadband was the future. telcos such as verizon had avested interest in broadband, as it was a key part of their future technologystrategy. òwe have the capability to make things happen quicker with some clarityand a cooperative effort around the technological, financial, and regulatory thingsthat we think have to be settled going forward,ó he stated, adding: òthe rightenvironment here is the key.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?91a paradigm challenge:municipally owned fiberh. brian thompsonitown communicationsmr. thompson began by signaling that his views were not in accord withthose of the previous speaker and by warning that some of his statements mightbe òless than subtle.ó noting that he had joined mci in 1981, when competitionwas just beginning in u.s. telecommunications, he stated that many of the issuescurrent in 2004 had applied in the early 1980s as well. currently, the situation inthe industry was òbecoming increasingly untenable,ó he declared.providing a brief overview of his talk, mr. thompson said that he would:¥add his own negative assessment of the u.s. competitive position to thoseof several previous speakers;¥discuss the essential nature of broadband;¥take up what he called òthe real question,ó why current services were notgood enough, again a topic that had received attention from other presenters;¥address the current model of the industryõs fundamental structure, a matterhe highlighted as òimportantó; and¥discuss what he characterized as the need òto make a complete change inthe whole paradigm of how weõre approaching the marketplace and serving thecustomers.ódisplaying a chart illustrating broadband penetration by country that differedfrom that of mr. wegleitner only in its details, mr. thompson observed that theunited states was far from the top of the list and sinking rapidly (see figure 25).concern over inequality in infrastructure and access had prompted him to participate a decade earlier in forming the global information infrastructure commission, an organization whose relevance had only increased with time, since itwas no longer developing nations alone that had such problems. òwe have a hugeaccess problem in our own country,ó he stressed.broadband central to community developmentit was beyond question that broadband affected every aspect of a community: its economic activity, its development, its education, its delivery of healthcare and government services. broadband was also the driving force behind theindividual and social activity that people were willing to pay for, whether thatmeant information and entertainment media or òsimply talking to someone somewhere else.ó nations that had recognized this before it had been addressed withany effectiveness in the united states, and that had established more broadlythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92the telecommunications challengefigure 25u.s. continues to lose ground on broadband penetration.note: the comparison is limited in that it does not reflect the relative prices of dialupservices in various countries or reflect what percentage of the population has access tobroadband at home.source: itu internet reports, 2004.broadband subscribers per 100 inhabitants,1 january 2004ranging policies, had taken into account the issues of economic and communitydevelopment.broadband policy: an irish examplemr. thompson, an adviser to the irish government for the previous decade,recalled putting together two study groups, the latest of which had resolved toembrace a publicprivate partnership at the local level in the aim of stimulatingthe development of home broadband access within that country. this, in turn, wasexpected to generate òhugeó rewards in economic development, as well as topromote the entire communityõs technological and social development. the irishgovernment had chosen 19 towns of moderate size and provided funds on athe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?93revolving basis to entities that were willing to take new technologies into thosetowns and to establish òtrueó broadbandñònot dsl, not simple broadband, butvery high level broadband connectivity, both wireless and fiber.óthe government had committed itself, he said, to moving beyond what it haddone ten years before to attract the information infrastructure companies thathadbecome a fundamental part of irelandõs economy. it had recognized that thesefirms were no longer making and selling shrinkwrapped software but were shipping software out over the net. besides addressing this change, it had establisheda national science foundation as a tool for staying up with the state of the art andmaintaining the countryõs economic development. only three or four weeks previously, irelandõs population had gone over 4 million for the first time since1857, as people were returning to the country. mr. thompson likened irelandõsformer condition to that of many states in the united states, which had seenresidents leave for centers where they could get access to communications andinfrastructure.why arenõt current services ôgood enoughõ?he then turned to the question, also raised by preceding speakers, of whycurrent services were not ògood enough.ó for more than five years, the nationaland international backbones had had a capacity of 1 terabit on a single fiber;before leaving gts in europe, mr. thompson had put such capability in place. inthe united states, what had once more commonly been called the informationsuperhighway was still capable of handling such capacity easily; and, accordingto a chart he projected, a desktop or laptop computer could function at between 1and 3 gigabits per second (see figure 26). the problem, as the chart illustrated,was that there was not even 1 megabit of connectivity between the two. the dslconnection he himself used on a wireless basis at his home in rhode island wascapable of only 128 kilobits per second. expressing skepticism regarding claimsthat 30 mbps would be available on dsl, he declared: òthe fact of the matter is,thatõs our choke point.óthis came about because since 1983, when access became a concept, companies seeking access had never been able to get it in a way that allowed them tocompete.4 mr. thompson recalled that his former company, lci international,and bell atlantic had agreed in 1996 on the existence of òunbundled networkelements.ó through the telephone companiesõ leasing out their local plant atreasonable prices, access would be made available to all, and the telcosõ embeddedplant would not become stranded investment. but this agreement had òlastedabout as long as it took the signatures to dry on the page,ó and nearly a decade4current speeds are determined by the nature of competition as well as by the copper architecture oflegacy telecommunications systems.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94the telecommunications challengefigure 26why arenõt current services good enough?source: paul green, ftth council consultant.internal transfer speed desktop/laptop computer with todayõs hard drive13 gbpssymmetricalixc and metropolitan fiber network transmission speed per optical wavelength15 gbpssymmetrical~13 mbps asymmetricalcablemodem/ dslin last milecurrent copper wire based cable modem and dslòbroadbandótechnologies choke information transferaccess remains the weak link info superhighwaydesktop/laptoplater everyone that was involved in that process had retired from the former bellsystem, so that there no longer was anyone who understood what the basis of theagreement had been. but, more important, the agreement itself had been òanencroachment on the prerogatives of the incumbents, and therefore access wouldnot be uniform and it would not be ubiquitous.ó fcc approval ensuring that thatdidnõt happen had been granted about a month before. but juxtaposed to this hadbeen the fccõs decision of the previous week not to subject voice over ip toregulation by the states, which mr. thompson equated to òa decision to open upthe internet.ó at&t, meanwhile, had announced that it would no longer be alocal service provider but that òoh, by the way, they may be in the voice over ipbusiness in the future.ó while all this amounted to a very interesting process thatwould be worth following, access was, he emphasized, òthe weak link.ócurrent capabilities nowhere close to needmr. thompson then projected a chart that placed bandwidth requirements fora variety of residential broadband applications, both business and consumer,against the level of access generally available (see figure 27). current capabilithe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?95figure 27another view of restricted uses: residential applications/speed matrix.source: kim maxwell, residential broadband: an insiderõs guide to the battle for thelast mile, hoboken, nj: john wiley & sons, 1998.10,000mbps.01.11101001,000professionalconsumerentertainmentvideo conferencingresidential broadband applicationsremote lan accesshome shoppingtelemedicineelearningnet surfingvideo on demanddigital photographybroadcast videontschdtvcurrent cable and dsl networksties, including dsl networks, did ònot come anywhere nearó being able to providethe bandwidth necessary for broadcastquality television, let alone highdefinitiontv or even hdtv òon some compression basis,ó taking account a demand levelof three to four sets per home. to make a case for òbig broadbandó or òultrahigh broadband,ó he displayed a chart comparing the speeds of dialup, dsl/cablemodem, vdsl, 100megabit, and gigabit services (see figure 28). the lasttwo, he said, were òwhat we really need.óanother chart schematized the industry model then current (see figure 29).telephone companies had networks, while cable companies had headends withcapacity to connect to both residences and schools. there had been additions tothese capabilities: dsl in the case of the former, settop boxes in the case of thelatter. òbut what we still have,ó mr. thompson observed, òis the notion thatyouõve got to have your own network to compete.ó even though one often heardit acknowledged, including at the dayõs symposium, that òthe customer wants tobe able to buy on a reasonable basis what theyõre looking for,ó that need wasbeyond the current industryõs ability to fulfill. he called, therefore, for change:òitõs time that we recognized, as the irish have, that we should be in publicprivate partnerships to provide access networks.ó for access networks were not aònicetohaveó but a òrequiredó facility, instrumental to towns, states, and thenation in òcreating the kind of environment that they want to have for economicthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96the telecommunications challengefigure 28beyond the interim solution: what is the solution for òbigó broadband?56 kbpsdialup modemdsl/cable modem1ð3 mbps26 mbpsvdsl10baset ethernet100 mbpsgigabit ethernet1,000 mbpsthis is ultrahigh broadbandfigure 29current industry model: if you want to compete, bring your own network.residencesbusinessesheadendgovernmentschoolsinstitutionscable companytelephone companycentral officethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?97development to take place.ó in 1986 he had called in a speech for a òseconddivestiture,ó one that would allow the access network component to be separatedfrom the services being provided. ònow weõre at the place where, economically,it is viable and, technologically, all the pieces are in place.ófiber network as public utilityit was for this reason that around two years before, confident of having provided for his childrenõs future and eager to ògive something back,ó mr. thompsonhad formed itown. the company was òvery rapidlyó pursuing a strategy thatbegan with establishing ònot a central office serving a small community but acentral facility serving as a hub for a community of economic interests.ó the hubwould then provide access to a nonprofit publicprivate partnership that wouldserve as a utility, lighting the fiber but not providing any service on that fiberexcept those municipal services that the town or community chose to provide.the network would be open to any and all service providers with an ip basisñbethey telephone companies, cable companies, a microsoft, or somebody wantingto provide films or games. communities should choose to build networks just as,a century before, they had chosen to build roads, just as they chose to build sewersystems or any other element of essential infrastructure.itown could play its role of providing the network when there was no oneelse to do so in towns all over the country that were being either underserved or,in many cases, not served at all. the united states should change, mr. thompsonargued, such that it would bring existing technology to people rather than forcingthem to move in order to have access to it (see figure 30). the network hefigure 30open network architecture allows multiple service providers: all serviceproviders use network under same prices and terms.residencesbusinessescentral officegovernmentschoolsinstitutionsi town retailservice provider aservice provider bnonprofit fiber utilityforprofit competitorsthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98the telecommunications challengefigure 31where does the revenue come from?sources: *fcc data; **estimated from fcc data; ***ars, inc.% of totalòtriple playóhigh speed internetcabletotal telephonelong distancelocal w/featuresservice100138.7244.22***46.50**48.0012.00**36.00*avg. total cost ($)5373.7219.2221.5033.0012.0021.00service provider ($)4765.0025.0025.0015.0015.00access ($)access and service provider division of revenuedescribed would not only be open to all service providers, it would be used by allunder the same terms and at the same prices. the community would control thenetwork assets through a nonprofit, to which itown would provide professionalmanagement services.access charges approach service chargesitownõs creation was a response to the fact that òaccess charges, quoteunquote,ó incurred by customers in some cases far exceeded the service chargesthemselves. the national average for what was known in the industry as a òtripleplayóñthe purchase of internet, telephone, and cabletv services from the sameproviderñwas about $139 per month (see figure 31). of that, said mr. thompson,$65 per month was billed for òaccessó to a network òthat doesnõt cost anywherenear that amountó unless not only past amortization programs but also òall thecapital thatõs been invested in facilities that are no longer validó are figured intothe equation. displaying figures reflecting current average investment costs associated with building networks in communities of 62,250 and 27,500 inhabitantsthat provided a fiber link to every home, he noted that payback for the basic costwas projected within 10 to 13 years (see figure 32); these projections did notinclude the use of broadband wireless, which he expected would also enter themix in the future. he challenged the notion that such a fiber network would beobsolete within 10 years, saying the networks itown planned to build would haveògigabit and multiplegigabit capabilities.ó the model, he said, was economically viable and would offer a small town the ability, acting as a local utility, toprovide access with òtodayõs and tomorrowõs technology.óitown was making headway in its endeavors, which, however, were not new:90odd communities across the country had gone forward with one form orthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?99figure 32fttp networks in small communities financially viable.passedserved$1,162$2,325$997$1,995cost per fttp distribution and nid27,50062,250community size (population)breakevenselffundingredirected income11131012years to debt payback~35%3840%50+%2830%3840%50+%take rateand financial performance$20m$54.7mcash flow (10 years)$58.4m$121mdedicated access revenue (10 years)$20m$35mrequired investmentanother of fiber projects. as an example he offered utopia, an effort to buildnetworks in a number of utah communities, among which the city of provo wasbeginning to move ahead with an active network. only the previous week,mr.thompsonõs group had announced opportunity iowa, a new undertakinginvolving some 83 towns in the state that had gotten together to provide municipalnetworks; itown was working on similar projects in other states as well. òthewhole truth here is that we as a nation have got to move,ó he stated. òwe donõthave the time to take the next 20 years to get onethird of the households in thecountry on broadband capability.ó the consequence of delay would be the continuing erosion of the countryõs technological base and its ability to maintain itsleadership.the wireless wildcarddavid lippkehighspeed americaoffering an overview of his talk, mr. lippke said he would identify withinthe domain of wireless what he called òreal wireless broadbandó and state whatits current status was, what challenges it faced, and where it was going. he mightoffer some projections for its future as well.elusive definition of ôwirelessõthe term òwirelessó was very confusing. did it refer to a cell phone? to aphone in oneõs house? to radio frequency identification (rfid)? òwhat kind ofthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100the telecommunications challengebroadband are we talking about?ó was the questionñòif we are talking aboutbroadband at all.ó for the purposes of his presentation, mr. lippke specified,òwirelessó would refer to broadband wireless access (bwa), fixed wireless access(fwa), wireless isps (wisps) large and small, and metro area networks. leftout of consideration would be satellite access, indoor wireless such as wifi,cellular, or such technologies as 2g or 3g. the capabilities and speeds of theselatter wireless venues could be expected to converge eventuallyñaccording toprojections he had recently read, perhaps in around 25 yearsñbut, for themoment, he would limit his remarks to the former group of technologies.broadband, as mr. lippke was defining it, was characterized by access speedsof anywhere from 250 kilobits per second to 20 megabits per second, with theaverage probably running at round 1 mbps. the 250kbps rate could generally beattributed to artificial constraints, he said, explaining: òpeople can turn the bandwidth limits down and still get the money.ó also characteristic was low latency,not of the fiber type but anywhere from singledigit to a few tens of milliseconds.where such wireless broadband was available (and particularly in rural settings)it supplanted satellite, as people would always convert to it from satellite becauseits broadband quality was much higher than satelliteõs. it was being implementedusing wifi; although wifi was not designed for outdoor use, it was sometimesbeing applied outdoors, pushed up to 10 miles with directional antennas or proprietary protocols. the hubs, commonly pretty small, were often collocated onbusinesses or even residences; the cell radius would run anywhere from 1 mile to5 miles with exceptions at both ends. to illustrate, mr. lippke showed photographs of the installations that brought access to his own home. a flatpanel,highgain antenna that was mounted on a post near his house communicated withantennas on a mountain ridge a couple of miles off, providing around 1 megabitof connectivity with more available if it were selected.wireless broadband suppliers in fluxalthough admitting it was difficult to ascertain the true numbers, mr. lippkeplaced wireless broadband operators in the united states at 2,000 and called anestimate of between 500,000 and 1 million subscribers òsafe.ó one new operatorwas reputed to be òpopping upó per day nationwide, but òwhat you donõt know ishow many are dying each day,ó he said. such deployments were not, on average,very large, even if this was starting to change with the arrival of bigger players inthe market. while some operators, particularly in the midwest and other regionswith conducive terrain, boasted several thousand subscribers, others were miredat the level of 100ð300 and having a hard time reaching critical mass.to date, wireless broadband had been successful in the t1 and fractionalds3 replacement businesses; in both rural and urban areas, it had been able tocompete very strongly on both cost and speed of delivery. the general goal forthese providers was to have, say, 10mbps service turned up within 72 hours of athe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?101contractõs being signed. since this stood in stark contrast, both in timing and cost,to service òthat one might get from the phone company,ó mr. lippke said, òthis isa definite sweet spot for wireless.ó it had often been very successful as well inuncompeted rural markets, and even in competed smalltown markets with particularly conducive geography.spelling out the challengescurrent operators were facing a number of challenges:¥relatively high persubscriber costs: deployment, estimated at anywhere from $300 to $1,000 once hub costs were considered, was bumped up bythe high cost of installation, which generally required sending a truck to the site.¥technology churn.¥proprietary protocols: many of these were being used, as was wifi,which was not intended for this application.¥obstacle penetration limitations: the majority of frequencies designatedfor this spaceñand particularly for the unlicensed space, which was dominantñexperienced real problems with obstacle penetration. òtrees and buildings aredefinitely enemies,ó mr. lippke commented.¥accurate coverage forecasting: the latter problems led to difficulty predicting where there would and would not be coverage, which in turn could createinefficiencies. multiple visits to a site, not only for installation but also for surveypurposes, might be necessary; and there could be marketing backlash fromcustomers who had ordered the service only to discover that coverage wasinadequate.¥insufficient spectrum: this had been a particular problem at the lowerend of the scale, although there had recently been a fair amount of progress in the900mhz space, allowing penetration through trees and buildings. òitõs one thingwhen youõre talking to satellites and looking 30 degrees above the horizon,ómr.lippke noted, òbut itõs another thing entirely when youõre sitting on a rooftopand trying to make it to a tower three miles away that is only 100 or 200 feet tall.then, there are all sorts of obstacles to be considered.ó¥general scale issues: because of these operatorsõ small size and the concomitant lack of equipmentbuying volume, it was hard if not impossible forthem to provide a residential broadband product costing on the order of $25 or$30 per month.while such challenges remained, what had led mr. lippke to dub wireless aòwildcardó was the good news that recent progress had been considerable. òandin 2005 and 2006,ó he predicted, òweõre going to see potentially a real flashoverbuilding up.ó important to remember was that mooreõs law applied to wirelessno less than to other forms of telecommunications. an article in the ieeethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102the telecommunications challengespectrum of july 2004 had heralded a new law, òedholmõs law of bandwidth,óholding that wireless data rates were increasing at the same pace as telecom ratesin general, although displaced somewhat in time. wireless data rates would thusreach all the points through which data rates for traditional telecom had passed, itwas òjust a matter of what applications [were] going to be appropriate at whattimes.ó significant progress had also been shown by: softwaredefined radios;new antenna technologies, such as mimo, that had the effect of increasing distances and speeds; and, after many failed mesh attempts, there appeared to besome practical mesh occurring. moreover, a key need of mesh topologies, densityof initial deployment, was being affected by the fact that penetration in residentialmarkets was approaching 50 percent. òwhen the efforts originally failed,ómr.lippke recalled, òyou didnõt have near that density of potential customers.óand, as had been mentioned by previous speakers, efforts to increase the amountof spectrum, or to expand the rules for accessing existing spectrum, had also beenmeeting with success.wimax seen having strong impactbut probably the greatest impact in this space would derive from the fact thatthe wimax standard had arrived, and specifically the form for fixed and nomadicuse known as 802.162004. wimax had resolved a number of problems withexisting wireless protocols, particularly wifi. there was initial talk of 75mbpsspeeds going to 250 mbps, and, just in the previous days, articles that mentionedthe prospect of reaching gigabit speeds had begun circulating. other issuesoccupying the wireless world in the past had been qualityofservice (qos); jitteron the latency; and graceful loading characteristics (as the number of subscribersin a confined space increased, the networkõs performance gracefully degraded).moreover, wimax had support for a variety of new approaches to antennas andsignal processing.even more important, wimax itself was a certification mechanism for thestandard of 802.16, which would bring down deployment costs tremendously.since installation would no longer require truck rolls, its cost would approach thenorm for indoor installationñdipping ultimately below $200, with selfinstallationby customers possibleñso that deployment over a wide area would become verypractical. wimax could also help compensate for the fact that òwirelessó is anambiguous term by providing consumer marketers with a brand or label that couldact as a point of focus around which understanding could be built. mr. lippkeremarked that the number of articles on wimax had recently shot through theroof; he had seen a tally of 400plus articles in the second quarter of 2004, athreefold increase from the quarter before. òwimax truly is a silver bullet thatcan lead to sort of surprise attack with widearea wireless broadband,ó he said,adding that he rarely gives standards such accolades.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?103wirelessfiber hybridization gaining presencespeculating on òlikely futures,ó mr. lippke said that wimaxdriven servicescould come to dominate the space in small towns that was being dealt with eithermarginallyñby small cable operatorsñor not at all. service providers would beable to deliver at speeds as good as or better than cable and dsl, he predicted.observing that hybridization of wireless and fiber to the curb was already underway and that broadband over power line (bpl) was starting to get some traction,he claimed to have seen numerous bplbased business plans that would involvegetting òrelatively close to the consumer, then bridging around a number of problems once in close by going wireless from there.ó cable and telephone companieswould hybridize as well, but this was to be expected in bpl in particular. whilecontending that there was òa lot more hype than realityó to news of the creation ofcitywide wifi networks, which were having to cope with hitandmiss and scalingproblems, he said that wimax unlike wifi was a practical protocol for largerscale deployment and would make such networks a reality. although the questionof how such antenna and switching technologies would develop was unresolved,mr. lippke concluded that, owing to cost changes, wireless might well become athird tier that would compete with cable and dsl in tierone and tiertwo areas.u.s. cable: bringing the bits homemike lajoietime warner cablethanking dr. raduchel for inviting him to speak at the symposium, andremarking on how different the opinions had been on the complex topic underdiscussion, mr. lajoie said he wished to talk about the implications of convergence: what it was doing to the industries represented, what benefits it had forconsumers, how separate industries might want to address it, and how it might beconsidered from a regulatory perspective.ôrealõ convergence: not devices but contentthe òrealó convergence, mr. lajoie asserted, was not that taking placebetween the television and the pc or between the cell phone and the television. it was, rather the convergence of data, voice, video, wireless, publicnetworks, and private networks in an endtoend infrastructure that was increasing competition across all the industries. the economic rewards that arose fromthis competition would be what drove continued innovation, the advent of newservices, and increased broadband connectivity. consumers would benefit fromthis competition, but only if economic models continued to drive the investment.a related point that he deemed key as the networks expanded, connectivitythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104the telecommunications challengeincreased, and the availability of broadband became more and more the rule ofthe day, was digital rights management and the protection of copyright. for it wasimportant to ensure that there was interesting content to disseminate via thesenetworks and that the industries creating it survived as well.to illustrate his notion of convergence, mr. lajoie pointed to the way business had evolved at time warner cable (twc) over the previous decade. in1994 the company had offered only one product, multichannel video. five yearslater it was beginning to grow in digital video subscribers and had just startedrolling out residential highspeed data service. by 2004 the companyõs revenuemix had changed through growth in digital video and highspeed data, and it wasadding digital phone and commercial highspeed data as well.formerly discrete businesses overlappingsome would call the convergence of these industries the transformation ofold lines of business: where there was once òa big separationó between what thetelecom and cable industries did, with satellite a new entrant into the competition,ònow everybody is in everybody elseõs business.ó mr. lajoie posted the following list, saying it was òjust the beginningó of the businesses that were destined tooverlap, offering òsimilar kinds of productsó:¥cable tv¥internet¥private ip¥cellular¥ixc, clec, ilec¥wifi¥satellite¥consumer electronicscompetition was increasing, something he viewed in a positive light. whilerecent announcements that verizon and sbc planned to build fiber to the homeand compete with cable in television services might give some people at twcpause, he said, they represented òa good thing for all of us because itõs going tospur initial investment in the economy and drive new uses.ócable industryõs massive broadband investmentfocusing on cable, he noted that the u.s. industry had invested about $85billion in broadband infrastructure since 1996 òincremental to just businessasusualcapital investment.ó twc alone had, on that basis, invested $14 billion duringthe period. this eightyear figure paled, he admitted, in comparison to verizonõsinvestment, which came close to matching it on an annual basis; but in the latterõsthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?105case it represented the entire capital budget, while for twc it corresponded tospending on broadband alone. this investment had enabled time warner cableto deploy with unprecedented rapidity a variety of enhanced consumer services,including highspeed data (hsd) and highdefinition television (hdtv),launched in 1996; video on demand, launched in 2000; digital video recorders(dvr), launched in 2002; and digital telephone, launched earlier in 2004.as a result, the company had added almost 4 million hsd subscribers by thethird quarter of 2004 to pass between 18 million and 20 million homes, therebyeclipsing 20 percent penetration. by that time, it also had 389,000 subscribers tohdtv, 1.4 million to subscription video on demand (svod), and 709,000 to dvr.òthe investment in this infrastructure pays off for our customers because they geta wider choice of products to enjoy,ó said mr. lajoie, and it òpays off for us, aslong as the climate continues to be as effective for us to invest in as it has been.óin 2004 alone twc had launched digital phone service in 30 out of 31 divisions.displaying a timeline showing deployments of new services in the cableindustry (see figure 33), he pointed out that from 1948 to 1972, when paytvcame in, all it had to offer was video in the form of communityaccess television.its next big technological achievement, addressable settop boxes, dated to 1990.ònot much happenedó for the next six years, but then the industry deployed hybridfiber/coax networks and started offering quite a number of new products, withòmany, many more being designed and developedó all the time.welcoming rbocs to the tv marketthe announced entry of sbc and verizon into the tv market, he reiterated,was ògreató for the communications industry in general and for the multichannelfigure 33 new service deployments.19481948197219721990199019961998200220032004videovideopay pay tvtvaddressable addressable boxesboxesvod, svod, dvr, hddvr, hddigital digital phonephonemultimultiroom dvr, hsd dvr, hsd tieringtiering, , hddvrhsdhsddigital digital serviceservicethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106the telecommunications challengevideo industry in particular. òmore outlets for the delivery of these products toconsumers will bring nothing but more investment and a richer set of services,óhe explained, because òinvestment in network infrastructure is the key thing thatenables all of this.ó contesting the opinion of previous speakers, he said the pressurewould be on to open these networks to all comers, but he added: òperformanceneeds to be maintained.ó no model for additional revenue was in existence òforthose who want[ed] to hitch a ride over existing network infrastructure,ó he said,alluding to mr. thompsonõs itown venture. therefore, while the idea of communityowned networks was òinteresting,ó it would be òvery difficult to continue makingthe investment from that posture.ó meanwhile, new regulation would need to takeinto account both the convergence and the amount of investment taking place inthese industries, as well as to òprovide for economic incentives that [would]ensure continued innovation.ó as the current system òseem[ed] to be workingpretty well,ó change should be made only after careful deliberation.calling the management and control of private networks òcriticaló to maintaining the quality of service, mr. lajoie underlined that it was nonethelessimportant that private networks and public networks have robust methods forinterconnectivity and interoperability. this was being addressed, albeit slowly, instandards bodies, and it might be an area in which regulatory application òcouldactually help.ó integration into an interoperating communications infrastructurewould enhance the power of each of these networks. òthe more devices connected to the network, the more valuable it is,ó he explained, and òthe more interconnected networks there are, the more international or national value there is inthat infrastructure.ó over time, bandwidth and connectionsñthe industryõsprimary driversñwould tend to become increasingly commoditized. as a consequence, distributors would have to be able to add content, commerce, and otherrich communications elements to their offerings.consumersõ mobility steadily risingwireless was having an undeniable impact, mr. lajoie said, citing the trend,made so obvious by subscribers, toward consuming content, communications,and information on the move. for network owners, this might present the mainchallenge of the future: while customers were still willing to consume productsat home, more and more wanted the ability to consume them on the move as well.ònomadicityó and mobility would become increasingly important components ofcommunications infrastructure in the future, requiring far more investment thanhad the hardline broadband infrastructure of the last decade.concluding, mr. lajoie raised the issue of digital rights management. eventhough twcõs business, delivering content, did not involve it in owning copyright, he expressed his concern for maintaining the integrity and ownership ofcopyright. an economic model that safeguarded products and protected theirproducersõ rights to financial return was essential to the continued developmentthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?107of interesting content. a degradation of the notion of copyright ownership hadaccompanied the advent of digital distribution, he stated, as making highqualitycopies and redistributing them had become exceedingly easy. this was anothercritical area, and one that was òcertainly appropriate for regulatory attention.ódiscussiondr. flamm opened the discussion by noting that the panel had provided òarare exampleó of unanimity in agreeing that broadband was important to thecountryõs economy, its society, and, to some extent, its national security. therewas likewise unanimous agreement that the united states had fallen behind othercountries and was not necessarily catching up. substantial variation was to beseen, however, in the panel membersõ prescriptions for dealing with the nationõslag. while characterizing one of the solutions presented as complete deregulationof the local loop, he pointed out that a complete reregulation of the local loophad also been put on the table, and that there had been some advocacy of òôrelax,donõt worry, be happyõ as one of the potential policy paths as well.óclaiming the right to the ask the first question as his òmoderatorõs prerogative,ódr. flamm began by recalling that more than one panelist had spoken of observing a tendency to dismantle some of the opening up of the local loopñforinstance, the unbundled network elements that had been a centerpiece of the 1996telecommunications reform act. he then solicited all the panelistsõ expectations for future developments: was unbundling network elements as the vehiclefor opening up the net òessentially deadñand just put flowers on its grave, andmove on to something elseñor [was it] something that should be resuscitated?óa second question, inspired by the discussion of municipally owned fiber, waswhether an increase in regulation at the state level, including the passage oflegislation, would limit such initiatives. finally, he asked the panelists to reflecton the innovative forms being taken by the regulation seen òpopping upó at thestate level.unbundled network elements already pass”mr. thompson, speaking as the author of a portion of the 1996 act, said heòwould be the first at this point to put flowers on the grave of unbundled networkelements.ó he said the pertinent provisions of the act had been used as a òlightning rodó to draw a large number of clecs into the business, based on the notionthat òsomehow there would be regulatory oversight and a pricing structure.ó mostof the incumbent operators would call it robbery and argue that it should neverhave happened, he stated, even as he reminded the audience that these incumbents were the very ones who had agreed to the process in the beginning as a wayof getting the act passed. the unfortunate reality was that the regulatory environment in washington had been greatly affected over the years by the power of thethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108the telecommunications challengeincumbents on all sides; it was therefore no surprise that the notion that openaccess would rest on a basic, agreed pricing structure had been dead on arrival.open access from the incumbentõs standpointexpressing his disappointment at the turn events had taken, he explained thecase from the incumbentõs point of view. as the local loop became commoditized,as voice communications increasingly dropped in price, and as such competitivesources as satellite and cable came into the market, it was becoming clear that theincumbent telephone company would be left with plant that was no longer producing revenue. stranded plant was a fundamental issue; it had been one of thegreat fears after the breakup of at&t. and the issue for the incumbent thenbecame how it could shift to getting at least some revenue from that strandedplant; for that would allow it, under its economic model, to invest in futurecapacity, whether it was going to sell the output on a wholesale or a retail basis.admitting to having been òon the opposite sideó as chairman of irelandõs telephone company, mr. thompson said he had wanted to encourage measuresensuring that such facilities òwould always be used and we could be the providerat the local level of those facilities.ó as circumstances evolved, however, regulation had to address the incumbentõs obligation to become increasingly open. òifyou were going to treat it as a local utility,ó he declared, òthen it should beregulated as a local utility.ó this, in essence, was what he was proposing.mr. wegleitner, while cautioning that òthrowing a technologist into a debateon unbundling [was] probably a very dangerous thing,ó permitted himself thefollowing observation: the general objection he had heard on the part of the rbocs,rather than being to the idea of wholesaling access as part of unbundled networkelements (unes), was to the setting of prices that were ònot compensable for thefacility.ó the crux of the matter, from his point of view, not so much the policy ofunbundling access as the amount of revenue that could be obtained from selling itas a wholesale facility. second, the point of the process, as he understood it, wasto encourage facilitiesbased bypass: the facilitiesñin the case under discussion,copper loopñhad been made available so that clecs might establish sometraction in the market, but the ultimate goal had been to spawn competition at thefacilities level. this, he stated, òreally did not materialize.ó while there had beencontinued effort to work the use of the unbundled element as a business, in theend many such business models had simply failed.ônew wires, new rulesõmr. wegleitner then shifted perspective from the past to the future. some ofwhat had been tried with the copper network had worked, some of it had not.saying he was speaking frankly as a technologist, he described the copper network as already òpretty much obsoleteó in any case and said it was ògoing to gothe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?109away.ó but what rules should apply to the new facilities that verizon, along withother players in the business, were putting into the ground? the future would seea move into broadband facilities, among them broadband to the premises. thisraised the question of how new constructionñòwhich, quite frankly, anyone couldundertakeóñwould be regulated. his own companyõs position: òitõs new wires,it should be new rules.ódisconnect between network, service layersmr. lajoie, suggesting that his listeners draw their own conclusions regarding both the effectiveness of unbundling network elements and the associatedregulatory impact, identified network ownersõ main future concern as a òreal disconnect between the services layer and the network layeró rather than unbundling.companies that provided services to subscribers but owned no network infrastructure other than their server complexesñhe named google, yahoo!, and msnas examplesñhad arrived on the scene, grown, and proved successful. he calledtheir viability òa testament to the fact that there are effective models out there formaking sure that new companies, and new communication products and services,can be devised separate from who owns the network.ó this was òone of thebeauties of the public internet,ó which promised even richer and higherbandwidthversions of such companies with further growth and the advent of internet protocolversion 6 (ipv6). the issues of unbundling and providing access to the last milehad become a moot point, he said, òbecause you donõt need access to theplant.óhe recalled meeting masayoshi son, the founder of yahoo! broadband injapan, who had driven a huge penetration of new products and services withoutowning any physical network himself just by leveraging existing infrastructure.one reason mr. son had been able to do that was that he had pinpointed a niche injapanõs regulatory arena, whose climate is òcompletely differentó from that of theunited states. mr. lajoie acknowledged that mr. son was ònow a billion dollarsin debt and losing more every day,ó but, calling him òan amazing guy,ó he predicted: òheõs going to turn that around.ó in this country, he reiterated, unbundledaccess to the physical plant was going to be far less significant than the separationof the network layer and the services layer.competition or consolidation?dr. ferguson said that those who knew his opinions on the subjects underdiscussion would experience no surprise at his disagreement with the previoustwo speakers. noting that his background in the competitive informationtechnology sector had shaped his temperament, he said that he shared the overallgoal of a deregulated environment. òbut that environment can and should bederegulated,ó he stipulated, òonly once it becomes open and competitive, which itcurrently is not.ó while it was òvery much in the incumbentsõ interest to portraythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110the telecommunications challengethemselves and each other as [being] as competitive as possible,ó he observed, òifyou in fact look at the structure of this industry over the last ten years, it has beengetting steadily less competitive.ó he issued a warning: òif you deregulate amonopoly, you get a deregulated monopoly.ódetailing the òwide variety of waysó in which he believed the telecommunications industry to have been concentrating, dr. ferguson began with internetaccess. under the dialup regime there were thousands of isps, but òwhen everybody converts to broadband, there are going to be two isps.ó asserting that thecable industry had been consolidating rapidly, he charged that it had become òanoligopoly of about half a dozen diversified, vertically integrated industrial complexes.ó all of these owned proprietary content assets; alluding to mr. lajoieõscomment that time warner cableõs business was delivering content and that itwas thus not involved in owning copyright, dr. ferguson declared that twcõscorporate parent was òvery definitely concerned with copyrightó as owner ofwarner communications, of warner bros. studios, and, through time inc.,oftextbased magazines.dr. ferguson traced a similar consolidation among ilecs, saying theirnumber had dropped from somewhere between seven and nine to four. commenting on the une regime, he moved to cast doubt on the ilecsõ complaint thatthey were being subjected to unfair pricing, with the prices of unbundled networkelements set unfairly low. òif that [were] true,ó he argued, òthen the most logicalthing in the world [would have been] for each of them to purchase those incredibly cheap unbundled network elements from each other, integrate into eachothersõ geographies, and compete with each other.ó that none of them ever didthat, he stated, meant that òa certain degree of skepticismó was in order whenviewing òthose claims, and the structure of this industry, and the kind of conductit has engendered.óconcluding, dr. ferguson cited several issuesñòthe precise way in whichan openarchitecture industry can and should be achieved, exactly which interfaces should be open, whether there should be divestitures or notóñas meritingdebate. noting the potential to choose among òa wide array of possibilities,ó henonetheless emphasized his misgivings regarding the status quo and the directionin which the industry had been moving.dr. flamm, responding to mr. thompsonõs request to comment, also askedhim if he would discuss whether municipal fiber networks had not already beenpreempted by state law in a number of places.regulatory underpinning to access cost structuremr. thompson said he would begin by making a point that, though òcritically important,ó might escape some who were younger than he: in 1983, whenthe access regimen was put into place and the first policy debates occurred, òtherewas no such thing as the internet.ó the tcp/ip protocol did exist, and there werethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?111four companies using it; one of these, western union, had 750,000 employeeswho were members of the communications workers union. during discussionsof the use of the embedded network and of who should pay for it, there was aòvery great hue and cry on capitol hilló that came back to the fcc, which established òenhanced services.ó these servicesñthe use of the tcp/ip protocol andof telex on the backbone, as it was being employed at the time for twx and otherfunctionsñcarried no fees for access to the public switched network. and theinternet service providers of ten years later, when the net was taking shape, stillpaid nothing for access despite a òhuge outpouring of objections from every oneof the incumbent telephone companies.ó in fact, even in 2004 an ispõs access tothe public switched network was without cost. òwhat we have seen as the advanceof the internet in our society,ó he concluded, had therefore enjoyed a òhugeregulatory underpinning.óstates, incumbents ganging up on nonprofits?turning to dr. flammõs question regarding state lawsõ preempting municipalfiber networks, mr. thompson asked: òis it any great surprise that the incumbentsñwhich in many states are very close to the regulators and play a fairlymajor role in political campaignsñhave put forward proposed legislation invirtually every state making it illegal for a municipality to compete with them onthe grounds that the municipality would come to the business from a nonprofitand governmental point of view?ó he stressed that his companyõs was not acompetitive offering but a significantly different package, based on the premisethat the municipality had a right to provide an access networkñas it does in thecase of roads, sewers, or waterñbut would not provide services unnecessarily incompetition with incumbent franchises.each stateõs laws were different, mr. thompson explained, in line withwhether the state had been nurtured or neglected by its incumbent providers ofservices. those towns participating opportunity iowa, whose advisory boardincluded two former governors and numerous university presidents, felt òthe timehad come to make a point,ó he said: òthey have been overlooked by their incumbent carriers and their incumbent cable operators to the point where they arelosing their brains, the graduates of their schools, to other states.ó in 2003, a billhad been put before the iowa legislature by the largest incumbent cable providerand the incumbent telephone service provider that would have made it illegal forany community to own a telecommunications network. the same had been donein other states, including wisconsin and kansas; opportunity iowa had beencrafted as a nonprofit, political effort in order to deal with such pressuresñwhich were being seen all across the countryñbefore the legislature. the following year or two, he predicted, would see òa very interesting debateó about the roleof the community in providing essential facilities for their residents, for, hestressed, network access is an essential facility.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112the telecommunications challengeseeds of a consumer rebellion?dr. flamm opened the floor to questions, and john gardinier, who identifiedhimself as retired, commented that he was leaving broadband because of themonopolies. òi know some consumers are leaving cable completely,ó he said,òand a certain number are leaving their phone providers to go strictly cellular.óhe asked dr. ferguson to state his reaction to mr. thompsonõs endeavorñspeculating that he would see it as a step in the right direction, albeit one withshortcomingsñand to reflect on the idea that unless the industry looked to adifferent model, it might face a consumer rebellion.dr. ferguson, characterizing as interesting the question of whether and atwhat point the broadband problem will become politically salient, identified twopossible sources of rebellion: consumers and the technology sector. the last milealready had become a significant drag or drain on the growth rate of much of thetechnology sector, he said, pointing specifically to personal computers. òin private, a number of those companies and the people who work in them will tell youtheyõre rather upset about it,ó he recounted. òbut, unfortunately, the telephonecompanies are frequently their largest customersñsometimes the cable companies are as wellñand both are politically powerful, so they have to be carefulabout how they proceed.ó he pronounced himself as ònot terribly optimisticó thatthis would become a political issue soon.addressing the status of municipal networks, dr. ferguson said he wouldconcur with mr. gardinierõs formulation: that they were a good thing but wereunlikely under prevailing regulatory, political, and economic conditions to makeup for the systemõs other problems. tax incentives for the construction ofmunicipal networks could be useful in a reformulation or improvement of broadband policy. there would, however, be a requirement for continuous technologicalimprovement of those systems over a long period of time, and in general municipalities were not considered to be the best stewards or managers. he did not,therefore, believe that municipal networks would replace other portions of thesystem.prospects for a new telecommunications actmike nelson of ibm asked the panelists to reflect on a question raised bymr. tenhula earlier in the day: whether there would be a new telecommunications act. what might actually drive a rewrite of the 1996 telecommunicationsact? was it possible that giving this serious consideration would only generatemore uncertainty in the marketplaceñconsidering that, as the details were hashedout and after they were finalized, it would take the courts another five years tofigure out what those details meant?mr. thompson, saying he had spent some 15 years on the 1996 telecommunications act beginning with what was called the bell bill in the late 1970s,the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?113offered to take off his shirt and display his scars. a telecommunications bill rankedonly one step below a trade bill as measured in money spent, both by proponentsand by opponents. any wouldbe competitors to the incumbents were, at themoment, weak enough financially and sufficiently dispersed that there was nostrong need to propose a bill. the exception was that a bill might come from thetelephone or the cable companies, but he saw that as unlikely because most fccdecisions on the issues attendant to the 1996 act had, to date, been in favor of theincumbents.mr. wegleitner, while demurring on the question of whether another telecommunications act might be coming, stated that both technology and òthe waythe industry has shaped upó had outrun the 1996 act. he said that somethingneeded to be done but expressed uncertainty as to whether another act would beneeded to do it.factors behind u.s. broadband lagturkan gardenier of pragmatica corp. offered a pair of observations regarding the united statesõ no. 13 ranking in broadband penetration. first, whereasoutside the united states the caller paid for a cell phone call, in this country therecipient was responsible for the charges incurred by the caller. because thesecharges could add up, she said, she personally did not give her cell phone numberout to many people. second, where a larger percentage of the population lived inapartment houses, such as in the far east, whole buildings could be wired forbroadband, avoiding installation fees and monthly charges for each individualdwelling. could these factors be contributing to the lessthanoptimal use ofbroadband technology in the united states?mr. lajoie disputed the notion that the charts showing the united states inthirteenth place told the full story. for a number of reasons, some related to theissues raised by ms. gardinier, the picture was somewhat less stark than the chartsmade it appear. important to keep in mind, he said, were differences in regulatoryclimates, in the history and condition of infrastructures, in how products wereused, and in the concentration of homes. the concentration of population in tokyoand seoul, for example, was much greater than in all but a few places in theunited states, and so broadband penetration would tend to be greater there. acomparison of penetration there with penetration in major u.s. cities would showthat there was not such a discrepancy. but the regulatory climate and the age ofinfrastructure were also significant. building greenfield was different from puttingin facilities when a lot had already been built out. while infrastructure in asiaand europe was newer than that in the united states, this country was in theprocess of making investments in both the cable industry and the telecomindustry.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114the telecommunications challengeno denying u.s. broadband shortcomingsdr. ferguson said he disagreed for a number of reasons. first, even if it weretrue that geography, population density, or other considerations made a difference with regard to broadband penetration, they did not explain growth rates. forgrowth rates had been òenormously differentó: less than 40 percent per year indsl residential connections in the united states vs. about 80 percent in the restof the world. second, the countries that were ahead of the united states, and thatin many cases were growing more rapidly even though they were already ahead,were not always countries with markedly different geographical or populationdensity profiles. not only was scandinavia ahead of the united states, so wascanadaña nation almost as large as the united states with a population of only40 million. third, a comparison of price to performance in urban areas wouldshow bandwidth to be somewhere between two and ten times more expensive inthe united states than it was in much of asia. arguing that such facts undermined mr. lajoieõs claim, he insisted that the united statesõ problems in bandwidth penetration were real.connections between communications, transportationmr. hellman said he would discuss the relationship between communications and transportation but he wished to preface his comments by saying that heconsidered outrageous that many accepted dsl or cablemodem as broadband;instead, he asserted, these were òthe sales tax on broadband.ó then, speaking as areal estate developer, he noted that because the longterm fixed assets he constructedñbuildingsñdo not move, wireless was of interest to him mainly as asubset of a much bigger picture. since it could be deployed very quickly, wirelessmight indeed be a step in the evolution toward a new wired network; but itsparticular value, mobility, was irrelevant in the case of buildings.the economic significance of the relationship between transportation andcommunication, mr. hellman declared, was greatly underappreciated. transportation was extremely expensive, and the expense could arise at many differentlevels:¥building roads and bridges was expensive;¥building rail was expensive;¥oil and gas were expensive, and they had international political implications as well; and¥environmental compliance could be expensive, and arduous as wellñthewashington, d.c., metropolitan region was currently in violation of the federalclean air act.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the broadband opportunity: what needs to be done?115the way to begin solving such problems was to reduce the amount of timepeople spent in stopandgo traffic. but, òif youõre going to do that,ó he said,òyouõve got to give them an alternative way of getting the job done.ó he calleddesktop videoconferencing an absolute necessity in this regard but noted that itrequired sufficient bandwidth that òyou can see a good picture and see what youõretalking about at the same time.ó bringing together the policy discussions on transportation, which entailed massive expenditures by both the federal governmentand the states, and telecommunications might be a way of starting to come togrips with these issues, he suggested.extending great teachersõ reachrelated in mr. hellmanõs mind was another publicinterest issue, that ofimproving education. the decline of urban schools was much discussed, but lesstalked about was the fact that òthe suburbs [were not] going to give up goodteachers to the cities.ó because truly great teachers were limited in number, òahybrid of computer and communication networks and broadband and interconnectivityó would be required if the best teachers were to be made available toeverybody. he therefore recommended expanding the policy debate.mr. wegleitner stated his agreement with mr. hellman on broadbandõspotential for helping solve the nationõs energy problems. while he hesitated tomake a detailed statement connecting the construction of a fiberoptic networkwith the economics and social impact of reducing emissions from gaspoweredvehicles, he called òbeing able to move the business to the houseñand, in fact,transparently providing the virtual officeñabsolutely part of the vision of broadband as we see it.ó upstream was one of the key components; downstream wasarguably o.k. at a few megabits, but symmetry was needed and 10 megabits ormore would be required in order to do the job correctly. it was for this reason, hesaid, that verizon had adopted as its platform for fiber deployment the g.983passive optical network, which òcan take a residence and make it look like anoffice in a remote sense.ómr. wegleitner affirmed mr. hellmanõs observations on the importance ofdistance learning as well. verizon had built a number of educational networksusing the more traditional atm frame relay technologies. he mentioned network virginia, on which verizon had worked in conjunction with other carriersto tie together a multitude of universities; extending its reach to other schools aswell was a primary objective. a similar network was online in new jersey.rbocsõ consolidation: legal, economic perspectivesmr. nelson recalled that dr. ferguson and bob metcalf had a few yearsbefore suggested the need for an antitrust suit against the regional bell operatingthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116the telecommunications challengecompanies (rbocs), since they clearly werenõt competing with each other.5 heasked dr. ferguson whether these declarations had prompted calls from:¥lawyers who wanted to explore the possibilities, since such a settlementwould have made them far wealthier even than the tobacco lawyers;¥the justice departmentõs antitrust division; or¥economists who wanted to do a study that would show there actually wasa case.there had indeed been discussions on these questions with the people whoran the antitrust division in the clinton administration, dr. ferguson said. òtherewas clearly some interest and concern,ó he recalled, òbut also an acknowledgementof the rather significant political barriers.ó to highlight the size of these barriers,he stated that the industryõs incumbents òliterally spend more money on lobbyingand litigation than they do on r&d.ó in this, they are behind only the energyindustry and, possibly, the cigarette industry.when mr. lajoie objected that the cable companies spent far less,dr.ferguson acknowledged this and specified that, by òincumbents,ó he hadmeant the ilecs. he asserted, however, that spending by the cable industry wasòincreasing rapidly.ó returning to mr. nelsonõs question, he added that he hadreceived calls from private attorneys exploring private antitrust suits and notedthat one òsemiseriousó attempt had been made but it had, to his knowledge, notgone anywhere. there had been no calls from economists.dr. flamm then thanked the panelists for an excellent discussion.5we may note in this regard that a firm in one geographical market is under no obligation to tocompete against firms providing similar services in a different geographical market. to the extent thatthe regional bell operating companies operate in separate geographical markets, this issue is notrelevant.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.117panel iiiññññññññññññññññññññthe waterfall effectsintroductioncherry a. murraylucent technologieswhile dr. murray explained that the title òwaterfall effectsó indicated thatthe panel would be devoted to some newer applications in telecommunications,she also reminded the audience that òvoice is the killer app, and voice will continue to be the killer app.ó still, she noted, in the areas of the world where òbroadband is just rampantóñin south korea and finland, for exampleñmessagingwas becoming increasingly popular, especially among the younger generation.as the first speaker, she introduced mike nelson of ibm.moving computing to the gridmichael r. nelsoninternational business machinesin his talk, dr. nelson said, he would cover òwhatõs beyond broadband, whywe need to keep continuing up the technology curve to produce faster and fasternetworks, and what we will do once we get there.ó to start, he encapsulated histhe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118the telecommunications challengemain points in what he called òbumper stickers,ó easily remembered summariesseven or eight words in length whose value he had learned while working oncapitol hill and at the white house. his first point so expressed, òitõs not justabout email and the web,ó was intended to signal that the internet had entered athird phase. this transition was being made possible by grid computing, autonomic computing, pervasive computing, and open standards, all of which heplanned to address further.the initial 20 years of the internet, dr. nelson recalled, were marked by onetoone applications. its very first user, who was located in los angeles, attemptedto log on to a computer at stanford; because the system crashed before this usercould type òlog in,ó the first message on the ônet read òlo.ó such onetoonemessages, whereby a person talked to a computer or to another person, weretypical of the internetõs first two decades, constituting most of its traffic untilabout 1990. then, the advent of the world wide web precipitated a fundamentalchange: through the addition of onetomany communications, the internetbecame a òbroadcast medium.ó this important step resulted in a remarkably sharpincrease in the amount of internet traffic; for a short period, it doubled every fouror five months, all because of the web.internet undergoing a pivotal transitionthe present was a similar moment, said dr. nelson, arguing that the internetwas undergoing another pivotal transition to become a òmanytomany medium.ónapster, the first example of this phenomenon, had shown òwhat could happen ifyou took a million people and hooked them up to a network that tied together300,000 pcs all operating as a single system.ó when users went onto the napsternetwork looking for an obscure beatles recording, they didnõt care which computer actually had the bits that they wanted: òthey knew only that somewhere outthere on the network would be the answer.óin this way, napster had demonstrated the power of a new paradigmñwhichin its own case, unfortunately, had been illegal. but that same principle had begunserving as a base for other innovative technologies. dr. nelson praised hisemployer, ibm, as a leader in one of these, known as òthe grid.ó this technologyallowed not only systems that had music files to be hooked together, but alsosystems that shared other types of data, software, andñperhaps most importantñcomputing power. likening the result to the supplying of electricity by a utility,he said that a user logging onto the grid could obtain access to far more computing power than was available on that userõs own systems.peertopeer computing: promise and limitationsto illustrate the variations of distributed computing, dr. nelson displayed agraph with the number of nodes on a grid plotted on the yaxis and the power ofthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects119figure 34many flavors of distributed computing.power per node1100101,000,000nlumber of nodespeertopeer (pcbased) napster kazaa seti@homegrid computing (serverbased)national grids teragridthe holy grideverything integrated with everythingeach node on the xaxis (see figure 34). he first addressed peertopeer computing, in which pcs are tied together to provide hundreds of millions of dollarsõworth of computing power that runs software aimed at a specific problem. namingnapster, kazaa, and seti@home, he commented that while each handled itstask well, it was unable to go beyond that single function to perform others.he focused on the example of seti@home, describing it as a screensaverthat harvests all cycles on a userõs laptop or desktop that are not in useña considerable bounty, considering that a typical laptop is used only about 2 percent of thetime and that most of its power is wasted even when it is in use. òwithseti@home,ó dr. nelson explained, òyou get a little piece of radioantenna datafrom puerto rico, and your computer tries to find some kind of consistent signalin that data to see if we are getting a signal from intelligent life on mars or inanother galaxy.ó as 500,000 people had downloaded the screensaver, it hadgenerated an amount of computing power that would have cost over $100 millionto purchase.in grid computing, situated opposite peertopeer computing on the graph,fewer nodes are tied together. but because of the size of the machinesñlargeservers and storage systems, even supercomputersñat least as much power isgenerated. in addition, since the systems involved in grid computing are moretightly coupled and more generalpurpose, they can do more. dr. nelson reservedhis greatest excitement for what he called òthe next step: the ôholy grid,õ whereeverything is connected to everything, running common software, able to tackle awide range of problems.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120the telecommunications challengethe ôutility modelõ of computingpositing the notion of computing as a utility, dr. nelson discussed his visionof the grid in light of the history of electrical distribution in the united states. inthe early decades of the last century, most american companies had a vice president for electricity, who was in charge of making sure that each factory had working generators to supply the power needed. once electrical utilities showed thatthey could provide power more cheaply and more reliably, however, few factoriescontinued running their own generators. with the advent of the grid, companieslarge and small would be able to proceed on a payasyougo basis. òthey will beable to buy the computing power they need and get the software they need overthis grid of network systems,ó he stated. òitõs got everything a normal laptop orserver would have: data, applications, storage, processing power.ówhat will eventuate, dr. nelson predicted, is a unified system that will bemanaged as such and be able to provide services to all who tap into it. servicewill be better and efficiency higher as a result. òyou make much better use ofyour systems,ó he said, òbecause rather than a laptop or desktop being in use only5 percent of the time or 3 percent of the time, it can be part of a larger system andcontributing excess cycles to the grid.ó even a typical corporate server is in useonly about 30ð50 percent of the time and is thus a potential source of power to beharvested. in addition, because the grid is to be managed as a single unit thatwill unify òdifferent sites, each managed by different people running differentsoftware,ó security will increase and complexity diminish. in this ònew world,ósystems and software will be virtualized: the user will be able to log on to thegrid, draw data from several different sites, pool it, process it using computingpower from several other sites, and then output it somewhere else. this presents apowerful opportunity for collaboration. by allowing all its different sites to tapinto the global grid, a company would be giving all employees access to its mostpowerful tools, something not possible with the current internet.the first steps toward ôthe gridõthe first step in the development of the grid has been the creation ofintranets by companies that take existing hardware, tie it together with highspeedsystems, and use the resulting network as a grid. òthey donõt have to buy anynew servers or storage systems,ó dr. nelson said, because by running òsoftwarethat ties their systems together they can double or triple the amount of computingpower they get out of their existing equipment.ó ibm tests some of its chips,using what is called the òdownload grid,ó whereby employees all around the company back up their laptops and desktops. although the application may be regarded as mundane, it can be carried out much faster and more economicallythanks to the grid.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects121the second step in the gridõs development is the partner grid, whichinvolves companies tying their systems to those of other companies. the thirdstep is the actual move to the utility computing model, under which thirdpartygrids run by independent companiesñpossibly ibm, at&t, or the telecommunications providersñfurnish the computing platform upon which thousands ofbusinesses run. ibm had just started some demonstration projects in this area; forone of them, the òsmallpox grid,ó about 10,000 ibm employees had downloadedsoftware enabling their computers to do modeling designed to determine whethera particular drug molecule might be used to block replication of the smallpoxvirus. the project had generated millions of dollarsõ worth of free computingpower for oxford university, which as a consequence had identified 10 or 12 drugsworthy of further investigation. this software was running on dr. nelsonõs computer as he spoke, trying to match a molecule with the virus to see whether therewas a way in which the two locked and, thereby, to identify an antismallpox drugthat merited testing.autonomic computing and pervasive computingalso part of this vision for future computing is òautonomic computingó:systems that are not only selfprotecting, selfoptimizing, selfconfiguring, andselfhealing, but that also come close to being selfmanaging. ibm customers,dr. nelson said, were experiencing enormous increases in the number of transactionsthey processed and the amount of data they stored. unable to hire enough qualifiedpeople to run all the systems required, they needed systems that could take care ofthemselves. òthe grid will facilitate that by making it easier to manage manysystems at once,ó he said.another important component of the vision was pervasive computing, something that dr. nelson felt had not received sufficient emphasis. it was his workingassumption that, five years down the road, he would own literally hundreds ofdevices and products that interacted in one way or another with the internet. manyof them would have a radio frequency identification (rfid) tag, others simplesensors; òanything in my house thatõs worth more than $50 or $100, or that has somemoving part, will probably have some way of interacting with the ônet,ó hesaid.in reference to a logarithmic diagram showing the numbers of computers,appliances, and sensors that have been connected to the internet since 1990 andprojecting them out to 2020 (see figure 35), dr. nelson observed that sensorscould be expected to become more numerous than either of the other two within5ð10 years. while many of the worldõs 1 billion pcs were connected to theinternet, they already lagged cell phones and other devices. òsoon,ó he said, òweõllhave trillions of sensors, and that will be what we really rely on the ônet for.óthese sensors will be located all around the world and the data they generate willsomehow have to be managed, something he saw as another application for thegrid.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122the telecommunications challengefigure 35sensors will predominate: internetconnected devices.1990200020102020year100 million1 billion10 billion100 billioncomputersappliancessensorsnumbercomputing power available on demandbehind ibmõs excitement about the grid, as well as about autonomic andpervasive computing, is the role they play as building blocks of what the company calls òebusiness on demandó or òondemand business.ó the integrationof a companyõs entire it infrastructure using common standards and commonsoftware will make it much easier for the company to obtain the computing power,data, and software it needs when it needs them. currently, tackling a new problem can take weeks if not months, dr. nelson said, because it means orderingnumerous servers, having them brought in, having somebody configure them,and getting them up and running. in what he referred to as òthis new vision of thefuture,ó acquiring the computing power sought will take a òfew hours, or even afew minutesñjust as, today, if you need some extra electricity, you can just plugsomething in.ó the vision, ibmõs response to its customersõ demands for lesscomplexity, more reliability, and improved security, will require better networks,he acknowledged.pulling out another of his òbumperstickeró phrases, dr. nelson estimatedthe internet revolution to be less than 8 percent complete, a figure that nonetheless registered an improvement over the 5 percent of òa couple of yearsó before.some 8ð10 percent of the worldõs population was using the ônet on a regularbasis, with the total number of internetconnected devices at three or four perperson in the united states. as many new and exciting applications could beexpected to be enabled by the grid, this figure would rise to òdozens if notthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects123hundreds,ó he predicted, adding: òno matter how you measure it, weõre just at thestart of this.óincreased activity assured, new policies neededoffering a formula to aid comprehension, dr. nelson advised those in attendance to òtake everything thatõs already happenedñall the new applications, allthe new content, all the new money thatõs been made, all the bankruptciesñandmultiply by 12.ó realizing the vision of the grid and the nextgenerationinternet will require some new technologies and significant investment, he cautioned, as it will entail providing whole neighborhoods with gigabitpersecondnetworks that are as affordable and reliable as they are ubiquitous. ògettingthere is going to require more intelligent, more consistent policies than we havetoday,ó he declared, noting that he was far from the first speaker of the day tocall for policies that were more consistent. furthermore, those working towardthis vision would òhave to look beyond the fccó if they hoped to address all theissues currently driving decisions, which he summed up with a list he had developed 15 years before and titled òthe ten põs of cyberpolicyó including pricing,privacy, piracy, pornography, protection (security), policing, procurement, payment, and protectionism.in fact, they would also have to look beyond policy makers in general. spending much of his time on standards issues, dr. nelson said, had impressed uponhim that the nextgeneration internet was already being shaped by critical standards that were in development, as well as by choices that the marketplace wasmaking between competing standards. posting a list of òkey technology choicesó(see figure 36), he said that how those issues and perhaps four or five others weredecided would not only shape the next generation of the internet but also determine whether the grid became a niche application or something upon whichalmost every company relied on a daily basis.u.s. decisionsõ worldwide impacthis final point was that decisions being made on these issues in the unitedstates would have an impact on developments in other countries. it would affectthem directly, because the market for new products created in the united stateswould enable sales elsewhere. it would affect them indirectly as well, because òifwe decide to do something stupid here, there are at least 40 countries that willprobably emulate our stupidity,ó said dr. nelson, adding: òwe have to make surethey learn from our stupidity rather than emulating it.ófurthermore, if the gridõs rollout justifies his expectations, taking the formof a ògrid of gridsó that ties all countriesõ informationtechnology infrastructurestogether in a global digital economy, future debates about offshoring, allshoring,and allsourcing will make the current one òlook pretty tame.ó in the resultingthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124the telecommunications challengefigure 36itõs not just about laws and regulation: key technology choices.¥authentication and directories¥privacyenhancing technologies (p3p)¥digital rights management¥filtering technologies to block spam, porn¥voice over ip¥wireless internet standards¥web services and grid computing¥instant messaging¥ipv6 deployment¥linking the phone network and the internet¥rich media standards (sip, multicast, etc.)¥endtoend vs. walled gardensenvironment, any employee anywhere will have the ability to tap into the grid,and any company will be able to compete with any other using the most powerfultools available. if the internet led to òthe death of distance,ó then the grid willmean òthe death of geography,ó because companies everywhere will have accessnot only to computing power but also to collaborators, databases, new tools, andnew software. opportunity will abound, but so will weighty issues.introducing louis mamakos of vonage, whose talk was titled òis voip thefuture?ó dr. murray observed that, already, voip was the present.is voip the future?louis mamakosvonagemr. mamakos endorsed dr. murrayõs assessment, noting that there hadalready been quite a bit of uptake of voice over internet protocol technology, andsaid he would be speaking about how the market for this service had developed.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects125he began an overview of the factors that helped bring voip capability tomarket by observing that the internet had decoupled the transport of bits fromapplications. internet service providers (isps) had supplied the pipe to plug thecomputer into; new, interesting, and varied applications had come from numeroussources. òif we can arrange to have an environment where new and innovativeideas can be tried out,ó he observed, òinteresting results pop out.ó recallingòsturgeonõs law,ó coined by the sciencefiction writer theodore sturgeonñòninety percent of everything is crapóñhe emphasized that, for the remaining10percent, that was not necessarily true. such innovations as the world wideweb and email had been the product of extensive experimentation rather than ofòpeople going off into a room, thinking really, really hard, and coming up withthe answer.ó this had also been the case with voice over ip, which he describedas òsomething familiar cast in a new light.ómarkets, services increase with broadband penetrationan important enabler had been the growth of broadband. but while broadband is a prerequisite for any such multimedia service, his own companyõs offering, and voice over ip service in general, are fairly insensitive to the type oftechnology over which they are run as long as capacity is adequate. the increasingpenetration of broadband deployment, globally and in the u.s. (see figure 37),opened new markets to new kinds of products and services. the reception withwhich not only vonage but also other voip players had met in the marketplace(see figure 38), mr. mamakos said, indicated that the serviceõs acceptance hadmoved beyond an earlyadopter population to the more mainstream consumer.because voip exists within a broadband environment, basic assumptionscan be altered, including those regarding the way in which the customer interactswith the service. service provided over the public switched telephone network(pstn) has in recent years offered such options as call forwarding and call waiting. but, mr. mamakos said, changing the provisioning of these features hastended to be a fairly lengthy process: where it is automated, the interface consistsof audio heard in the ear plus a tendigit keypad on the phone. voice over ip takesadvantage of broadband to present service parameters to customers using a veryrich, highfidelity interface in the form of their web browser. new and interesting services can thus be delivered that may have been available previously butwere simply too unwieldy to control without the customerõs having access to aricher interface. òin the voice over ip world,ó mr. mamakos noted, òall thesefeatures are just software, and if you look at how voice over ip operators tend todeliver their services, these features are bundled in as a standard part of the serviceoffering.ó that the customer is not paying extra for touchtone dialing, caller id,threeway calling, and other services is, he added, a òsideeffectó of the amountof power that voip brings to the marketplace.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126figure 37broadband growth.98131164196224251501001502002503002003200420052006200720082533415059671020304050607080200320042005200620072008global broadband adoption is driving this transformation global broadband growth(in millions)u.s. broadband growth(in millions)yearyearthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects127figure 38growth of u.s. consumer voip lines.381,000542,000795,000252,0000100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000600,000700,000800,000900,0002004first quarter2004second quarter2004third quarter2004fourth quarter (est.)number of linesquartervoip: shared infrastructure, greater customer controlmr. mamakos cited two sources of opportunity that arise with voip. one isthrough sharing infrastructure, which comes of chopping up audio into packetsand transmitting it over an existing packetbased network. but equally powerful,he contended, are opportunities that come of making the call control of servicesavailable on platforms that are easier to program than a telephone switch. thisflexibility, in the form of exposing call processing, made it possible for companies like vonage to try out very interesting ideas, some of which might resonatewith customers.the company would start with features that customers are very familiar with,mr. mamakos said, but he suggested that it might then blend familiar elementsinto novel contexts. as an example, he offered integrating buddy lists frominstantmessenger clients with phone service so that customers could control whocould call their phone after 9 in the evening. an instance of integrating telephonyservice with computer capability that vonage had already developed is òclick tocall,ó which allows the user to highlight a name in his or her email address book,then click a button that rings both the userõs vonage phone and the person that heor she wanted to callñòthus,ó he said, òsaving that tedious dialing, with its wearand tear on the finger.ó conceding that ònone of this is really rocket science tothe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128the telecommunications challengefigure out,ó he explained that, nonetheless, òsomeone has to write the code, and,more important, once youõve actually done interesting features like this, you needto be able to expose them in a way that is easy for a customer to manipulate.ó it isthe web interface that allows vonage to augment the richness of the servicesgoing to market.areas of innovation in which vonage had recently been active included amobile 911 service akin to that available through a cell phone and e911 capability,which had been the subject of some early trials rhode island. regulatory help inthe form of allowing new entrants access to some emergency response infrastructures would be welcomed by providers of such new and interesting applications, mr. mamakos said; to date, these infrastructures had been centered aroundthe legacy telephony infrastructure. he posited the development, with the evolution of technology, of a small device outfitted with a panic button that could beused to summon help in an emergencyñassuming that such appliances weregranted access to the emergency response infrastructure.open standards credited as enablermr. mamakos credited open standards as an enabler of voice over ip technology. within the internet engineering task force (ietf) and other standardsbodies, fora existed for developing standards to allow many different manufacturers to bring products to market. especially in the case of the ietf, standardization of the technology had been viewed as more a process than an event, hesaid, and òtypically, standards happen after thereõs been some demonstration ofthe technology and production deployments.ó as part of this ongoing process,interesting ideas are tried out, some of which strike a chord and achieve marketacceptance. òthen, the benefit of that early deployment works its way into thestandards,ó he said, òmaking it easier for other participants to build products andservices [that are able] to participate in the market.óvoipenabled silicon can be embedded in any device; mr. mamakos displayed an image of an object that appeared to be a cell phone but was in reality anappliance integrating a voip telephony adapter with a wifi radio. at a hotspot,this could be used for voice over ip service nomadically, almost as if the userwere to carry a dedicated telephony adapter and find an internet jack to plug itinto. because it is after a mass market, vonage tries to make the service òas muchplugandplay as possible,ó he said. and customers are, in fact, simply pluggingthe òfamiliar telephony instrument that they are used to having in their homesóinto a voice over ip adapter rather than plugging it into the wall to connect to thetelephone company. although they have the benefit of a webbased interface tocontrol features, for daytoday calling the interface is the same as always: userspick up the phone and dial. lastmile technology is a matter of indifference tomost voip services, which require only a broadband connection with adequatethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects129capacity. thanks to the interconnects between the internet and the pstn, a voiceover ip customer can call ilec customers who have the same legacy phoneservice thatõs existed for the last hundred years as well as other internetconnectedvoip end users.voip matches landline call qualityaccording to a survey conducted by smart money, the quality of a voice overip conversation was on par with that achieved over a traditional landline phoneand typically better than could be achieved on a cellphone call. judging thisresult ònot too surprising,ó mr. mamakos pointed out that a typical cdma cellphone uses òabout a 13kbpersecond codec, and youõre trying to squeeze as muchcapacity onto fixed spectrum allocationsó as possible, while a voip adapter withtotalquality voice uses the same 64kbpersecond transport codec used bythepstn.briefly describing the competitive landscape for voip, mr. mamakosobserved that while voip is built around standards that allow devices to interactwith each other, operators have built their networks using different backofficetechnologies. his customersõ voice over ip adapter uses sip to talk to his siblingsystem, the implementation of which represents an opportunity for vonage toinnovate and thus to compete in robustness, features, and other aspects of theservice. one concern that the company has, in light of the rapid growth of demandfor its services as reflected in both calls and minutes (see figure 39), is the extentto which its system is scalable: òwe donõt want to experience a success disaster,with more customers than we can handle.ófcc ruling favors innovative telephonymr. mamakos then turned to a november 2004 ruling by the fcc in favor ofa petition filed by vonage requesting that service of the type it provides bedeclared an interstate information service subject to regulation on a federal ratherthan a statebystate basis. the burden of having to go to 50 or 51 jurisdictionswith different regulations could significantly burden a new technology, he said,and would serve òonly to delay introduction of new services and features.óremaining to be resolved, he acknowledged, were some issues of public policy,as many programs are funded directly or indirectly through taxes and fees associated with telephone services, and state and local governments see new entrants ascausing erosion of such revenue. while expressing the wish to be òpart of thesolution, not part of the problem,ó he advocated solving the problem in a òuniformwayó that would limit the burden of compliance to the greatest extent possible.in conclusion, mr. mamakos declared voice over ip òhere to stayó and postedthe following claims:the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1303045721051370204060801001201401601201853024135470100200300400500600calls made (millions)minutes in millionsthirdquarterfourthquarterfirstquartersecondquarterthirdquarter20032003200420042004thirdquarterfourthquarterfirstquartersecondquarterthirdquarter20032003200420042004figure 39scalability.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects131¥that, as a òdisruptive technology,ó it òhas irrevocably changed the telecommunications landscapeó;¥that òpricing pressureó it has exercised òcontinues to challenge the voiceservices models [that] incumbents have relied upon for centuriesó; and¥that it is òchallenging the regulatory framework, forcing new thinkingwith regard to subsidies, e911, and packet prioritization.óoffering an example of the internetõs ability to render geography òirrelevantto a large extent,ó he recounted that he had transferred his home phone servicefrom verizon to vonage and taken his area code 301 phone number with himwhen moving not long before from the washington, d.c., area to new jersey.just as any other internetbased service, he said, voip is òinherently nomadic,ómeaning that where the user plugs into the network is more or less irrelevant,subject to performance concerns.presenting andy schuon, the president & ceo of the international musicfeed television network, as the next speaker, dr. murray remarked that the panelõsremaining talks would focus not only on the interesting new digital content thatcan be provided by new technology, but also on difficulties in the industry thathave come with the new technologyõs availability. similarities were to be found,she said, in the music industry, the video industry, and the publishing industry,specifically with reference to digital books.digital entertainmentandrew schuoninternational music feedas someone whose entire career had been spent on òthe experience side ofentertainment,ó mr. schuon said, he had been asked to talk about the contentbeing delivered by the technologies that other speakers had discussed. he wouldtherefore look at how music and other forms of entertainment were undergoing afundamental shift in the digital age; at the effects of this shift on both the entertainment industry and the consumer; and at what needed to be done about theòwidespread epidemic of piracyó that had accompanied it. he would touch uponsatellite radio and video along the way.figures for legitimate downloading placed sales by itunes at a couple ofhundred million downloads and indicated that more and more people were usingnapster and subscription services. but there were estimates according to which,mr. schuon said, legitimate downloading was running at only a few percent of allthe downloads from the internet. so while òa nice startó had been made, he said,òwe still have a really long way to go.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132the telecommunications challengemonetization a key problem for content providersthe publicõs desire to consume music had never been greater, observedmr.schuon, pointing to robust sales of portable music devices, some of whichallow users to take an entire music collection with them anywhere they go.òpeople are falling in love with music again,ó he stated. òthe only issue is: howdo we monetize it?ótechnology developed for building legitimate services had in fact made itpossible to protect intellectual property, to monetize it, and to track licenses whileat the same time creating a good experience for the consumer. but the entertainment industry had been forced to wait for technology to catch up with its needs,and now it had to find a way to get the consumer to pay for its product while at thesame time being more creative than the illegitimate download sites. success wouldrequire what mr. schuon characterized as òa multipronged attackó: not only didthe legitimate services have to offer as great a variety of songs as the competitionbut they also had to remember their obligation, being in show business, to entertain consumers. òwe have to give them a dazzling product that isnõt just highspeed and fair priced but also offers them the flexibility to use the content in theway they really want to,ó he stated.this, rather than price, was the issue. indications were that those willing topay for downloads found the range of 75 cents to a dollar per track to be in theballpark, but the consumer wanted to take control. and rules had been associatedwith the use of content obtained through legitimate services, whereas òif you stealthe content, you can do anything you want with itñput it on any portable device,put it on as many computers as you have, use that content as you see fit,ó he said.òthatõs what itõs all about in the future of entertainment.ótechnology boosts legitimate providersõ offeringswith the advance of technology, however, this would become òmuch less anissueó for the legitimate providers. mr. schuon offered a recent itunes release asa good example of a product òfar superioró to anything obtainable throughillegitimate sites: a ògreat experience and value propositionó that was wellmarketed and well priced, this was a virtual boxed set containing all 400 of u2õssongs, including the bandõs new album and 30 songs that had never before beenreleased. priced at $149, it could be downloaded at high speed with one click, andusers could put it onto a portable device such as an ipod, burn it onto a cd,andput it onto any number of computers. with the purchase of a u2 ipod, thesetõs price fell to $100.òwhat weõve been combating so far is trying to put digital rights management [drm] onto all of these services, whether they be music or movies,ómr.schuon said. since the mp3 open standard is much easier to proliferate, theindustry has had to wait for the technology to catch up. although he concededthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects133that drm would never be foolproof, he said that it could òdramatically reducethe problem [while providing] those willing to pay a really great experience.ódigital watermarking was also likely to offer a future alternative for tracking andproviding protection. he cited the success that verance corporation had enjoyedin the course of 2004 in tracking all advertising on television and radio; notingthat the company was moving over to the music space, he predicted its technology would be effective there as well. microsoftõs janus project, also showingpromise, would allow users with subscription services to take content and move itover to a portable device. rather than pay $149 for the u2 package, some mightprefer to òtake the whole world of music with them for $10 [or] $12 a month,ówith their access to the content continuing as long as they subscribed.music: the entertainment industryõs guinea pigmr. schuon portrayed the music industry as a guinea pig that had beenobliged to òtake its hitsó while business models, rights issues, technology, andother aspects of the new, digital entertainment market were getting ironed out.òitõs paving the way for new experiences across the spectrum of devices: settopboxes, phones, and all of video,ó he stated. viruses, file spoofing, fake files, andóother things that lurk around in that thirdworld bazaar of illegal downloadingówould continue to cause concern but would become less relevant as time went on.he praised as constructive the aggressive actions being taken by record companies, the recording industry association of america (riaa), and the motionpicture association of america (mpaa).technology, he stressed, was creating a new entertainment economy bygiving consumers the control they wanted. for those with a tivo, a favorite television program is on at whatever time they want. more and more, it is consumerswho make primetime television schedules, who make cds, who make their ownprivate radio stations by programming their ipods and taking their music withthem. òitõs very rapidly becoming absurd to think about going to a tv scheduleto see when somethingõs on or buying a cd that someone else chose to put acertain set of songs onto,ó mr. schuon said. already, the technology available inmassmarket consumer electronics stores would allow anyone to make his or herown multimedia network.as a result, music and tv would in the future be marketed more like films.content providers would no longer be able to rely as they once had on one showõsleading into another or on a listenerõs waiting to hear a particular song on theradio. distribution, as had been seen with the internet, would no longer be inthehands of the major media companies; consumers would make their owncontent, and they would want to use copyrighted materials to really expressthemselves. òlegitimate peertopeer services are going to need to come tomarket,ó mr.schuon said. òsharing and recommendations from friends will beessential and will drive the future of entertainment.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134the telecommunications challengecontent licensed to, originated by consumersavenues would have to be found for licensing content to consumers becauseconsumers would pass content around among themselves in any case. mr. schuonrecounted that his niece, a day after he had read a bedtime story to her over avideo chat link that spanned the continent, had phoned to ask him òwhen it wouldbe on again.ó his comment: òthere i am, creating content. itõs basically my owndisney channel for my niece when iõm out of town.ó while aol, yahoo!,google, and a few others might emerge as the major aggregators of content in thefuture, the capacity to offer such choices as that exemplified by his ondemandbedtimestory channel was not far off. a new service that delivered televisionprogramming over the internet via a settop box, akimbo, allowed the user tosearch for content on a given subject. òif you search for something on skateboarding, for example, you might get espn2 right alongside a show that anyone in theaudience might have created,ó he explained, just as a google search for a productmight deliver offerings from a topline merchandiser and a momandpop shopright alongside one another and without the userõs being able to tell the differencebetween the sources.he offered another example: ripetv, a videoondemand channel supportedby advertising that had been the subject of a recent magazine article. founded byòa couple of guys who were bored, had made a bunch of money, and decided theywanted a tv channel,ó the venture was creating its own content and had made adevelopment deal with comcast digital. while he was not convinced that thechannel, thanks in part to wireless, would fulfill its ownersõ prediction of garnering 300 million viewers worldwide by 2006, mr. schuon was reluctant to rule outthe possibility of success. òreally, content is king,ó he said, òand if youõreoutthere creating these new forms of content on your own lowcost networks,thereõll be more and more places to display that content.óôif you donõt build it, they canõt comeõmr. schuonõs current company was active in launching cable channels, working with satellite radio, doing television production, and advising companies inthe field of broadband entertainment. calling himself òbullish on the idea ofentertainment brands and content offerings,ó he said that he had often been askedto launch new television channels and had invariably accepted. òõeven if we donõthave a lot of distribution right now, build that brand,õó he tells clients, becauseòõif you donõt build it, they canõt comeñand thereõll be lots of places for yourcontent in the future.õó remarking that it takes only a single show to create buzz,he said that òtrading spacesó had made the learning channel a òhouseholdname networkó and that the bravo channel had had few viewers before airingòqueer eye for the straight guy.ó even animated cartoons on the internet, suchas the political satire offered at jibjab.com before the 2004 presidential election,the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects135had the power to attract millions upon millions of viewers. accessed through alink that had been passed around òvirallyó through email, jibjab might in thefuture turn into a network seen via an akimbo box or on a cell phone.the key features of future search technology would be high speed, massivestorage, and òfabulously elegantó user interfaces. mr. schuon envisioned fiber,cable, satellite, and wireless all flowing seamlessly into settop boxes or similardevices equipped with ample storage incorporating search capability that wouldallow users to look at everything on their drive and òeverything that [they] mightpossibly want to download or watch in the future.ó the box was likely to beleased, much of the content either rented or obtained under subscription. currentaccess providersñisps, as well as cable, satellite, and wireless providersñwould,in his estimation, probably the best suited to becoming the òtolltakersó for usersin the future. they had an established billing relationship with their customersand were set up so that they would be able to do the microbilling that would beneeded whether subscription or a la carte became the dominant payment modality.owing to the proliferation of wifi and wimax, satellite radio and radioservices on broadband offering hundreds of channels would be ubiquitous in thefuture. just becoming available was the xm myfi portable player, a devicethesize of a deck of cards that, in offering all of xmõs programming without adish, was in essence putting òsatellite in your hand.ó its tivolike features enabledthe recording of five hours of programming with rewind and fastforward. ògoodbye wtop,ó said mr. schuon, referring to a newstalk am station popular in thed.c. area. òyou wonõt need to wait for ôtraffic and weather togetherõ every tenminutesó because on satellite radio dedicated weather and traffic channels willoperate 24 hours a day. he also predicted the disappearance of carpentry jobsòbecause thereõs going to be no need to build any bookcases.ócoming soon: changes unparalleled in profundityaccording to mr. schuon, the ways in which content is made, marketed,distributed, and monetizedñin fact, every element of the entertainmentbusinessñwould change, and the change would be unparalleled in its profundity.despite the many changes occurring in the automobile industry in its century ofexistence, its products still have four rubber tires and travel down a road. evenleaving aside the technologies used in distributing entertainment, he suggested,the number of platforms that content can be delivered on, and the variety ofproduction, sales, and marketing techniques that exist, can sometimes seemoverwhelming.looking back, mr. schuon said that his career path, one that had never strayedfrom the entertainment business, would not have been open to him if it hadnõtbeen for a healthy industry able to monetize content and pay artists a properroyalty for their rights. at the same time, he said, he believed firmly òin the fantaking over the experience,ó adding: òthe revolution will be televised, and it willthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136the telecommunications challengebe televised however the consumer wants to televise it to his or her friends, [and]on whatever platform they wantó to use. in conclusion, he said that he planned totake part in ensuring that the fieldõs òexciting evolutionó continued.serving consumers on broadbandlisa a. hookaol broadband (retired)ms. hook, having entered retirement only days before the symposium, putthe attendees on notice at the outset that her style of presentation would reflecther new, relaxed frame of mind. she began by describing a longtime reluctanceon america onlineõs part to acknowledge that broadband offerings would play asignificant role in the consumer market for internet services. òhistorically thecompany has had a commanding market share in the dialup space,ó she said, butit òalso had a commanding ability to ignore the advent of broadband.ó it was onlyafter some 15 million u.s. households had become broadband customers thataol òdecided maybe it wasnõt just an earlyadopter, propellerhead type of aproduct and [the company] should start paying a little bit of attention to it.óits response was to import its business model for dialup service into thebroadband business. the dialup model was brilliant and permitted aol, according to ms. hookõs description, to act as a òbuying clubó for internet connectivity:òwe got a bunch of subscribers in the door, we went out and bought networkconnectivityñthanks to the 1996 telecom act, we could buy it more and morecheaplyñand so our ebitda [earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, andamortization] margins were effectively driven by our ability to be the worldõslargest acquirer of network connectivity.ó in the dialup space, this had beensuccessful to the point of genius.replicating the dialup model in broadbandbent on replicating the model in the broadband space, aol attempted tonegotiate wholesale connectivity purchases with both cable operators and dslproviders. the former showed extreme reticence, resisting the companyõsentreaties that they open up their networks in a regulated fashion for reasons thatwere obvious. but aol did conclude deals with the latter for the portion of thenetwork that it needed, obtaining ògreató line charges. it backed all traffic to itsheadquarters in dulles, virginia, put it through an òenormous amountó ofprocessing, and sent it back out of its server architecture on the other side. aolended up providing òthe slowest broadband service in the world,ó she said, adding:òthe dsl guys were probably laughing all the way to their operations meetings.ómoreover, with respect to its own operations, aol had unwittingly goneinto a business that had nothing to do with its dialup business. òon the dialupthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects137side, we were able to acquire network connectivity and to handle the customercare into networks that had a high level of visibility down to the home,ó ms.hookexplained. òin the broadband area, thereõs absolutely no visibility into the networks, so we were getting customer care calls and, frankly, not having answersthe customers neededñnever a good recipe for customer satisfaction.ó to complicate matters further, the company was warehousing more than 20 skus ofdsl modemsñsomething that those with experience in operations might recognize as òa very bad thing.ó to top it all off, aol was managing its modeminventory next to that of another business it had: selling linens, seed pearls, andother such items. òthey were all in these bins, and sometimes weõd send a dslcustomer sheets and towels instead of a modem,ó she recalled. òvery difficult toget connectivity, even at 200 thread count.óseparating the network and service layersin sum, aol was trying to force itself into a connectivity business in whichit did not belong, but it continued on for some timeñòlosing ebitda on anoperating basis on every single subscriber [it] brought onto the networkóñbeforetaking stock of the situation. the company then decided to leave aside the network layer of the business, which it judged to be beyond its area of expertise, andto focus instead on the service layer: on developing innovative products, integrating them, and selling them to consumers under the aol brand. òwhile we allnow assume that the split between the network layer and the service layer hasbeen out there for a number of years,ó ms. hook remarked, when this decisionwas made two years before, òit was quite revolutionary. wall street thoughtñasdid some people inside our companyñthat we had lost our minds.óbut the consumer, faced with a proliferation of internet services, operatingsystems, and devices, still wants service that is both easy to use and integrated.this is true even of the early adopter, ms. hook asserted. for this reason, theaol brand positioning of òsimple and easy to useó was one that could be spun tothe service layer without much difficulty. as a result, around 5 million users hadsigned up for aolõs broadband service layer at $15 and $25 per month in theprevious two years, and 3 million more had opted for its premium services, whichincluded voice, wireless, safety and security applications at $3 to $5 per month.point service explosion to renew demand for aggregatorsthe market was thus clearly present at the service layer, concluded ms. hook,predicting future offerings of point services in advanced communications, as foreshadowed by vonage, and entertainment, where the potentially òexplosiveó videoover ip would be joining music. all such products would need to be integratedwith each other, including those in the field of safety and security, which sherated as the preeminent market: òwhat we see people saying to us is, ôiõve got athe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138the telecommunications challengefirewall, iõve got antivirus, iõve got the spyware protection, but iõm dying here.can you put it altogether so that i have one click into my system?õó the paidservices of providers like aol have and will become more relevant. in short, theproliferation of point services and of theme packages could be expected to leadback to the need for aggregators like aol.companies participating in this service layer will have to get innovations tomarket very quickly, said ms. hook, pointing to dramatically shortening innovation cycles and to problems experienced by msn in kicking off its longhorn lineof internet products, as well as to similar problems at aol. what this acceleratedpace will require from large firms like aol is òmoving from our old mentality ofbuilding proprietary networks and systems to an openplatform type of architecture, and recognizing that our value add is in the brand, the distribution platform,and the customer care and billing on the back end,ó she said, adding: òpeople likeus just cannot innovate so, like other companies our size, we are moving out andembracing thirdparty innovators.ólaunching applications as if they were tv programsover the previous year aol had already taken advantage of shifts in themarket to begin opening up its subsystems, inviting thirdparty developers towork with it, and then launching their innovative applications into the market inthe way a television network would launch a program. òwe put things up, we trythem, we see whether consumers like them, we take them down if they donõt, weput more marketing dollars behind them and integrate them into our service ifthey do,ó ms. hook explained. as internet services moved off the pc and ontostereo systems, television sets, game boys, playstation 2s, and cellular services,the necessity of this would only grow.to parry potential questions as to whether there remained a role for anaggregator such as aol or yahoo!, ms. hook said that while early adoptersmight be expected to share the symposium audienceõs level of sophisticationregarding the internet, members of the average user base would not. she recounteda customerservice call of a few weeks before, saying that she had made a practice of listening in on such calls to remind herself that people could experienceproblems with even the simplest of services. this call concerned a system thataol offered to both broadband and dialup customers permitting parents to setthe level of access their children would have to the internet. òwe had one longtime customer call, and he was trying to figure out how to turn out the parentalcontrols,ó she recounted. òhe unfortunately was down in his laundry room, andhe thought that the parentalcontrol switch was near the boiler.ó simplicity isneeded, she declared, òso we donõt have everybody whoõs trying to use theseservices wandering around the laundry room or worse.óthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects139the view from the copyright industrysteven j. metalitzsmith & metalitzmr. metalitz began by listing products and services that are dependent uponcopyright protection: books, music and sound recordings, movies, audiovisual,tv, video games, computer games, and business software, among others. toillustrate the economic impact of the industries that produce them, he posted achart showing the results of a study commissioned periodically by the international intellectual property alliance, which he represents (see figure 40). themost recent study, based on data for the year 2002, put the annual contribution ofthe copyright industries to u.s. gdp at $1.25 trillion dollars. half of that camefrom the òcore copyright industries,ó those he had just mentioned; the rest camefrom other, òcopyrightdependent industriesó including the segments of the retail,transportation, and distribution businesses devoted to copyrighted materials.similar studies, of which more and more were being conducted, put results forother countries in basically the same range.pirate product inevitable with broadbandexpressing his enthusiasm for the opportunities broadband affords to òeverything that is protected by copyrightóñopportunities to provide new types ofproducts and services to new customers over new delivery mediañmr. metalitzfigure 40copyright industries (isic) valueadded contribution to gdp.source: <http://www.iipa.com/copyrightuseconomy.html>.470.3595626.2594.3611.9627.802004006008001,0001,2001,400199720012002core copyright industriesother copyright industriesbillions of dollarsyearthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140the telecommunications challengesaid he looked forward to the growth of broadbandõs presence in the united states.at the same time, he cautioned, òwe know thereõs going to be a certain amount ofpirate product coming through the pipe, and anybody who tells you that thereõsany realistic strategy to eliminate piracy on the network is fooling themselves orattempting to fool you.ó the hope, he said, was to achieve a relatively low levelof piracy and a very high level of legitimate products; the concern, of course, wasthat the exact opposite might result. the broadband challenge was òto make surethat itõs the first scenario, and not the second,ó that prevailed.referring to dr. nelsonõs observation that napster, though demonstratingthe power of a new paradigm, had nonetheless been illegal, mr. metalitz wentfurther. ònot only is it illegal,ó he declared, òbut itõs also bad for this hugesegment of the economy that weõve been talking about. itõs therefore bad for ouroverall economy, itõs bad for jobs in the united states, and itõs certainly bad forthe public as a whole in terms of the continuing incentive to invest in the creationof new audio, video, software, and other products.ókorean, u.s. broadband markets diametrically opposedmr. metalitz evoked trends from the music industry in south koreañwhosepresent, he suggested, may provide a glimpse of the united statesõ futureñtounderline his concern. close to 80 percent of south korean households havebroadband access, a rate twice that of the united states, and the network is useddifferently in the korean market than it is here. fourfifths of korean broadbandcustomers reported consuming audio and video products, over half play gamesonline, and some twofifths engage in file sharing, while only 14 percent reportedusing their broadband connection for email. u.s. figures were close to opposite,with a far higher percentage of americans using broadband for email, a far lowerpercentage for some of the other applications. in the music industry, whose roleas guinea pig he ascribed to its needing less bandwidth than video, the koreanmarket for compact disks was off 40ð60 percent from a few years before, to thepoint that it was smaller than the market for ringtones. òitõs great that mobileservices are growing,ó he reflected, òbut that isnõt really going to replace themuchlarger hard goods market.ó the country had, at the same time, seen a hugeincrease in pirate services. when the korean version of napster 1, soribada, wasshut down, it had 8 million subscribers, or about onesixth of the countryõs population. an unlicensed audio streaming service had 14 million. òwe donõt want toend up in this situation,ó he said.but how might the united states avoid it? mr. metalitz organized theelements of the challenge under five rubrics: legitimate market, technology, legaltools, enforcement, and public education.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects141legitimate marketdeveloping the legitimate market for copyrighted materials over broadbandñfor entertainment services, software, video games, research, referenceworksñwas indispensable for success. meeting this challenge would mean offering enhanced products, as had been done in hard goods with the transition fromthe cd to the dvd and on to the various types of enhanced formats whosepresence in the market was increasing; offering more delivery channels; andmaking services easier to use. this new broadband market was analogous in certain ways to a large, new geographical market: he drew a parallel between it andthe chinese market, which the copyright industries had been trying to reach withphysical goods and where they had encountered a significant piracy problem.while remarking that many steps had been taken to combat piracy in china,mr.metalitz suggested it was generally recognized òthat you canõt really changethe paradigm and move to a society thatõs mostly consuming legitimate goodsunless you have access to that market and can get your legitimate goods in.ó thewidespread availability of infringing product represents a similar òmarket accessbarrieró for legitimate copyright industries in the broadband market. the key tosurmounting that barrier is to make sure that the technology was married to thecreative product in a way that delivered something customers would want andwould find both easy to use and attractive.technologygreater control over content would need to be provided to the end user, asmr. schuon and others had discussed, but delivery of the content would have tobe sufficiently secure òto keep honest people honest.ó also needed would bemeasures ensuring that the incomegenerating potential of material going into thepipe did not vanish forever. in addition, according to mr. metalitz, a moreplatformneutral approach was called for; the problem of interoperability, salientin the music sphere, where legitimate services were proliferating, had not yetbeen solved. finally, it was desirable that protections be developed that, whenapplied, were more or less invisible to end usersñwho could thus focus on enjoying the experience that they had paid for, or on getting access to the material thatthey had subscribed to, rather than on the protections.legal issuesin the digital millennium copyright act, the united states had the basicframework needed to protect the technological measures used to control access tocopyrighted materials in the network environment, and more and more countrieswere adopting similar measures. some enforcement improvements were pendingbefore congress even then: the intellectual property protection act contained anthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142the telecommunications challengeamalgam of ways to improve enforcement activities, including those of thedepartment of justice. but a problem had been presented by a recent decision ofthe ninth circuit court of appeals dealing with peertopeer services and,particularly, with grokster. under that precedent, according to mr. metalitz, abusiness could be built whose only viability was based on copyright infringement, òand yet that doesnõt attract liability under the copyright law or, really, anyother law at this point.ó this needed to be fixed, he said, because investment andinnovation should be going into legal businesses rather than into encouragingillegal activity, and there were many ways in which it could be fixed. a petitionwas then pending before the u.s. supreme court asking that the case be reviewed,and legislation had been proposed in the congress that would address the matter,although it was unlikely to be passed during the current session. however it wasaddressed, he said, the status quo was untenable because, under it, investmentwas permitted that encouraged illegal activity.enforcementsometimes forgotten òin all the brouhaha about the lawsuits that the riaa[had] brought and that the mpaa [was] about to bring against enduser filesharers,ó mr. metalitz said, was that òmost of the piracy problem we face is stilldue to organized criminal groups.ó many of these groups are transnational, andthat, he felt, is where many enforcement resources need to be focused. still, whathe called òdedicated amateursó also played a role in making the system insecure,which explained the riaaõs and mpaaõs actions.public educationenforcement action, however, was not being undertaken exclusively for itsown sake; in fact, mr. metalitz asserted that it was best viewed as a means ofpublic education. survey research had shown that most people in the united stateshad not known a year or two before that uploading through a filesharing servicewas illegal and an infringement of copyright if one did not have permission fromthe copyright owner. those present at the symposium would have known that thisactivity was illegal, he stated, because they followed such issues closely, but theaverage consumer really had not been aware. that had since changed, in thatmost people now knew that it was illegal. the question of whether they were ableto make their own conduct or that of their family members conform to the law,however, got into a cultural issue regarding attitudes toward intellectual propertyand creativity in the larger society. nonetheless, public understanding, at least ofthis basic feature of copyright law, had moved to a much higher level.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects143to meet the challenge, cooperation a mustpossibly the most important concept for the copyright industry as it attemptedto meet the broadband challenge, according to mr. metalitz, was cooperation.the copyright industry was unlikely to achieve or even to advance its objectivesin any of the above areas, he said, in the absence of cooperation with providers ofnetworking services on the one hand, and, on the other, better communicationwith policymakers and people such as those attending the symposium who wereòseeking to understand what all these developments are leading to.ódiscussionphilippe webre of the congressional budget office noted that ciscoõs claimto have sold òa couple of millionó ip telephones contrasted with mr. mamakosõsestimate that, at 300,000, vonage held half the voip market. he conjectured thatmany ip phones were being used in enterprises and asked mr. mamakos to explainhow the enterprise market was different from the market he had discussed in histalk.mr. mamakos suggested that the voip enterprise market might be considered òsort of a nextgeneration pbx.ó he himself had a cisco voip phone on hisdesk at vonage, and many other companies had abandoned the traditional nortel/avaya key system phone that is plugged into a central pbx using dedicated wires.replacing it were voice over ip appliances bought from cisco or other vendors;these are equipped with a òsoft pbxó that handles voip and then is connected tothe pstn òbehind the scenes by whatever means: either voice over ip again, orisdn pri, or the normal sort of interconnect.ó the statistics in his own presentation had referred to enduser subscribers on the pstn as opposed to users withinan enterprise or corporate setting. he said he did not know whether the enterprisemarket was growing faster than the enduser market.voip consumer, enterprise market rising in tandemdr. nelson, expressing ibmõs excitement about enterprise voice over ip,posited that growth in the two markets was similar, with curves going up veryquickly. he stressed, however, that the enterprise sector comprised ip servicesbeyond voice. it was the ability to put fax, email, and voice together in one systemthat ibm was selling to its enterprise customers, who were tired of managingseparate phone and data networks. this was particularly useful to companies withlarge numbers of mobile employees; for example, it allowed ibm employees,30percent of whom did not have an office, to get their voice mail and faxes asemail attachments. as a result, he remarked, òwe donõt have to go to three different services to get the information we need to do our job.ó so while vonage wasselling more versatile voice service, ibm was selling a totally different way ofdoing messaging.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144the telecommunications challengevonage, stated mr. mamakos, offered the same sort of technology and someoverlapping products and services, but was targeting different market segments.new services: identifying the showstoppersevoking the term òshowstoppers,ó used by the semiconductor industry forpotential obstacles to the continuation of progress at the pace described bymooreõs law, dr. charles wessner of the step board asked dr. nelson andmr.mamakos whether they were aware of potential showstoppers of either aregulatory or technical nature in the markets they had discussed. he asked inaddition whether solutions to any such barriers had been identified.dr. nelson named privacy, intellectual property, and security as the threeshowstopper issues for the grid, with a solution to the last being a prerequisitefor dealing with the first two. as to privacy, a òmajor change in mindsetó wasneeded before corporations would accept a third partyõs running the it infrastructureon which their essential services depended; among other things, they had to beconvinced that their data would be kept confidential even though the third partywas running all the systems that that data passed through. òyou not only need tomake sure the data is safe from hackers,ó he said, òyou also have to convince thecorporate customer that youõre not somehow tracking what kind of applicationstheyõre using and who theyõre talking to.ó this was similarly true, he observed, inthe case of vonageõs customers, to whom it must be abundantly clear that thecompany was storing a great deal of personal data, voice mails included.thechallenge for both grid and voip providers was to win the customerõs trust.on the issue of intellectual property, dr. nelson said, there was òa long wayto go.ó no consistent standards for drm existed, and it was clear that manydifferent solutions would be needed, as the grid would be a very powerful toolfor the pirates referred to by mr. metalitz.imposing old regulation on a new mediumdr. nelson then turned to security, which he considered not a regulatoryissue but a challenge for suppliers of services, as hundredbilliondollar industries were being built on an infrastructure that òisnõt quite ready for that.ó in theregulatory domain, his biggest fear was of efforts to impose old regulation on thenew mediumña tendency that was, in fact, active all around the world. servingas vice president for policy for the internet society and working with developingcountries, he had seen how easy it was to say, òinternet telephony looks liketelephony so weõd better to regulate it that way, and streaming audio lookslikeradio so weõd better impose regulation that way.ó such thinking, he asserted,òcould stop everything very quickly.ómr. mamakos placed the major challenge for vonage in the domain of regulation and public policy. there was òno new physics we have to invent to be ablethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the waterfall effects145to grow the business,ó he said. òitõs a matter of doing a good job of execution, andtechnology evolution hopefully allows us to do a better job more economically.óin contrast, great uncertainty remained on the policy and regulatory side. vonagewas engaged in a project to implement calea capability, as the company wantedto be òpart of the solution, not part of the public policy problem.ó while his ownbelief was that the company needed to pursue the project even though greatexpense was involved, he acknowledged that this was ònot entirely clear.óif the grid is inherently global, dr. murray then asked, òwhat do we do in theunited states?ólocating transactions in an inherently global marketmr. mamakos remarked that vonageõs users could, and did, take their telephone adapter and plug it in all over the world, using their telephone service as ifthey were at home. òitõs a feature,ó he said, ònot a bug.ódr. nelson observed that while many old laws assume that a company islocated in one place and that a transaction occurs in one place, the grid mighthave data coming from brazil and computing power from canada and germanywhile the user was somewhere in belgium. thus the potential existed òto do atransaction in five places at once,ó which would also confound regulations taxingthe value of the transaction based on where it took place. that the òlaws are notvirtualized but the grid isó could lead to what he termed òa lot of just totalcollision.ómr. metalitz said that all three issues raised by dr. nelson were problematicon the international level. that legal standards were harmonized to a greaterdegree than they had been a decade or two before in the intellectual propertyareas, and particularly in the copyright area, was a positive development. butthere was far less harmonization in the privacy area, where there was not any oneinternational agreement that established a standard of privacy protection.ms. hook, while concurring on the previous points regarding ip and privacy,differed on taxes and subsidization. òit is really quite easy,ó she contended, òforservicelayer providers to provide the services from an international point ofpresence and avoid having to get at all entangled in any kind of local or statetaxation or universal service fund.ó this was particularly important on the telecomside, where upward of 23 percent of the revenue line was subject to a variety ofstate and local taxes, making domestic providers òautomatically noncompetitivevis‹vis providers coming in from international sources.ótechnologyõs challenge to the constancy of timemr. hellman, in reflecting on how the evolution of computer and communication technologies might affect real estate development, had realized that peoplelive simultaneously in two different domains, time and space. asking someonethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146the telecommunications challengethe distance between home and work, for instance, more often elicits an answerexpressed in time than in space. examining the reason people respond this wayleads to a profound insight: there have always been 24 hours in a day, and in thefuture there will presumably continue to be 24 hours in a day, and because allbasic activities have to fit into 24 hours, peopleõs behavior is relatively stable inthe time domain. but as work becomes more virtual, with technology allowing itto move away from a paperbased manuallabor paradigm toward an electronicbased network paradigm, the whole world becomes one virtual place in whichaustralia, say, is less than onetenth of one second from the united states. thechallenge for the evolution of the human species, in light of this, may be whetherit can deal with the world as one integrated system.dr. nelson remarked that one of the drivers behind the grid was the desire,since there are only 24 hours in a day, not to waste half an hour of that time backingup a hard drive, reconfiguring a disk, or downloading new software patches.mr. schuon recounted having experienced a òkind of content mooreõs lawóover the previous two years thanks to tivos and other products incorporatinghard drives. he now flips through tv shows as through pages of a magazine,forwarding through parts of shows that do not interest him. òi can watch ôdateline nbcõ and ô60 minutesõ in under and hour,ó he said, òand iõll bookmark thebusiness section of the new york times, reading that every morning but nevergetting to the rest of the paper.ó by managing content in this manner, he has beenable to do and see much more in the same 24hour period.the ip dilemma: private licenses vs. public goodmr. hellman observed that information is an unusual form of property in thateven if it is stolen, the victim of the theft retains it. he saw in the current increasein the flow of intellectual property a parallel to the change brought about by theinvention of the printing press, which had drastically reduced the cost of reproducing and distributing information, thereby elevating the quality of life on earthas a whole. the intellectual property issue becomes very interesting, in his view,if the only way to protect what we think of as intellectual property rights is toslow down an evolution whose benefit to the world is such that economics maybe irrelevant.mr. metalitz noted that intellectual property law had faced many challenges inthe past and had adapted to significant changes. a century ago, for example, therewas no such thing as recorded music, and copyright law has been able to adapt toall the changes that intervened. still, he acknowledged, there was no questionthat, as mr. hellman had outlined, it was again facing a profound challenge.mr. schuon, recalling dr. raduchelõs description of how people gathered tolisten to the virgin play of an lp, observed that the current consumer was largelyhappy with an mp3 file on an ipod, whose quality was well below that of acompact disk. consumers, he concluded, would trade quality for the ability tomanage content and use it in a more exciting way.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.147panel ivññññññññññññññññññññparticipantsõ roundtablemoderator: dale w. jorgenson, harvard universityh. brian thompson, itown communicationsdavid s. isenberg, isen.comlisa a. hook, aol broadband (retired)jeffrey m. jaffe, lucent technologiesandrew schuon, international music feedwilliam j. raduchel, ruckus networkdr. jorgenson asked each of the roundtableõs participants to state brieflywhat he or she would be taking away from the dayõs meeting.as someone who had repeatedly had the experience during his career in thetelecommunications industry of looking back and seeing the preceding few yearsas the most exciting yet, mr. thompson said he had the feeling as the symposiumconcluded that the coming five years were going to be extremely exciting.significant discontinuities would be taking place òin everything that everybodythought was the status quo,ó he predicted, quoting mciõs founder, bill mcgowan,on the danger of òwanting the status quo long after the quo had lost its status.óthat those in industry desire both to lead commercially and to cause theirtechnologies to evolve into something useful to society dictates that they look atthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148the telecommunications challengewhat they are trying to accomplish from more than one perspective. putting in aword of praise for open access, he said that òweõve got to create the opportunityfor people not to be shut off even from the small things that we find not justenjoyable but beneficial to us intellectually as well as socially.ómr. thompson found frustrating that a huge part of the world still had neverused a telephone, let alone taken downloads on an ipod. he stressed the importance of opening up access to the network and òcreating opportunity for thepeople, broadly based, to make their own selections about what they want to do.óendorsing ms. hookõs plea for simplicity, he said that services needed to be notonly accessible but also packaged in a way that would allow users throughout thenation and the world to take advantage of them.the symposium had also, he said, left him with the pleasure of knowing thathis was not a lone voice on such issues.mr. isenberg asserted that òif the status quo has lost its status, people ingeneral at this conference donõt seem to realize it.ó technology that alreadyexisted made it unnecessary to be limited by bandwidth, but those in attendancewere òjust assuming that weõre on the right track.ó if, as others had claimed, thedemand for bandwidth was insatiable and people would use bandwidth once theywere given it, then the problem, as he expressed it, was that ònobodyõs giving mebandwidth.ó what he wanted, he said, was ònot just bandwidth [but] stupid, openbandwidth: fast pipe, always on, get out of my way.óms. hook recounted that in the summer of 1949 there was an article inelectrical engineering magazine predicting that within the next three years allhomes would be networked, with a server in the telephone closet. in the late1970s and early 1980s warner communications founder steve ross had an interactive network called òcubeó in columbus, ohio, intended to deliver voice, video,and several additional applications, as well as to upload and download the userõsmedical information, in a networked household. it was, she said, òa completefiasco.ó time warner had a similar fullservice network about ten years later thatprovided voice, video, data, uploading, and downloading on a trial basis to severalthousand homes in orlando, florida. a survey conducted upon the conclusion ofthe experiment found that the only application users would have been willing topay for was a highpitched tone that killed roaches. òso for $100,000 a home,óshe said, òwe had created the networked version of terminix.ójuxtaposing the picture emerging from this 50year span of industry historywith the current argument that if people are given unlimited bandwidth, they willbe able to use it, ms. hook offered several observations:¥that, in line with what mr. thompson had said, a point of inflection had beenreached with respect to the ability to put unlimited bandwidth into peopleõs hands;¥that, particularly over the previous year, people had begun to experimentin the manner of mr. schuon with uploading and downloading, and to changetheir behaviors in ways never seen before; butthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.participantsõ roundtable149¥that the industry was struggling at the service layer to find business modelsand revenue streams on these applications that would justify the investmentneeded to make unlimited bandwidth available.òso i think weõre getting there,ó she said, òbut iõd still say we canõt build outthis entire network based on terminixõs business model, because theyõre doingjust fine with the old juice.ódr. jaffeõs strategy for summarizing the symposium, which he said hadpresented so many issues and perspectives that his head was spinning, was to takeall of the dayõs ideas and put them into five different òbucketsó:¥bucket no. 1, technology issues. technology issues concerning investment, infrastructure, security, and reliability remained to be resolved beforeservice could be offered that was universal, high speed, and full bandwidth with alarge number of applications.¥bucket no. 2, regulatory policy. all had concluded that it is not acceptable for the united states to be thirteenth in the world in broadband and that,òsomehow or other, our regulatory policies are failing usó; therefore, regulatorypolicy needed to be addressed.¥bucket no. 3, economic policy. there had been a great deal of veryinteresting discussion about who the winners and losers would be in the nextgeneration of networks. òwhatõs important to me,ó said dr. jaffe, òis that theconsumer wins, that the country wins, and that we get this technology out there.ó¥bucket no. 4, technology absorption. òtechnology absorption by themasses is a nontrivial part of the technology and industrial ecosystem,ó saiddr.jaffe, praising ms. hookõs points regarding the important role played by theservice infrastructure.¥bucket no. 5, r&d policy. while much of the symposium had beendevoted to òhow we deploy that which we already know how to do,ó dr. jaffewas anxious about òthat which we donõt know how to doó and about making surethat the united states got there first. the country had been very innovative overthe past two decades, and the dayõs discussion had indicated that it would continue to be innovative over the coming two decades, but, he said, òwe donõt wantto stop there.ó for this reason, r&d policy was, for him, a òhotbutton issue.ómr. schuon evoked the memory of the òperfect stormó for entertainmentcontent providers that had arisen from the confluence of a number of elements:the availability of ample space on hard drives and of a certain amount of broadband with the advent of mp3s and then of napster. this ushered in an era ofwidespread piracy and filesharing, and it made music the killer app driving muchof the growth of the internetõs entertainment content sites in the late 1990s. atthat time, every major media company thought it had to have music sites, asmusic sites were going to drive its business.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150the telecommunications challengethe music business, mr. schuon reiterated, is the guinea pig for other contentbusinesses, and, with larger amounts of broadband becoming available, the moviebusiness was now right behind the music business. remarking that not allfinancial models had yet been figured out, he expressed the hope that the contentsector of the entertainment industry could òcatch up to the technology a little bitand get a little bit ahead of the game.ó because providers had neglected to thinkabout how to monetize content on the internet, they were now having a hard timeconvincing consumers, who had become used to the idea that everything comingto them via the internet was free, that they should pay. òif we donõt educatepeople early about the value of the content,ó he said, òthen when all [the anticipated new offerings become] available, everybody is going to be trading it again,and weõre going to have no business at all in media.ómr. schuon called this a frightening prospect but said that, although it mightseem to be just around the corner, it would be longer in coming than manyñand,in particular, enthusiastic potential usersñmight think. still, he warned, if theindustry tarried in creating an economic model for òthe distribution of content ona grand scale,ó then it would find itself òin very big trouble.óto conclude the panelistsõ accounts of what they would take away from thesymposium, dr. jorgenson turned to dr. raduchel, who had set the context forthe dayõs discussions by providing what dr. jorgenson called a òvery eloquentpicture of the convergence of everything on the great network.ódr. raduchel began by noting that mr. lajoie had been the only one amongthe network providers to raise the question of content protection, as well as byseconding mr. schuonõs observation that content protection would be essentialfor the future of the entertainment business. auguring a significant challenge wasthe fact that content protection had not been built into the network, nor had theindustry yet come up with an alternative. his response to the question of òwhowas going to win, the broadcast industry feeding large hard drives on tivolikedevices or the ip networkbased people,ó was that òone side has all the licensesand the other has none.ó seeing in this the existence of a òmajor edge,ó he said thequestion needed to be addressed.but the foremost challenge, according to dr. raduchel, was coming up witha viable business model. he had recently returned from a visit to south koreaduring which the president of korea telecom had told him: òõbit consumption isgoing up all the time. prices are flat to down.õó as a result, the company, althoughòway aheadó of its u.s. counterparts, was not making any moneyñor, as itspresident had put it, òõweõre dying.õó and messrs. wegleitner, lajoie, andthompson had all just said the same thing: in the absence of a stable businessmodel, there was no knowing when it would be possible to make a return on theseactivities. mr. thompson in particular was making òa huge betó in positing payback over 10ð12 years, which dr. raduchel called òa long time in todayõs world.óconvergence was coming, and every time it seemed that the flow of moneyinto it might stop, it began again from yet another source. how would telecomthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.participantsõ roundtable151companies deal with making cell phones work perfectly everywhere? with voipcausing rates to plummet? with skype, a company made up of eight computerprogrammers in estonia, offering telephone calls worldwide for next to nothing?the next decade, dr. raduchel warned, would be marked by òlots of dislocation.óalluding to the remarks by mr. tenhula of the fcc, he placed the industry òsomewhere between consumer confusion and political anxietyó and opined that thelatter was just beginning to build.among his own worries, he said, was where the r&d would come from.korea had no expectation of making money on consumer broadband but had builtout its network because 38 percent of its exports were ip based and it wanted tomake sure that samsung and lg were the companies that supplied the world. itwas clear that the network, as the koreans did not care whether it ended up havingvalue in itself, was an instrument of industrial policy, and that their interest was indriving investment, driving standards, and giving their home companies anadvantage. it was because dr. raduchel felt that u.s. competitiveness hinged onbroadband, even if he was unable to sketch the connection directly, that this wasamong his worries.although unsure what the business model for 100mbpsintothehome mightbe, he was certain that it would depend on supplying content. recalling that itwas not market forces but, in the face of opposition from the cable industry, anact of congress that got hbo onto satellite, dr. raduchel said he thought òitmight take a similar act of congress here around content.ó the european unionhad been bolder, having overridden existing exclusivities in ordering that soccerrights be made available to broadband, both wireless and wired. òif you donõthave the content, youõre not going to have the business models to do this,ó heobserved, reminding those in attendance that the reason consumers pay is to beentertained.summing up, he said he could not predict who would mediate the comingdislocation. whether the fcc had the legitimacy to do this was unclear, as thefccõs moves to protect content had constituted òat best a mixed bag.ó there was,in fact, no one institution that was constituted such that it could settle questions ofintellectual property rights. his initial questionñhow regulation would beachieved once convergence had turned all the various telecommunications industries into featuresñhad thus remained unanswered.discussionmr. gardinier said that his major takeaway from the symposium was thesturgeon ruleñò90 percent of everything is crapóñand inferred that it wasexemplified by the practice of bundling. òpeople are being sold cds when theywant a song, theyõre being sold a dvd with 10 different applications that, becausethey just want to watch a movie, they never are going to use,ó he noted, assertingthat this is òone of the big problemsó in that it drives up prices. that said, hethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152the telecommunications challengeasked whether any of the panelists had taken consumer wants and needs intoaccount in forming business models.mr. thompson, emphasizing that he was speaking as a service provider andnot a content provider, said that his own business model was based on the factthat òthe consumer today is paying $137 a month to get something thatõs notworth $137.ó an assumption of his targeting a tenyear payback was that he couldtake out costs that service providers had been passing down to consumers.consumers ògo catatonicó upon reading their phone bill because none of thenumerous charges it contains, the largest of which is the federal access charge,makes any sense to them. and it is these charges to which they are objecting.bundling was a second source of objection. òpeople want it simple,ó he said,òbut they want it simple the way that they can consume it and the way they wantto consume it.ó while having open access is difficult, it leads to the consumerõshaving more say. òit will get people who want to bundle in different ways fordifferent audiences together to create something thatõs of great value to theindividual,ó he claimed.addressing the question from the content side, mr. schuon said that since theamerican record industry had lost the ability to make money selling singles,which continued to be a decent business in europe, it had been plagued by thebundling problem. over the years, the u.s. industry had not done the best job ofmarketing the value of music to the consumer. certain offerings could be considered complete works that actually constituted an album, he said, naming asexamples certain classical works, movie soundtracks, and the music of such artistsas u2 and bruce springsteen. but in most cases popular records were built aroundtwo or three songs, with the rest put in as filler. the fact that it had not figured outhow to make money on an a la carte basis had caught up with the record industrynow that consumers wishing to purchase single songs had the option of takingtheir business somewhere else, and it was something that the industry had todealwith.dvds, in contrast, were reasonably priced, and the extras were thrown in asa bonus, which consumers liked and which added value without raising cost. toillustrate how the pricing of dvds had hurt the record business, mr. schuonrecounted going to best buy and seeing the spiderman dvd displayed right nextto the spiderman soundtrack and priced $2 below it. such a thing is possiblebecause there are so many marketing windows in the movie business: a film issold at the box office, in stores, on payperview, to airplane passengers, on hbo,and to broadcasters. in contrast, records have only the one play, they sell fewerunits, and the cost is greater. for this reason, albums cost more than dvds;consumers, however, have no idea why, whereas they know how much moviescost to make because òthe film industry always tells you, ôthis movie cost $100million and this star got this much, and thereõs real value in that.õó while admitting that the record industry had not taken the time to educate the consumer onthis point, he speculated that it might not be possible to do so in any case.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.participantsõ roundtable153comparing prices through the different distribution channels, ms. hookobserved that it seemed fairly rational to pay $17 for the ownership of a film asopposed to $10 for a ticket to a movie theater. the problem for the music industrywas that the alternative to paying $17.99 for a cd was not paying at all butstealing the content off the internet. the issue, as she put it, was that the musicindustry had fallen behind in figuring out interim price points between zero and$18. in response, mr. schuon called charging a dollar per track òa nice startó butnoted that the industry still canõt make a profit at that price level.dr. isenberg threw out two questions: whether apple could be consideredpart of the music industry, and whether it hadnõt figured out how to sell singlessuccessfully.ms. hook answered that singles were a loss leader for apple the same waymusic was a loss leader for walmart. òthis whole industry has become a promotional industry,ó she declared. but mr. schuon pointed out that the worldõs largestmusic company, the universal music group, was not in the hardware business atall and therefore drew no benefit if its works promoted the sale of ipods orstereosñyet it still had, somehow, to turn a profit. as for the claim that ituneswas profitable, he speculated that if it had sold 150 million downloads at a dollareach, the business would emerge as òat best a breakevenó once appleõs marketing costs were figured in.òcouldnõt it be that the music industry is changing and that the formerlyôgreatest music company in the worldõ is losing its status in the current quo?ódr.isenberg asked. mr. schuon replied that consumers had never had a morevoracious appetite for music, and that there were more hits than ever, but thatmonetizing that enjoyment of the music had become extremely challenging.in the opinion of dr. raduchel, itunes in fact constituted òa disaster for themusic industryó because, on a $330 sale of an ipod on itunes, the music industrygot $20 and apple got $310. this business model was not sustainable for theindustry in the long run because it would not provide sufficient revenue either toproduce the music or to create the demand that drives sales. moreover, as steveballmer had said, the basic drm for music on the ipod was òstolen.ó while themicrosoft ceo issued a retraction owing to the annoyance his statement had caused,according to dr. raduchel only 30 songs on an average ipod had actually been sold.to address the question of bundling, he turned to the price structure in effectat mcdonaldõs and the consumer behavior it engenders. a customer ordering adouble cheeseburger, a coke, and french fries may base his or her decision on theprice of the cheeseburger, but there is in fact no gross margin on that item, whilethere is a 90 percent gross margin on the coke and the fries. the company, therefore, depends on the sale of bundles for its profit. òthe essence of every consumerbusiness iõve ever studied,ó dr. raduchel remarked, òis that you make yourmoney by denying consumers what they most want, thus making them buy it theway you want them to.ó as this model was used in consumer businesses acrossthe board, bundling would continue.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154the telecommunications challengeobserving that the symposium had spent far less time on the issue of securitythan did most meetings of its kind, dr. nelson posed a question on that topic inthe form of a scenario. some who knew the internet well remained worried aboutthe prospect of a systemic problem: perhaps a way in which the domain namesystem (dns) could be brought down or a virus that, spreading throughout theônet, could disable a million hard drives in a day. how would the investmentcommunity respond to such an occurrence? how would regulators, both in the unitedstates and elsewhere, respond? and how should they respond if the internet has aserious security problem that could be exploited?dr. jaffe expressed the belief that a single instance would occasion a greatnumber of meetings and perhaps even a congressional investigation but òveryminimaló response beyond that. the dearth of practical measures taken after theevents of 9/11 had shown the countryõs firstresponder systems to be antiquatedcould be regarded as precedent. he put forward as an explanation that in order tobelieve that there is economic value in defending against a security threat, òyouhave to believe itõs going to happen again or build into your model that itõs goingto happen again.ó because the united states is òa very optimistic society,ó hesaid, òit seems to take us a very long time to take things seriously.ó agencies ofthe government that are nominally responsible for the countryõs infrastructureshould be more active in this area than they had been, because nothing wouldhappen otherwise.dr. raduchel attributed recent resignations at the department of homelandsecurity to the lack of attention given this issue and said that richard clarke wasvery passionate about it but that, once he had left, there would be no one to carrythe torch. as to whether a security disaster was likely to happen, dr. raduchelexpressed uncertainty. he personally had been using the pc firewall product thathad been voted the most secure, but attackers specifically targeting it had found ahole in it a few months before, with the result that his hard drive had been completely destroyed. still, he registered his disagreement with dr. jaffe, saying thata major ddos attack would incite òpanic in some quarters over what it woulddo and where it would go.óin the face of dr. jaffeõs rejoinder that significant security breaches hadalready taken place, dr. raduchel objected there had been nothing òto the extentto which you couldnõt make airline reservations for a week.ó but dr. jaffe heldhis ground, saying that incidents òpretty close to that scaleó had occurred, including the shutting down of amazon.ms. hook drew a parallel to the major power outage of two summers beforethat had crippled the u.s. northeast, among other things taking down all financialservices and causing them to be rerouted to north carolina. although it was aòhuge issueó at the time, she recalled, ònothing happened in congress [and]nothing has happened since then [except for] a couple of daysõ worth of newsstories.ó the incident would, in her judgment, have had to be òmuch, much moredramaticó for anyone to take real action.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.participantsõ roundtable155dr. isenberg weighed in on the second half of dr. nelsonõs question, thataddressing what should happen. first, arguing for alternatives to the dns system,which he called òa single point of failure,ó he recommended a research effort thatwould investigate options. second, he called for the institution both of òmultiple,completely physically dissimilar ways of accessing the internetó and of completely dissimilar internet backbones transiting different parts of the country.dr.nelson mentioned that the defense department was in the process of implementing such a program, but dr. isenberg dismissed it because use would belimited to dod itself. while he was unsure about advocating the resurrection ofmicrowave transmission, dr. isenberg said that diverse fiber routes should òcertainlyó be made available. third, it was important to have multiple and differentoperating systems: having one operating system that accounted 85 percent ormore of terminals was unacceptable from the point of view of network reliability.robert hershey asked whether increasing bandwidth and computer power,the consequence of which seemed likely to be an improvement in capability byorders of magnitude, would simply make currently available services cheaper orlead to innovation.dr. isenberg said this would lead to a world unimaginable even to those withactive imaginations. òif we all had a gigabit to our home, which is probablyaffordable and within the scope of todayõs technology, life would be really different and, i have to believe, immeasurably better,ó he said.dr. jaffe, recalling jibes from earlier in the day about the symposiumõs beinga physical rather than a virtual meeting, confided that he òdidnõt relish waking upat 4 in the morning to go to the airport, pass through security, and board a plane inorder to get here. agreeing that the changes cited by mr. hershey would make abig difference, he predicted that òonce thereõs enough bandwidth, thereõll be thisvisceral feeling of being there even when youõre not there.óms. hook said that most bandwidth providers with whom aol talks want toknow, before they invest in the bandwidth, what applications it would be usedtoprovide and how much people are willing to pay for them. she therefore calledmr. hersheyõs questionñwhich she rephrased as òwhat are they going to do withit?óñthe question of the day. she asked mr. thompson to what degree he waswilling to speculate: how extensively would he build out his network before hismarket could be sized and those willing to write monthly checks for his servicehad been identified?mr. thompson emphasized that his project was focused on present ratherthan future capabilities. having looked at what was happening in japan with its$28 gigabits and at what was going on in korea, he had become convinced thatthe crucial issue was not that of the technologyõs availabilityñrather, it was thecost of doing something with it that was beginning to drive new applications.had the united states moved toward more of an open network three or fouryears before, as in his judgment it should have, it would already have ip tv. thatwas the killer application that would òchange the world as we know it,ó he said,the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156the telecommunications challengeadding that at&t had thought the same in 1956, when it introduced the firsttelevision picture phone. not only was mr. thompson himself convinced that iptv would be coming along in the following two or three years, so were southwestbell, which was taking a big bet on it, and others as well. while admitting thathow they would deliver was òanother story,ó he maintained that lower costs weregenerating more opportunity to develop applications that could be useful. atpresent, the country was paying for capabilities that it was not taking advantageof.dr. isenberg, however, òrespectfullyó disagreed that tv over ip had not yetarrived. he said that he often òwentó to fcc meetings that put codiffusing tvover ip, although the picture was, unfortunately in his view, both small and lowresolution. he objected to the notion, thrown out by ms. hook, that he was theonly one interested in watching this, saying that specialized niches existed. heallowed as how the clips from the daily show that were being passed aroundwere more popular than the fcc meetings, although he remarked: òif i had thebandwidth, iõd like to see that glint in [fcc chairman michael] powellõs eyewhen he says what he says.ódr. raduchel, looking at r&d trends, said that the one field in which thecountry was spending billions of dollars pretty much out of the public view wassensors. a large portion of the research was classified, as it was meant for application in such homeland security concerns as border protection and monitoring,but its results would inevitably flow into public use. sensors could, in fact, emergeas the source of the next round of productivity improvements, and they had thepotential to cause other significant changes as well. òif you put sensors everywhere, you change the way that every logistics system works,ó he said, adding:òin the end, every business is a logistics system.ópointing out that all sensors are silicon, dr. raduchel remarked that the declining cost of semiconductors was still òdriving the world.ó and a great deal ofbandwidth would be consumed by the constant communication among sensors,which donõt do any good if they canõt communicate. it would be above all thedumb sensors, those lacking the builtin intelligence to make decisions regardingthe meaning of the information they were gathering, that would communicate inlarge volume. asserting that the impact of sensors on the economy would belargeñalthough its scope had not yet become clear, something also true ofnanotechnologyñhe predicted that, within three to five years, they would providethe focus for many meetings similar to the dayõs symposium.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.157dr. jorgenson said that while he did not wish to minimize the many interesting disagreements that had marked the dayõs proceedings, he felt justified in concluding that, in the course of them, lessons learned from previous symposia in thestep boardõs series on the new economy had been corroborated.the series, he recalled, had started with semiconductors and gone throughcomputing and software before arriving at telecommunications. what is differentabout the last, as those attending had heard over and over again, is legacy. thislegacy easily goes back to alexander graham bell although, for economic historians like dr. jorgensonõs neighbor, al chandler, the person most important tothe industryõs origin was benjamin franklin. why franklin? he was the firstpostmaster of the united states. but if communications is an industry with a hugelegacy, it has certain features that are very similar to those of other industries thatthe conference series had examined, something dr. jorgenson would talk about inthese closing remarks.the first issue he would consider was economic impact. the telecommunications industry accounts, by various measures, for about 1 percent of the economy.but, dr. jorgenson cautioned, òõ1 percent of the economyõó is the way industriesare characterized not by economists but by the business pressñso that, in thewall street journal, an industry is accorded importance depending on its percentage of gdp in dollars. economists, in contrast, look at an industry in terms of itsconcluding remarksdale w. jorgensonharvard universitythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158the telecommunications challengeimpact on economic growth. and if the telecommunications industry wereappraised from the latter point of view, he said, a rough estimate would be thatthis 1 percent of the gdp was responsible for about 10 percent of economicgrowth. ten was a common multiplier; the new economy, while only about 3percent of the overall economy, was responsible for about 30 percent of economicgrowth, and the figure was rising. the corresponding figures for other countriestrailed those for the united states but were on basically the same track. theeconomistõs contribution was to get that multiplier of 10 front and center. òirealize we didnõt totally succeed,ó he admitted, òbut we tried.óthe second issue concerned a standard industry model that emerges in thenew economy, a subject treated by andy grove in only the paranoid survive.this òbeautifuló book, which grove wrote when he was not only ceo of intel buta parttime business school professor as well, described a huge shift from a verticalmodel to a horizontal model in both the computer and semiconductor industries.in the vertical modelñincarnated by ibm, which for a long time was the computer industryñthere was a huge laboratory that created large portions of theintellectual property involved in the development of computing technology. butwhile such labs might still exist, the model itself was òhistory,ó as groveõs bookhad pointed out more than a decade before. what the dayõs discussion had taught,dr. jorgenson said, was that the identical shift had taken place in the communications industry. at&t had been the ibm of that model, and r&d under it hadbeen conducted at bell labs. in the new model, which had yet to be preciselydefined, most of the interesting innovations were disruptive: vonage was anexample of a disruptive innovator, as was skype, through which a mere eightprogrammers were disrupting the entire communications industry.with the third issue, the business model, the most important question to beasked about any new economy venture came to the fore: òhow in heaven can weever make any money out of this?ó agreeing with dr. raduchel that the way tomake money is to figure out what the consumer wants and withhold it,dr.jorgenson commended the formerõs analysis of the cheeseburgerdrinkfrenchfries bundleõs cost structure as an explication of the business model. pointing tothe existence of many books on the subject, of which his own favorite was varian& shapiro, he said the matter was very well understood and it applied, to a greateror lesser degree, to all of the businesses carrying the new economy designation.despite the business modelõs familiarity, dr. jorgenson cautioned, it ishard to make money operating under it because consumers are both clever andunpredictable. it was òtoo bad,ó he said, that the consumer ends up carrying awaymost of the welfare, which then cannot be delivered to shareholders. but inanother respect the fact that òconsumers emerge over and over again as the bigwinners, even when confronted by tremendous intellectual talent, [was] the greatthing about the new economy.óthis brought dr. jorgenson to the policy issues, which he qualified asextremely difficult. he characterized the economistõs typical stance as: òõprivatethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.concluding remarks159property has to be the answer, so we just create property rights and then leave thescene and let them fight it out.õó but in the telecommunications sector things arenot quite that simple, because of the presence of other, related issuesñcommonproperty rights, for example, or infrastructure that has to be maintained andcompensated. so, while òitõs not just a case of private property rules the world,óa way had to be found of maintaining common facilities within a marketbasedapproach.in addition, there were more subtle property issues: how do you protectproperty? how do you keep it from being stolen? it was difficult to prevent consumersõ not merely benefiting, but benefiting illegally and carrying off otherpeopleõs property, which was obviously undesirable. at the same time, it wasimportant to provide privacy in a convincing way, one that òassures people thatthey are in fact going to be able to enjoy their property in private if thatõs theirwish.ó propertyrights questions spill over into other areas as well: hardware,infrastructure, software, and content as opposed to software. one very importantarea was the right to the r&d product, òthe intellectual property that is created bypeople who are trying to create this new future that weõve heard about here.ódr. jorgenson called the dayõs proceedings òa total success for the neweconomy modeló and credited the collective efforts of the presenters, panelists,organizers, and members of the audience who had participated in the discussions.he thanked all for attending and said he hoped they would be able to follow theseissues as they unfolded.in closing this meeting and the series on the new economy, dr. jorgensonoffered special thanks to dr. wessner, dr. shivakumar, mr. clabaugh, andmr.dierksheide of the step board staff, and above all to dr. raduchel, whomhe called the intellectual leader of the step boardõs venture into the neweconomy.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.iiiappendixesthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.163mark e. domsmark e. doms is senior economist at the federal reserve bank of sanfrancisco. his research interests include diffusion of it technology and effectson firm performance and shifts in it investment. he is currently beginning arather large project examining the relationship between technology use and firmperformance. this study will use a very large data set on technology use attheestablishment level between 1980 and 2002. the study will first examine thediffusion of it technologies over the past several decades, then examine the relationship between the adoption of various it technologies and firm performancefor a sample of publicly traded companies. dr. doms also is examining models ofit investment at the national level; this involves testing the various hypothesessurrounding the 1990s surge and 2001 sharp drop in it investment.among dr. doms’ published work are “how fast do personal computersdepreciate? concepts and new estimates” (with wendy e. dunn, stephen d.oliner, and daniel e. sichel. frbsf working paper 200320. november); “itinvestment and firm performance in u.s. retail trade” (with ron s. jarmin, andshawn d. klimek. frbsf working paper 200319 november); and “understandappendix abiographies of speakers**as of november 2004.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164the telecommunications challengeing productivity: lessons from longitudinal microdata” (with erik bartelsman,journal of economic literature, september, pp. 569–594, september 2000) aswell as other articles appearing in journals such as review of economic dynamics,economics of innovation and new technology, quarterly journal of economics,economic inquiry, and international journal of industrial organization.mark doms received a b.a. from the university of maryland and a ph.d. ineconomics from the university of wisconsin.charles h. fergusoncharles h. ferguson is a nonresident senior fellow in economic studies atthe brookings institution and an independent computer consultant. he is authorof the broadband problem: anatomy of a market failure and a policy dilemma(brookings institution press, 2004), high stakes, no prisoners: a winnerõs talkof greed and glory in the internet wars (times books, 1999) and coauthor withcharles r. morris of computer wars: the fall of ibm and the future of globaltechnology (random house, 1993). he founded and served as ceo of vermeertechnologies, the company responsible for developing frontpage. he receiveda ph.d. in political science from mit.kenneth flammkenneth flamm is professor and dean rusk chair in international affairs atthe lbj school of public affairs at ut–austin. he is a 1973 honors graduate ofstanford university and received a ph.d. in economics from m.i.t. in 1979.from 1993 to 1995, dr. flamm served as principal deputy assistant secretary ofdefense for economic security and special assistant to the deputy secretaryofdefense for dual use technology policy. prior to and after his service at thedefense department, he spent eleven years as a senior fellow in the foreignpolicy studies program at brookings. dr. flamm has been a professor of economics at the instituto tecnológico a. de méxico in mexico city, the universityof massachusetts, and george washington university.dr. flamm currently directs the lbj school’s technology and public policyprogram, and directs externally funded research projects on “internet use indeveloping and industrializing countries.” “the economics of fair use,” and“determinants of internet use in u.s. households,” and has recently initiated anew project on “exploring the digital divide: regional differences in patterns ofinternet use in the u.s.” he continues to work with semiconductor industry research consortium international sematech, and is building a returnoninvestmentbased prototype to add economic logic to sematech’s industryinvestment model. he also is a member of the national academy of science’spanel on the future of supercomputing, and its committee on measuring andsustaining the new economy. he has served as member and chair of the natothe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a165science committee’s panel for science and technology policy and organization, and as a member of the federal networking council advisory committee,the oecd’s expert working party on high performance computers and communications, and various advisory committees and study groups of the nationalscience foundation, the council on foreign relations, the defense scienceboard, and the u.s. congress’ office of technology assessment, and as aconsultant to government agencies, international organizations, and privatecorporations.dr. flamm is the author of numerous articles and books on the economicimpacts of technological innovation in a variety of high technology industries.among the latter are mismanaged trade? strategic policy and the semiconductorindustry (1996), changing the rules: technological change, international competition, and regulation in communications (ed., with robert crandell, 1989),creating the computer (1988), and targeting the computer (1987). recent workby flamm has focused on measurement of the economic impact of the semiconductor industry on the u.s. economy, analyzing the economic determinants ofinternet use by households, and assessing the economic impacts of internet use inkey applications.lisa a. hookas president of aol broadband, premium & developer services, lisa a.hook oversaw aol’s drive to offer the premier broadband experience to aolmembers. aol for broadband develops, markets, and operates aol’s highspeedline of business with more than 2.5 million subscribers, as of september 30, 2003.in addition, ms. hook led the premium services organization, which develops, launches, and operates new subscription services. working in tandem withaol’s marketing organization, the premium services group works across aolto define and quickly deploy services that bring even greater value to members’online experience.ms. hook’s responsibilities also included oversight of aol’s platformservices initiative that develops the nextgeneration platform strategy needed tolaunch new technologies in a scalable manner, including concerns such as transactions and authentication.formerly, ms. hook served as president of aol anywhere. in this role, shedirected strategy and oversaw daily operations for the company’s fastgrowinganywhere division and its mobile and voice services and nonpc devices. shealso was responsible for new initiatives and partnerships to bring aol’s hallmarkconvenience and easeofuse to online consumers beyond the pc worldwide.a widely respected veteran of the telecommunications and media business,ms. hook joined aol in 2000 as senior vice president of aol mobile and servedas senior vice president and chief operating officer of that division before she wasnamed president of aol anywhere.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166the telecommunications challengeprior to joining the company, ms. hook was a partner at brera capitalpartners llc, a private equity firm focused on investing in media and telecommunications. hook also has served as executive vice president and chiefoperating officer of time warner telecommunications and later was vice presidentof time warner, inc. managing various telecomrelated transactions and operating matters. at time warner, she established the company’s cellular and pagingresale business and built its first successful retail outlets for cellular, paging, andcable services.ms. hook initially joined time warner in 1989 as special advisor to the vicechairman of time warner inc. in this position, she developed and oversaw international joint ventures including the acquisition of cable systems and the launchof theatre and cable services in europe.earlier in her career, ms. hook served as legal advisor to the chairman of thefederal communications commission. before that, she served as senior attorneyat viacom international inc., where she oversaw the legal department of viacom’scable division. ms. hook was also an associate with the law firm of hogan &hartson in washington, d.c.ms. hook is a director of national geographic ventures and a member of theboard of trustees of the national public radio foundation.ms. hook is a graduate of duke university and the dickinson schooloflaw.david s. isenbergin 1997, david s. isenberg wrote an essay entitled, the rise of the stupidnetwork: why the intelligent network was a good idea once but isnõt anymore.in it, isenberg (then a distinguished member of technical staff at at&t laboratories) examined the technological bases of the existing telecom business model,laid out how the communications business would be changed by new technologies, foresaw today’s cataclysms, and imagined tomorrow’s new network.tom evslin, a senior at&t executive at that time, told the wall streetjournal that the rise of the stupid network, “was like a glass of cold water in theface” of at&t’s leaders. the wall street journal called the essay “scathing . . .startling,” and said, “it may soon assume cult status among the tech mavens thatroam the world wide web.” communications week international said that theessay “challenged the most sacred assumptions of the telecom world.” the gildertechnology report said it was “a stirring call.” inevitably, the essay found wideracceptance outside of at&t than within it. so in 1998, isenberg left at&t tofound isen.com, inc. to help telecommunications companies understand the business implications of the newly emerging communications infrastructure.dr. isenberg’s public delivery of the stupid network message is passionateand personal. he has spoken to over 100 audiences on three continents. forexample, he has spoken numerous times at george gilder’s telecosm, at jeffthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a167pulver’s voice on the net, at kevin werbach’s supernova, at john mcquillan’snext generation networks, at the canadian advanced network research(canarie) annual meeting, at merrill lynch and chase bank telecom investormeetings, at the international institute of communications, at the asia pacificregional internet conference (apricot), at the optoelectronics industrydevelopment association (oida) annual conference, at the fiber to the homecouncil’s first annual meeting, and at numerous private management, customer,investor, and technology events.dr. isenberg has been cited and quoted in the new york times, the wallstreet journal, usa today, forbes, fortune, wired, business 2.0, communications week international, network world, release 1.0, gilder technology report,thestreet.com, nikkei communications, and numerous other publications. hisstory appears in at least half a dozen business books, including telecosm bygeorge gilder, the new pioneers by tom petzinger, and the future of ideasbylawrence lessig.dr. isenberg has written articles for fortune, usa today, ieee spectrum,msnbc, communications week international, light reading, business 2.0,americaõs network, von magazine, and acm networker. isenberg advises anumber of new telecommunications companies and their investors. he serves asamember of techbrains (the merrill lynch technology strategy advisory board).he sits on advisory boards of callwave, launchcyte, broadband physics,terabeam, and yottayotta.dr. isenberg is a fellow of glocom, the institute for global communicationsof the international university of japan.he is a founding advisor of the worldtechnology network. he was a judge of the world communications awards in1999 and 2001.in his 12year career at at&t (1985–1998), dr. isenberg was a distinguishedmember of technical staff with at&t labs research, the part of bell labs thatstayed with at&t after the 1996 “trivestiture.” before that, he held at&t belllabs technical positions in consumer long distance, in network services, andin the pbx business unit. before at&t, dr. isenberg was employed by matteland verbex, and did consulting work in voice processing for milton bradley,national semiconductor, gte labs, and others. david isenberg holds a ph.d. inbiology from the california institute of technology (1977) but also learned muchscience growing up in woods hole, massachusetts. his upbringing centeredaround two principles: (1) research is useful, and (2) if you are going to fish, usea big hook.jeffrey m. jaffejeffrey m. jaffe is president of bell labs research and advanced technologies for lucent technologies. bell labs, the company’s global research anddevelopment arm, consists of approximately 10,000 employees in 10 countries.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168the telecommunications challengeas president of bell labs research, dr. jaffe supports basic research toadvance science and technology in areas of importance to lucent. advancedtechnologies works with lucent’s business units in the commercial developmentand deployment of new technologies.prior to joining lucent in 2000, dr. jaffe held a variety of executive researchpositions with international business machines (ibm) in a 20year career, whichincluded general manager of secureway software and corporate vice presidentof technology.dr. jaffe is a fellow of the ieee and the association of computing machinery.the united states government has consulted with dr. jaffe on numerous policyinitiatives. in 1997, president clinton appointed dr. jaffe to the advisorycommittee for the president’s commission for critical infrastructure protection.dr. jaffe has chaired the chief technology officer group of the computersystems policy project (cspp), which consists of a dozen of the top computerand telecommunications companies, and has served on the national researchcouncil’s computer science & telecommunications board.dr. jaffe earned his b.s. in mathematics, a m.s. in electrical engineering,and a ph.d. in computer science, from the massachusetts institute of technology.dale w. jorgensondale w. jorgenson is the samuel w. morris university professor at harvarduniversity. he received a b.a. in economics from reed college in portland,oregon, in 1955 and a ph.d. in economics from harvard in 1959. after teachingat the university of california–berkeley, he joined the harvard faculty in 1969and was appointed the frederic eaton abbe professor of economics in 1980. hehas directed the program on technology and economic policy at the kennedyschool of government since 1984 and served as chairman of the department ofeconomics from 1994 to 1997.dr. jorgenson has been honored with membership in the american philosophical society (1998), the royal swedish academy of sciences (1989), theu.s. national academy of sciences (1978), and the american academy of artsand sciences (1969). he was elected to fellowship in the american associationfor the advancement of science (1982), the american statistical association(1965), and the econometric society (1964). he has been awarded honorarydoctorates by uppsala university (1991), the university of oslo (1991), keiouniversity (2003), and the university of mannheim (2004).dr. jorgenson served as president of the american economic association in2000 and was named a distinguished fellow of the association in 2001. he was afounding member of the board on science, technology, and economic policy ofthe national research council in 1991 and has served as chairman of the boardsince 1998. he also served as chairman of section 54, economic sciences, of thethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a169national academy of sciences from 2000 to 2003 and was president of the econometric society in 1987.dr. jorgenson received the prestigious john bates clark medal of the american economic association in 1971. this medal is awarded every two years to aneconomist under forty for excellence in economic research. the citation for thisaward reads in part:dale jorgenson has left his mark with great distinction on pure economic theory(with, for example, his work on the growth of a dual economy); and equally onstatistical method (with, for example, his development of estimation methods forrational distributed lags). but he is preeminently a master of the territorybetween economics and statistics, where both have to be applied to the study ofconcrete problems. his prolonged exploration of the determinants of investmentspending, whatever its ultimate lessons, will certainly long stand as one of thefinest examples in the marriage of theory and practice in economics.dr. jorgenson has conducted groundbreaking research on information technology and economic growth, energy and the environment, tax policy and investment behavior, and applied econometrics. he is the author of 232 articles ineconomics and the author and editor of twentyfour books. his collected papershave been published in ten volumes by the mit press, beginning in 1995. hismost recent book, economic growth in the information age, was published bythe mit press in 2002 and represents the first major effort to quantify the impactof information technology on the u.s. economy. another recent mit press volume, lifting the burden: tax reform, the cost of capital, and u.s. economicgrowth, coauthored with kunyoung yun in 2001, proposes a new approach tocapital income taxation, dubbed “a smarter type of tax” by the financial times.fortythree economists have collaborated with dr. jorgenson on publishedresearch. many of dr. jorgenson’s books and papers have been coauthored withstudents in economics at berkeley and harvard. among his former students areprofessors at leading academic institutions in the united states and abroad andseveral occupy endowed chairs. the mit press published econometrics and thecost of capital, edited by lawrence j. lau, in 2000. this contains essays inhonor of dr. jorgenson presented at a conference at harvard by thirteen of hisformer students. it also contains his biography, a list of his publications, and a listof his sixtyfour ph.d. thesis advisees at berkeley and harvard.mike lajoiemike lajoie is chief technology officer of time warner cable. prior to hisappointment to cto, mr. lajoie had been serving as the company’s executivevice president of advanced technology since august 2002.over the last several years, mr. lajoie has lead the development and deployment of time warner cable’s extremely successful advanced digital productsthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170the telecommunications challengeincluding video on demand, high definition television and digital video recorders.as chief technology officer, mr. lajoie guides technology development acrossall product offerings at the company. he also charts the course for the continuingevolution of the company’s digital platform and technological infrastructure.mr.lajoie continues to build on his responsibility for new technology development, settop advances and industry standards activities, such as ocap anddocsis, while driving to keep time warner cable in its position as technologyleader within the industry.mr. lajoie served as vice president of corporate development from 1998through 2002, where he oversaw the development of vod software and settopboxes and other major launches of new services and products. mr. lajoie has beeninvolved in many development projects over his 16 years working with the company, including its multi media initiative, the full service network, road runner,pegasus digital television platform, and the company’s early work in ip telephony.prior to joining time warner cable, mr. lajoie was an independent softwaredeveloper and designed and installed network systems. earlier in his career hewas a nasdaq broker/dealer and a series 7 registered securities representative.david lippkedavid lippke, president of highspeed america, has over two decades ofintensive, industryleading experience in technology development and management. mr. lippke is particularly well known for his openness, the strength of hisinterorganizational relationships, and his desire to understand others’ perspectives.mr. lippke joined america online (aol) in 1993 where he led the development of the company’s core infrastructures, scaling mechanisms, and key applications for nine years. early in his aol career, mr. lippke developed aol’sscalable architecture including the architecture and implementation of aolinstant messengertm, a highperformance messaging fabric architected in 1996to support the two orders of magnitude growth represented by the nine millionsimultaneous user load experienced now.mr. lippke most recently served as aol’s senior vice president for systemsinfrastructure leading a nationwide engineering organization of some 9,000employees with primary responsibility for the company’s hostbased products;systems and connectivity infrastructures; as well as its advertising, publishing,and contenttracking systems.louis mamakoslouis mamakos, chief technology officer, oversees all technology functionsat vonage, which includes new product and services development, supervision ofall research projects and integration of all technologybased activities intovonage’s corporate strategy.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a171mr. mamakos has more than 20 years of experience in internet technicalengineering and architecture for large scale, commercial ip backbone networks.most recently, mr. mamakos served as a fellow for hyperchip, inc., a startup thatbuilt scalable, highperformance core routers. prior to hyperchip, mr.mamakosheld various engineering and architecture positions during his eight years atuunet technologies, now known as mci. prior to uunet technologies,mr.mamakos spent nearly twelve years as assistant manager for network infrastructure at the university of maryland, college park.mr. mamakos holds a b.s. in computer science from university of maryland—college park.steven j. metalitzsteven j. metalitz is a partner in the washington, d.c. law firm of smith &metalitz, llp. he specializes in intellectual property, privacy, ecommerce andinformation law. he provides legal counseling and policy advocacy, primarily forclients in the publishing, recording, motion picture, software and database industries, and for ecommerce companies.for the past decade, mr. metalitz has represented the main coalitions of thecopyright industry sector on key public policy issues. for example, as counsel tothe creative incentive coalition, mr. metalitz was closely involved in the drafting and enactment of the digital millennium copyright act of 1998, and sincethen he has represented a copyright industry coalition on dmca implementationmatters. he also serves as senior vice president of the international intellectualproperty alliance® (iipa®), the coalition of copyright industry trade associationsworking for stronger copyright protection and enforcement around the world,including ratification and implementation of the wipo internet treaties. he hasbeen counsel to the copyright coalition on domain names (ccdn) since itsestablishment in 1999, and has been an officer of the intellectual property constituency of the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers (icann)since its inception, including two terms as president.from 1989–1994, mr. metalitz was vice president and general counsel of theinformation industry association, directing the trade association’s governmentrelations program and developing and advocating its policy positions in copyright, telecommunications, privacy, government information policy, and otherareas. from 1982–1989, he held several senior staff positions with the u.s. senatejudiciary committee, including chief nominations counsel, and chief counsel andstaff director of its subcommittee on patents, copyright and trademarks. he alsoserved as legislative director to senator charles mccurdy mathias, jr. (rmd).before his government service, mr. metalitz practiced law in charleston, southcarolina. mr. metalitz is a member of the bar in the district of columbia andsouth carolina (inactive). he has taught copyright law as professorial lecturer inlaw at the george washington university law school in washington, d.c., andthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172the telecommunications challengehas published widely on copyright and internet law topics. he is a phi beta kappagraduate of the university of chicago (b.a. 1972) and earned his law degree atgeorgetown university law center (j.d. 1977).cherry a. murraycherry a. murray, research strategy, wireless and physical sciencesresearch senior vice president at bell laboratories, lucent technologies, is aphysicist recognized for her work in surface physics, light scattering, and complex fluids. she is best known for her imaging work in phase transitions of colloidal systems. dr. murray was born in 1952 in ft. riley kansas into an army andthen foreign service family, and spent her childhood traveling around the world,moving on the average of once per year. after receiving a b.s. and ph.d in physicsfrom the massachusetts institute of technology, she was hired into bell labs as amember of technical staff in 1978. dr. murray became a distinguished memberof technical staff at bell labs in 1985. she has numerous publications andtwopatents.at bell labs, dr. murray was promoted to department head of the lowtemperature physics department in 1987 and served as department head of thecondensed matter physics, and then semiconductor physics departments until1997, when she was promoted to director, physical research lab. she is proud ofmanaging the 40gb/s electronics group and the invention and development of theoptical fabric for the first alloptical crossconnect for telecommunications networks, lucent’s wavestar lambdarouter. she was promoted to physical sciencessenior vice president in april 2000, and assumed her present responsibilities inoctober 2001. in this position, dr. murray has responsibility for the strategy ofall bell labs research and also bell labs research business development. shealso manages the wireless and physical research labs, and is responsible for therelationship of bell labs research with lucent’s largest business unit, mobilitysolutions.dr. murray is a member of the national academy of sciences, the nationalacademy of engineering and the american academy of art and sciences. she isa fellow of the american physical society and the american association for theadvancement of science and a member of the american chemical society,theoptical society of america, the materials research society, and sigma xi.she won the aps maria goeppertmayer award in 1989. she sits on numerousadvisory committees and boards, including the national sciences resourcecenter, dedicated to the propagation of inquirybased science education. she iscurrently a general councilor of the american physical society, a councilor ofthe national academy of sciences, the national research council, and theuniversity of chicago board of governors of argonne national laboratory. shealso serves on the basic energy sciences advisory committee for the department of energy.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a173mark b. myersmark b. myers is visiting executive professor in the management department at the wharton business school, the university of pennsylvania. hisresearch interests include identifying emerging markets and technologies toenable growth in new and existing companies with special emphases on technology identification and selection, product development and technology competencies. dr. myers serves on the science, technology and economic policy boardof the national research council and currently cochairs with richard levin, thepresident of yale, the national research council’s study of “intellectual propertyin the knowledge based economy.”dr. myers retired from the xerox corporation at the beginning of 2000, aftera 36year career in its research and development organizations. dr. myers wasthe senior vice president in charge of corporate research, advanced development, systems architecture and corporate engineering from 1992 to 2000. hisresponsibilities included the corporate research centers, parc in palo alto,california; webster center for research & technology near rochester, newyork; xerox research centre of canada, mississauga, ontario; and the xeroxresearch centre of europe in cambridge, uk, and grenoble, france. during thisperiod was a member of the senior management committee in charge of thestrategic direction setting of the company.dr. myers is chairman of the board of trustees of earlham college and hasheld visiting faculty positions at the university of rochester and at stanford university. he holds a bachelor’s degree from earlham college and a doctorate frompennsylvania state university.michael r. nelsonas director of internet technology and strategy at ibm, michael r. nelsonmanages a team helping define and implement ibm’s next generation internetstrategy (ngi). his group works with university researchers on ngi technologyand shaping standards for the ngi. he is also responsible for organizing ibm’sinvolvement in the internet2 research consortium. he chaired the internetsociety’s annual inet2002 meeting and was recently selected as the society’svice president for public policy.prior to joining ibm in july 1998, dr. nelson was director for technologypolicy at the federal communications commission (fcc), an independent unitedstates government agency that is charged with regulating interstate and international communications by radio, television, wire, satellite and cable. there hehelped craft policies to foster electronic commerce, spur development anddeployment of new technologies, and improve the reliability and security of thenation’s telecommunications networks.before joining the fcc in january 1997, dr. nelson was special assistant forthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174the telecommunications challengeinformation technology at the white house office of science and technologypolicy. here he worked with vice president gore and the president’s scienceadvisor on issues relating to the global information infrastructure, includingtelecommunications policy, information technology, encryption, electronic commerce, and information policy.from 1988 to 1993 dr. nelson served as a professional staff member for thesenate’s subcommittee on science, technology, and space, chaired by thensenator gore. he was the lead senate staffer for the highperformance computingact.michael nelson has a b.s. in geology from caltech, and a ph.d. in geophysicsfrom mit.william j. raduchelwilliam j. raduchel is the chairman and chief executive officer of ruckusnetwork bringing a broad range of business experience in the computing, internetand media industries. before joining ruckus network, dr. raduchel was executive vice president and chief technology officer of aol time warner, inc.prior to aol, dr. raduchel served as chief strategy officer and an executivecommittee member for sun microsystems, inc. in his eleven years at sun,dr.raduchel also held positions as chief information officer, chief financialofficer, acting vice president of human resources and vice president of corporateplanning and development and oversaw relationships with major japanese partners. in addition, he has held senior executive roles at xerox corporation andmcgrawhill, inc.dr. raduchel currently serves as a director of chordiant software, in2books,panellink cinema partners plc and as an adviser to its parent company, siliconimage. additionally, he is an adviser to myriad international holdings, hyperspace communications and wild tangent. dr. raduchel is a member of thenational advisory board for the salvation army, the national academycommittee on internet navigation and domain name services and the board onscience, technology and economic policy of the national academy of sciences.named “cto of the year” in 2001 by infoworld magazine, dr. raduchelwas a past professor of economics at harvard university and holds several issuedand pending patents. after attending michigan technological university, whichgave him an honorary doctorate in 2002, dr. raduchel received his undergraduatedegree in economics from michigan state university and earned his a.m. andph.d. degrees in economics at harvard. in both the fall and spring of 2003 he wasthe castle lecturer on computer science at the u.s. military academy atwest point.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a175andrew schuonandrew schuon is the president of international music feed. formerly hewas president of programming for infinity broadcasting, where he was responsible for groupwide programming for 183 radio stations, and president and chiefexecutive officer of pressplay, where he oversaw all aspects of pressplay’s operations, including the launch of the online subscription service, the management ofits technical operations and the overall branding and development of the service.prior to joining pressplay, mr. schuon was president and chief operatingofficer of jimmy and doug’s farmclub.com where he was responsible for overseeing all aspects of the company’s record label operations, online activities, andtelevision programming since its launch in january 2000. previously, mr. schuonwas executive vice president and general manager of warner brothers records,with responsibility for all creative and administrative issues including promotion,marketing, artist relations, advertising, art, sales, and production. before his postat warner brothers, mr. schuon spent several years at mtv, music television,culminating in his title as executive vice president of programming. mr. schuonis credited with engineering the station’s evolution from “video jukebox” to afully realized “youth culture” network. he was the executive producer of themtv video music awards and the mtv movie awards, and created and developed such programming as “alternative nation,” “mtv live (now trl),” “mtvjams,” and “the mtv beach house.” mr. schuon also served as executive vicepresident of programming at vh1 where he supervised the channel’s successfulrelaunch.peter a. tenhulaon april 7, 2003, peter a. tenhula was named acting deputy bureau chief ofthe fcc’s wireless telecommunications bureau. in this position, mr. tenhulaoversees the bureau’s mobility division and its auctions and spectrum accessdivision.mr. tenhula also serves as director of the fcc’s spectrum policy task forcewhere he is leading the next phase of the task force’s mission, including the coordination of spectrum policy activities within the fcc, with congress and with theadministration. he also serves on the fcc’s homeland security policy council.before taking on his current duties, mr. tenhula served as senior legal advisorto chairman michael k. powell. he advised chairman powell on various issuesincluding matters related to wireless telecommunications, spectrum policy, international communications, and national security/emergency preparedness.mr.tenhula joined thencommissioner powell’s staff as a legal advisor in 1997.a 13year fcc veteran, mr. tenhula started his career at the fcc in 1990 as astaff attorney in the video services division of the mass media bureau. from1991–1995, he worked in the administrative law division of the fcc’s officethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176the telecommunications challengeof general counsel, and from 1995–1997 he served as special counsel to thefcc’s general counsel.prior to joining the commission, mr. tenhula served as a legal intern with u.s.representative michael g. oxley and the national association of broadcasters.mr. tenhula received a b.a. degree in telecommunications from indianauniversity—bloomington, and a law degree from washington university inst.louis, missouri. he is a member of the missouri bar and the federal communications bar association.h. brian thompsonbrian thompson is the chairman and founder of itown communications. asa veteran senior executive of the telecommunication industry, mr. thompson hasbeen instrumental in impacting the rise of competitive telecommunications bothin the united states and abroad. mr. thompson continues to head his own privateequity investment and advisory firm, universal telecommunications, inc. invienna, virginia, focused on both startup companies and consolidations takingplace in the information/telecommunications industries.mr. thompson currently serves as chairman, comsat international (ci), oneof the largest independent telecommunications operators serving all of latinamerica. he was previously chairman and chief executive officer of globaltelesystems group, inc. from march 1999 through september of 2000. he servedas chairman and ceo of lci international, leading a turnaround of the companyand developing it into one of the fastest growing telecommunications companiesin the united states. subsequent to the merger of lci with qwest communications international inc. in june 1998, he became vice chairman of the board forqwest until his resignation.mr. thompson was also the executive vice president of mci communications corporation during its formative years as a long distance service companyfrom 1981 to 1990 with responsibility for the company’s eight operating divisions,including mci international.mr. thompson currently serves as a member of the board of directors of bellcanada international inc., arraycomm, inc., axcelis technologies, inc., sonustechnologies, and united auto group. he also serves as the u.s. cochairman ofthe global information infrastructure commission, a multinational organizationcharting the role of the private sector in the developing global information andtelecommunications infrastructure. additionally, he is a member of the irish primeminister’s irelandamerica economic advisory board.mark a. wegleitnermark a. wegleitner is senior vice president, technology, and chief technology officer (cto) for verizon communications. he is responsible for technologythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a177assessment, network architecture, technology planning, platform development,and laboratory infrastructure for the wireline communications business. in addition, he oversees a group providing technology solutions for government andcommercial customers: federal network systems. in his current role, he and hisorganization support all business units in the management of technology matters.prior to his current assignment, mr. wegleitner served as vice president,technology & engineering, at bell atlantic network services, where he wasresponsible for all technology and engineering functions. prior to that, hewascto at bell atlantic network services.since joining bell atlantic, mr. wegleitner has also held a variety of othermanagement positions in strategic planning, network architecture, technologydevelopment, information systems, research and development, broadband implementation, and new services technology.mr. wegleitner began his career in 1972 with bell telephone laboratories inlocal switching systems development. in 1979, he joined the exchange switchingsystems design organization at at&t general departments, where he hadresponsibility for the introduction of new features and services on local switchingsystems. in 1983, he held a brief assignment with bell laboratories in localswitching systems engineering before transferring to bell atlantic.mr. wegleitner received a b.a. in mathematics from st. john’s university,and an m.s. in electrical engineering and computer science from the universityof california at berkeley.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178jeffrey alexanderwashington corecaterina augeorge mason universityphil auerswaldgeorge mason universitystephanie baronisetecseugenie bartonfederal communications commissionkim bayardfederal reserve boardappendix bparticipants list*bill belttelecommunications industryassociationrichard bissellthe national academiescraig burkhardtdepartment of commercedave byrnefederal reserve boardkenneth carterfederal communications commissionlynn chapmangeorge mason university*speakers in italics.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b179barbara cherryfederal communications commissionmcalister clabaughthe national academiesdenise cocafederal communications commissioneileen collinsrutgers center for women and workcarol corradofederal reserve boardmark crawforddepartment of commercesantanu dasoffice of naval researchcynthia de lorenzipatriotnetdavid dierksheidethe national academieskyle dixonprogress and freedom foundationmark e. domsfederal reserve bank of san franciscotom donahuejesus dumagandepartment of commercewendy dunnfederal reserve boardcharles h. fergusonthe brookings institutionjeffrey fillarnational communications systemkevin finneranthe national academieskenneth flammuniversity of texas at austinbarbara fraumenidepartment of commercejohn gardenierturkan gardenierpragmaticarobin gasternorth atlantic researchbehzad ghaffarifederal communications commissionpeter gottsteinembassy of germanymiguel greengeorge mason universityhenry heilbrunninteractive directionsmiriam hellernational science foundationjay hellmanrobert hersheymichael holdwaydepartment of laborthe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180the telecommunications challengelisa a. hookaol broadband (retired)john horriganpew internet projectrichard hoveyfederal communications commissiontim hugheshouse science committeedan hurleydepartment of commercedavid s. isenbergisen.comken jacobsonnational academiesjeffrey m. jaffelucent technologiesdale w. jorgensonharvard universitymagnus karlssonembassy of swedenderek khlopintelecommunications industryassociationjeanphillipe lagrangeembassy of francemike lajoietime warner cableemmanuel le perruembassy of francealfred leedepartment of commercerichard lempertnational science foundationtom lenardprogress and freedom foundationpaul lengermannfederal reserve boardnanette levinsonamerican universitydavid lippkehighspeed americanancy lutznational science foundationneil macdonaldfederal technology watchsira malipholembassy of the united kingdomlouis mamakosvonagegoran marklundvinnovahugh mcelrathoffice of naval intelligencepamela megnafederal communications commissionbart meroneydepartment of commercethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b181stephen j. metalitzsmith & metalitzclark misuldeteconsabrina montesdepartment of commercecherry a. murraylucent technologiesnathan musickcongressional budget officemark b. myersthe wharton schooluniversity of pennsylvaniamichael r. nelsoninternational business machineskent nilssonfederal communications commissionsue okubodepartment of commerceluciano parodiembassy of chiledavid peytonnational association of manufacturerspeter pitschintel corporationlorenzo pupillothe world bankwilliam j. raduchelruckus networkstan rivelesstate departmentdorothy robynthe brattle groupandrew schuoninternational music feedsujai shivakumarthe national academiesrobert sienkiewicznational institute of standards andtechnologymeredith singertelecommunications industryassociationchristina siroskeygeorge washington universityjim snidernew america foundationanna snoweuropean commissionthomas spavinsfederal communications commissionfrancessca spenceroraclekenneth sprattembassy of irelanddiane steinourdepartment of commercethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182the telecommunications challengedavid sunational institute of standards andtechnologypeter a. tenhulafederal communications commissionh. brian thompsonitown communicationshannele tikkanenembassy of finlandrichard van attainstitute for defense analysesvenu veeravallinational science foundationdavid wasshausendepartment of commercejoseph watsondepartment of commercephilip webrecongressional budget officemark a. wegleitnerverizonjosh weinerruckus networkcharles w. wessnerthe national academiesjohn wohlstetterdiscovery institutethe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.183abel, jaison r., ernst r. berndt, alan g. white. 2003. price indexes for microsoftõs personal computer software products. nber working paper 9966. cambridge, ma: national bureau ofeconomic research.abramovitz, moses, and paul david. 1999. “american macroeconomic growth in the era ofknowledgebased progress: the long run perspective.” in cambridge economic history ofthe united states. robert e. gallman and stanley i. engerman, eds. cambridge, uk: cambridgeuniversity press.advanced technology program. 2002. “benefits and costs of atp investments in componentbasedsoftware.” nist gcr 02834. gaithersburg, md: u.s. department of commerce.aizcorbe, ana. 2005. “moore’s law, competition, and intel’s productivity in the mid1990s.” beaworking paper wp20058. washington, d.c.: bureau of economic research.aizcorbe, ana. 2005. “why are semiconductor price indexes falling so fast? industry estimates andimplications for productivity measurement.” bea working paper wp20057. washington,d.c.: bureau of economic research.aizcorbe, ana, kenneth flamm, and anjum khurshid. 2002. “the role of semiconductor inputs init hardware price decline: computers vs. communications.” federal reserve board financeand economics series discussion paper 200237. washington, d.c.: board of governors of thefederal reserve system.aizcorbe, ana, stephen d. oliner, and daniel e. sichel. 2003. “trends in semiconductor prices:breaks and explanations.” washington d.c.: board of governors of the federal reservesystem.baily, martin n. 2002. “the new economy: post mortem or second wind?” journal of economicperspectives 16(2):3–22.appendix cselected bibliographythe telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184the telecommunications challengebaily, martin n. and robert j. gordon. 1998. “the productivity slowdown, measurement issues, andthe explosion of computer power.” brookings papers on economic activity 2:347–420.baily, m. n. and r. z. lawrence. 2001. “do we have an economy?” nber working paper 8243.cambridge, ma: national bureau of economic research.bard, yonathan and charles h. sauer. 1981. “ibm contributions to computer performance modeling.ó ibm journal of research and development 25:562–570.barzyk, fred. 1999. “updating the hedonic equations for the price of computers.” statistics canadaprices division working paper. ottawa, on: statistics canada.bell, c. gordon. 1986. “risc: back to the future?” datamation 32(june):96–108.benkard, c. lanier. 2001. a dynamic analysis of the market for wide bodied commercial aircraft.stanford, ca: graduate school of business, stanford university.berndt. ernst r. and jack e. triplett, eds. 1990. fifty years of economic measurement. chicago, il:university of chicago press.berndt, ernst r., and zvi griliches. 1993. “price indexes for microcomputers: an exploratory study.”in murray f. foss, marilyn manser, and allan h. young, eds. price measurements and theiruses. studies in income and wealth 57:63–93. chicago: university of chicago press for thenational bureau of economic research.berndt, ernst r., zvi griliches, and neal rappaport. 1995. “econometric estimates of prices inindexes for personal computers in the 1990s.” journal of econometrics 68(1995):243–268.berndt, ernst r. and neal j. rappaport. 2001. “price and quality of desktop and mobile personalcomputers: a quartercentury historical overview.” american economic review 91(2):268–273.berndt, ernst r. and neal j. rappaport. 2002. “hedonics for personal computers: a reexaminationof selected econometric issues.” unpublished paper.bleha, thomas, 2005. “down to the wire,”foreign affairs 84(3).blinder, alan, 1997. “the speed limit: fact and fancy in the growth debate.” the americanprospect 8(34).bloch, erich and dom galager. 1978. “component progress: it’s effect on highspeed computerarchitecture and machine organization.” computer 11(april):64–75.bosworth, barry p. and jack e. triplett. 2001. “what’s new about the new economy? it, economicgrowth, and productivity.” international productivity monitor 2(spring):19–30.bosworth, barry p. and jack e. triplett. 2003. services productivity in the united states: grilichesõservices volume revisited. washington, d.c.: the brookings institution.bourot, laurent. 1997. “indice de prix des microordinateurs et des imprimantes: bilan d’unerénovation.” working paper of the institut national de la statistique et des etudeseconomiques (insee). paris, france.brainard, lael and robert e. litan. 2004. òoffshoringó service jobs: bane or boon and what todo? brookings institution policy brief 132. washington, d.c.: the brookings institution.bresnehan, timothy, eric brynjolfsson, and lorin m. hitt. 2002. “information technology, workplace organization, and the demand for skilled labor: firmlevel evidence.” quarterly journalof economics 117(1):339–376.bromley, d. alan. 1972. physics in perspective. national academy of sciences. washington, d.c.:national academy press.brooks, frederick. 1975. the mythical man month: essays on software engineering. reading, ma:addisonwesley publishing company.brynjolfsson, eric and lorin m. hitt. 2000. “beyond computation: information technology, organizational transformation, and business performance.” journal of economic perspectives14(4):23–48.brynjolfsson, eric and lorin m. hitt. 2002. computing productivity: firmlevel evidence.” reviewof economics and statistics 85(4):793–808.brynjolfsson, eric and brian kahin, eds. 2000. understanding the digital economy. cambridge,ma: the mit press.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c185bureau of economic analysis. 2001. “a guide to the nipas.” in national income and productaccounts of the united states, 192997. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing office.accessible at <http://www.bea.doc.gov/bea/an/nipaguid.pdf>.businessweek. 1997. “deconstructing the computer industry.” august 25.butler group. 2001. “is clock speed the best gauge for processor performance?” server worldmagazine september 2001. accessed at <http://www.serverworldmagazine.com/opinionw/2001/09/06clockspeed.shtml> on february 7, 2003.carr, nicholas. 2005. “the end of corporate computing.” mit sloan management review46(3):67–73.cartwright, david w., gerald f. donahoe, and robert p. parker. 1985. “improved deflation ofcomputer in the gross national product of the united states.” bureau of economic analysisworking paper 4. washington, d.c.: u.s. department of commerce.cecchetti, stephen g. 2002. “the new economy and the challenge for macroeconomic policy.”paper prepared for the conference, the new economy: whatõs new about it? texas a&muniversity. april 19.chandler, alfred d. jr. 2000. “the information age in historical perspective.” in a nation transformed by information: how information has shaped the united states from colonial times tothe present, eds. alfred d. chandler and james w. cortada. new york: oxford universitypress.choi, soonyong and andrew b. whinston 2000. the internet economy: technology and practice.austin, tx: smartecon publishing.chow, gregory c. 1967. “technological change and the demand for computers.” americaneconomic review 57(december):1117–1130.christiansen, clayton. 1997. the innovatorõs dilemma: when new technologies cause great firmsto fail. boston, ma: harvard business school press.chwelos, paul. 2003. “approaches to performance measurement in hedonic analysis: price indexesfor laptop computers in the 1990s.” economics of innovation and new technology12(3):199–224.cohen stephen s., and john zysman. 1988. manufacturing matters: the myth of the postindustrialeconomy. new york: basic books.cohen, wesley m. and john walsh. 2002. “public research, patents and implications for industrialr&d in the drug, biotechnology, semiconductor and computer industries.” in nationalresearch council. capitalizing on new needs and new opportunities: governmentindustrypartnerships in biotechnology and information technologies. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.cole, rosanne, y. c. chen, joan a. barquinstolleman, ellen dulberger, nurhan helvacian, andjames h. hodge. 1986. “qualityadjusted price indexes for computer processors and selectedperipheral equipment.” survey of current business 66(1):41–50.colecchia, alessandra and schreyer, paul. 2002. “ict investment and economic growth in the 1990s:is the united states a unique case? a comparative study of nine oecd countries.” review ofeconomic dynamics 5(2):408–442.congressional budget office. 2002. the role of computer technology in the growth of productivity.washington, d.c.: congressional budget office.corrado, carol a., john haltiwanger, and daniel sichel, eds. 2005. measuring capital in a neweconomy. chicago, il: university of chicago press.council on competitiveness. 2004. innovate america, thriving in a world of challenge and change,washington, d.c.: council on competitiveness.council of economic advisors. 2001. annual report. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice.council of economic advisors. 2002. annual report. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printingoffice.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186the telecommunications challengecrandall, robert c. and kenneth flamm, eds. 1989. changing the rules: technological change,international competition, and regulation in communications. washington, d.c.: thebrookings institution.cunningham, carl, denis fandel, paul landler, and robert wright. 2000. silicon productivity trends.international sematech technology transfer #00013875aeng.dalén, jorgen. 1989. “using hedonic regression for computer equipment in the producer priceindex.” r&d report. statistics sweden. researchmethodsdevelopment. 1989:25.david, paul. 2000. “understanding digital technology’s evolution and the path of measuredproductivity growth: present and future in the mirror of the past.” in brynjolfsson, eric andbrian kahin, eds. 2000. understanding the digital economy. cambridge, ma: the mit press.david, paul. 2001. “productivity growth prospects and the new economy in historical perspective.”eib papers 6(1):41–62delong, bradford and lawrence h. summers. 2001. “the ‘new economy’: background, historicalperspective, questions, and speculations.” federal reserve bank of kansas city economicreview 86(4):29–59.diewert, irwin w. and denis a. lawrence. 2000. “progress in measuring the price and quantity ofcapital.” in lawrence j. lau, ed. econometrics and the cost of capital. cambridge, ma: themit press.doms, mark, 2004. “the boom and bust in information technology investment.” federal reservebank of san francisco economic review: 19–34.doms, mark. 2005. “communications equipment: what has happened to prices?” in corrado, carola., john haltiwanger, and daniel sichel, eds. measuring capital in a new economy. chicago,il: university of chicago press.dulberger, ellen r. 1989. “the application of a hedonic model to a quality adjusted price index forcomputer processors.” in dale w. jorgenson and ralph landau, eds. technology and capitalformation: cambridge, ma: the mit press.dulberger, ellen r. 1993. “sources of price decline in computer processors: selected electroniccomponents.” in murray foss, marilyn manser, and allan young, eds. price measurementsand their uses. chicago: university of chicago press for the national bureau of economicresearch.easterly, william. 2001. the elusive quest for growth. cambridge ma: the mit press.the economist. 1997. “assembling the new economy.” september 11.the economist. 2000. “to boldly go…” march 23.the economist. 2000. “a thinker’s guide.” march 30.the economist. 2000. “productivity on stilts.” june 8.the economist. 2000. performing miracles.” june 15.the economist. 2000. “solving the paradox.” september 21.the economist. 2000. “elementary, my dear watson.” september 21.the economist. 2000. “waiting for the new economy.” october 12.the economist. 2001. “the great chip glut.” august 11.the economist. 2001. “productivity growth (cont’d?).” september 6.the economist. 2003. “the new geography of the it industry.” july 17.the economist. 2003. “overproductive and underemployed.” august 11.the economist. 2003. “survey of the new economy.” september 11.the economist. 2003. “between a rock and a hard place.” october 9.the economist. 2003. “untangling the local loop.” october 9.the economist. 2003. “relocating the back office.” december 11.the economist. 2004. “innovative india.” april 1.the economist. 2004. “survey: a world of work.” november 11.the economist. 2005. “moore’s law at 40.” march 23.the economist. 2005. “how the internet killed the phone business.” september 15.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c187electronic news. 1999. “sematech adds 4 international members.” june 21.electronic news. 2005. “samsung faces $300m doj fine for price fixing.” october 13.ericson, r. and a. pakes. 1995. “markovperfect industry dynamics: a framework for empiricalwork.” review of economic studies 62:53–82.european semiconductor industry association. 2005. the european semiconductor industry 2005competitiveness report. brussels, belgium: european semiconductor industry association.accessed at http://www.eeca.org/pdf/finalcompreport.pdf.evans, richard. 2002. “insee’s adoption of market intelligence data for its hedonic computermanufacturing price index.” presented at the symposium on hedonics at statistics netherlands.october 25.executive office of the president. 2003. the national strategy to secure cyberspace: cyberspacethreats and vulnerabilities. washington, d.c.: executive office of the president.feenstra, robert c., marshall b. reinsdorf, and michael harper. 2005. “terms of trade gains andu.s. productivity growth.” paper prepared for nbercriw conference. july 25.fershtman, c. and a. pakes. 2000. “a dynamic game with collusion and price wars.” rand journalof economics. 31(2):207–236.fisher, franklin m., john j. mcgowan, and joen e. greenwood. 1983. folded, spindled, andmultiplied: economic analysis and u.s. v. ibm. cambridge, ma: the mit press.flamm, kenneth. 1988. creating the computer. washington, d.c.: the brookings institution.flamm, kenneth. 1993. “measurement of dram prices: technology and market structure.” inmurray f. foss, marilyn e. manser, and allan h. young, eds. price measurements and theiruses. chicago: university of chicago press.flamm, kenneth. 1996. mismanaged trade? strategic policy and the semiconductor industry. washington, d.c.: the brookings institution.flamm, kenneth. 1997. more for less: the economic impact of semiconductors. san jose, ca:semiconductor industry association.flamm. kenneth. 2004. “moore’s law and the economics of semiconductor price trends.” innational research council. productivity and cyclicality in semiconductors: trends, implications, and questions. dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds. washington, d.c.: thenational academies press.kenneth flamm, 2005. “the coming it slowdown: technological roots and economic implications.” working paper, lbj school of public policy, university of texas.frankel, jeffrey and peter orsag, eds. 2002. american economic policy in the 1990s. cambridge,ma: the mit press.fransman, m. 1992. the market and beyond: cooperation and competition in information technology development in the japanese system. cambridge, uk: cambridge university press.gandal, neil. 1994. “hedonic price indexes for spreadsheets and an empirical test for networkexternalities.” rand journal of economics 25.gordon, robert j. 1989. “the postwar evolution of computer prices.” in dale w. jorgenson andralph landau, eds. technology and capital formation. cambridge, ma: the mit press.gordon, robert j. 1999. “has the ‘new economy’ rendered the productivity slowdown obsolete?”paper presented at the federal reserve bank of chicago, june 9.gordon, robert j., 2000. “does the ‘new economy’ measure up to the great inventions of the past?”journal of economic perspectives 14(4). northwestern university working paper.gordon, robert j. 2000. “interpreting the ‘one big wave’ in u.s. longterm productivity growth.”nber working paper 7752.gordon, robert j. 2004. “innovation and future productivity growth: does supply create its owndemand?” in peter cornelius, ed. the global competitiveness report 20023. new york:oxford university press.gosling, james, bill joy, and guy steele. 1996. the java (tm) language specification. new york:addisonwesley.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188the telecommunications challengegriffith, p. 1993. “science and the public interest.” the bridge. washington, d.c.: national academyof engineering. (fall):16.griliches, zvi. 1960. “measuring inputs in agriculture: a critical survey.ó journal of farmeconomics 40(5):1398–1427.griliches, zvi. 1961. “hedonic price indexes for automobiles: an econometric analysis of qualitychange.” in george stigler, ed. the price statistics of the federal government. new york:columbia university press.griliches, zvi. 1994. “productivity, r&d, and the data constraint.ó american economic review94(2):1–23.grindley, p., d. c. mowery, and b. silverman. 1994. “sematech and collaborative research:lessons in the design of a hightechnology consortia.” journal of policy analysis andmanagement 13.grossman, gene and elhannan helpman. 1993. innovation and growth in the global economy.cambridge, ma: the mit press.gowrisankaran, g. 1998. “issues and prospects for payment system deregulation.” working paper.university of minnesota.hagel, j. and a. g. armstrong. 1997. net gain. cambridge, ma: harvard business school press.halstead, maurice h. 1977. elements of software science. new york: elsevier north holland.handler, philip. 1970. biology and the future of man. london, uk: oxford university press.harhoff, dietmar and dietmar moch. 1997. “price indexes for pc database software and the valueof code compatibility.” research policy 24(45):509–520.hazlett, thomas w. and george bittlingmayer. 2003. “the political economy of cable ‘openaccess.’” stanford technology law review 4.holdway, michael. 2001. “qualityadjusting computer prices in the producer price index: an overview.” working paper. washington, d.c.: bureau of labor statistics.holdway, michael. 2002 “confronting the challenge of estimating constant quality price indexesfor telecommunications equipment in the producer price index.” working paper. washington,d.c.: bureau of labor statistics.hornstein, andreas and per krusell. 2000. “the it revolution: is it evident in the productivitynumbers?” federal reserve bank of richmond economic quarterly 86(4).horrigan, john brendan. 2005. “broadband adoption at home in the united states: growing butslowing.” washington, d.c.: pew internet and american life project.howell, thomas. 2003. “competing programs: government support for microelectronics.” innational research council. securing the future: regional and national programs to supportthe semiconductor industry. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.information technology association of america. 2004. “the impact of offshore it software andservices outsourcing on the u.s. economy and the it industry.” prepared by global insight.isenberg, david. 1997. “rise of the stupid network” computer telephony (august):16–26.ishida, haruhisa. 1972. “on the origin of the gibson mix.ó journal of the information processingsociety of japan 13(may):333–334 (in japanese).jorgenson, dale w. 2001. economic growth in the information age. cambridge, ma: the mitpress.jorgenson, dale w. 2001. “information technology and the u.s. economy.” american economicreview 91(1).jorgenson, dale w. 2002. economic growth in the information agevolume 3. cambridge, ma andlondon, uk: the mit press.jorgenson, dale w. 2002. “the promise of growth in the information age.” the conference boardannual essay.jorgenson, dale w. 2004. “information technology and the world economy.” leon kozminskyacademy distinguished lecture. may 14.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c189jorgenson, dale w., mun s. ho, and kevin j. stiroh. 2002. “projecting productivity growth:lessons from the u.s. growth resurgence.” federal reserve bank of atlanta economic review87(3):1–13.jorgenson, dale w., mun s. ho, and kevin j. stiroh. 2004. “will the u.s. productivity resurgencecontinue?” federal reserve bank of new york current issues in economics and finance10(13):1–7.jorgenson, dale w., mun s. ho, and kevin j. stiroh. 2005. “growth of u.s. industries andinvestments in information technology and higher education.” in corrado, carol a., johnhaltiwanger, and daniel sichel, eds. measuring capital in a new economy. chicago, il:university of chicago press.jorgenson, dale w., j. steven landefeld, and william nordhaus, eds. 2006. a new architecture forthe u.s. national accounts. chicago, il: university of chicago press.jorgenson, dale w. and kevin j. stiroh. 1999. “productivity growth: current recovery and longerterm trends.” american economic review. 89(2):109–115.jorgenson, dale w. and kevin j. stiroh. 2002. “raising the speed limit: u.s. economic growth inthe information age.” in national research council. measuring and sustaining the neweconomy. dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds. washington, d.c.: nationalacademy press.jorgenson, dale w. and eric yip. 2000. “whatever happened to productivity growth?” in newdevelopments in productivity analysis, charles r. hulten, edwin r. rean and michael j.harper, eds. boston, ma: national bureau of economic research.jovanovic, boyan and peter l. rousseau. 2002. “moore’s law and learningbydoing.” review ofeconomic dynamics 5:346–375.kessler, michelle. 2002. “computer majors down amid tech bust.” usa today. october 8.knight, kenneth e. 1966. “changes in computer performance: a historical view.” datamation(september):40–54.knight, kenneth e. 1970. “application of technological forecasting to the computer industry.” injames r. bright and milton e.f. schieman, a guide to practical technological forecasting.englewood cliffs, nj: prenticehall.knight, kenneth e. 1985. “a functional and structural measure of technology.ó technologicalforecasting and technical change 27(may):107–127.koskimäki, timo and yrjö vartia. 2001. “beyond matched pairs and grilichestype hedonic methodsfor controlling quality changes in cpi subindices.” presented at sixth meeting of the international working group on price indices, sponsored by the australian bureau of statistics,april.kuan, jennifer. 2005. “open source software as lead user’s make or buy decision: a study ofopen and closed source quality.” palo alto, ca: stanford institute for economic policyresearch.landefeld, j. steven and bruce grimm. 2000. “a note on the impact of hedonics and computers onreal gdp.” survey of current businesses 80(12):17–22.landefeld, j. steven and barbara m. fraumeni. 2001. “measuring the new economy.” survey ofcurrent business 81(3):23–40.landefeld, j. steven and robert p. parker. 1997. “bea’s chain indexes, time series, and measuresof longterm growth.” survey of current business 77(5):58–68.levine, jordan. 2002. “u.s. producer price index for prepackaged software.” presented at the 17thvoorburg group meeting. nantes, france. september.levy, david and steve welzer. 1985. “an unintended consequence of antitrust policy: the effectof the ibm suit on pricing policy.” unpublished paper. rutgers university department ofeconomics.levy, david l. 2005. “the new global political economy.” journal of management studies42(3):685.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190the telecommunications challengelim, poh ping and richard mckenzie. 2002. “hedonic price analysis for personal computers inaustralia: an alternative approach to quality adjustments in the australian price indexes.”paper presented at zew conference. mannheim, germany. april.litan, robert e. and roger g. noll. 2003. “the uncertain future of the telecommunicationsindustry.” brookings working paper. washington d.c.: the brookings institution.litan, robert e. and alice m. rivlin, 2000. “the economy and the internet: what lies ahead?”washington, d.c.: internet policy institute. accessed at http://www.intenetpolicy.org/briefing/litanrivlin.html.macher, jeffrey t., david c. mowery, and david a. hodges. 1999. “semiconductors.” in nationalresearch council. u.s. industry in 2000: studies in competitive performance. david c.mowery, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.maney, kevin. 2003. “music industry doesn’t know what else to do as it lashes out at filesharing.”usa today. september 9.mann, catherine. 2003. “globalization of it services and white collar jobs: the next wave ofproductivity growth.ó international economics policy briefs pb0311. december.mann, catherine. 2004. “the u.s. current account, new economy services, and implications forsustainability.” review of international economics 12(2):262–276.mann, catherine l. forthcoming. high technology and the globalization of america.martin, brookes and zaki wahhaj. 2000. “the shocking economic impact of b2b.” global economicpaper, 37. goldman sachs. february 3.maxwell, kim. 1998. residential broadband: an insiderõs guide to the battle for the last mile.hoboken, nj: john wiley & sons.mckinsey global institute. 2001. u.s. productivity growth 19952000: understanding the contribution of information technology relative to other factors. washington, d.c.: mckinsey &company.mckinsey global institute. 2003. offshoring: is it a winwin game? san francisco, ca: mckinsey& company.mckinsey global institute. 2005. the emerging global labor market. washington d.c.: mckinsey& company.michaels, robert. 1979. “hedonic prices and the structure of the digital computer industry.” thejournal of industrial economics 27 (march):263–275.moch, dietmar. 2001. “price indices for information and communication technology industries: anapplication to the german pc market.” center for european economic research (zew)discussion paper no. 0120. mannheim, germany: zew.moore, gordon e. 1965. “cramming more components onto integrated circuits.” electronics 38(8)april.moore, gordon e. 1975. “progress in digital integrated circuits.” proceedings of the 1975 international electron devices meeting 11–13.moore, gordon e. 1997. “the continuing silicon technology evolution inside the pc platform.”intel developer update. issue 2.moore, gordon e. 2003. “no exponential if forever . . . but we can delay forever.” santa clara, ca:intel corporation.moylan, carol. 2001. “estimation of software in the u.s. national income and product accounts:new developments.” paris, france: organisation for economic cooperation and development.national academy of sciences, national academy of engineering, institute of medicine. 1993.science, technology and the federal government. national goals for a new era. washington,d.c.: national academy press.national advisory committee on semiconductors. 1992. a national strategy for semiconductors: anagenda for the president, the congress, and the industry. washington, d.c.: national advisorycommittee on semiconductors.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c191national institute of standards and technology. 2002. “the economic impacts of inadequate infrastructure for software testing.” planning report 023. gaithersburg, md: u.s. department ofcommerce.national research council. 1995. standards, conformity assessment, and trade into the 21st century. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 1996. conflict and cooperation in national competition for hightechnology industry. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 1999. the advanced technology program: challenges and opportunities. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 1999. industrylaboratory partnerships: a review of the sandia scienceand technology park initiative. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: national academypress.national research council. 1999. new vistas in transatlantic science and technology cooperation.charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 1999. the small business innovation research program: challenges andopportunities. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 2001. the advanced technology program: assessing outcomes. charlesw. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 2001. capitalizing on new needs and new opportunities: governmentindustry partnerships in biotechnology and information technologies. charles w. wessner,ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 2001. a review of the new initiatives at the nasa ames research center.charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 2001. trends in federal support of research and graduate education.stephen a. merrill, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 2002. measuring and sustaining the new economy. dale w. jorgensonand charles w. wessner, eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 2002. partnerships for solidstate lighting. charles w. wessner, ed.washington, d.c.: national academy press.national research council. 2003. governmentindustry partnerships for the development of newtechnologies: summary report. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.national research council. 2003. securing the future: regional and national programs to supportthe semiconductor industry. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.national research council. 2004. productivity and cyclicality in semiconductors: trends, implications, and questions. dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds., washington, d.c.: thenational academies press.national research council. 2004. the small business innovation research program: programdiversity and assessment challenges. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: the nationalacademies press.national research council, 2005. deconstructing the computer. dale w. jorgenson and charles w.wessner, eds. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.national research council. 2005. getting up to speed: the future of supercomputing. washington,d.c.: the national academies press.national research council. 2005. policy implications of international graduate students andpostdoctoral scholars in the united states. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.national research council. 2005. rising above the gathering storm: energizing and employingamerica for a brighter economic future. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.national research council. 2006. software, growth, and the future of the u.s. economy. dale w.jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192the telecommunications challengenational research council. forthcoming. enhancing productivity growth in the information age:measuring and sustaining the new economy. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: thenational academies press.nelson, richard, ed. 1993. national innovation systems. new york: oxford university press.nelson, r. a., t. l. tanguay, and c. c. patterson. 1994. “a qualityadjusted price index for personalcomputers.” journal of business and economics statistics 12(1):23–31.the new york times. 2003. “good economy. bad job market. huh?” september 14.the new york times. 2004. “financial firms hasten their move to outsourcing.” august 14.nikkei microdevices. 2001. “from stagnation to growth: the push to strengthen design.” january.nordhaus, william d. 2002. “productivity growth and the new economy” brookings papers oneconomic activity 2:211–44.nordhaus, william d. 2002. “the progress of computing.” new haven, ct: yale university. march 4.okamoto, masato and tomohiko sato. 2001. “comparison of hedonic method and matched modelsmethod using scanner data: the case of pcs, tvs and digital cameras.” presented at sixthmeeting of the international working group on price indices, sponsored by the australianbureau of statistics. april.oliner, stephen. 2000. the resurgence of growth in the late 1990s: is information technology thestory?” journal of economic perspectives 14(4):3–22.oliner, stephen. 2002. “information technology and productivity: where are we now and whereare we going?” federal bank of atlanta economic review 87(3):15–44.o’mahoney, mary and bart van ark. 2003. eu productivity and competitiveness: an industryperspective: can europe resume the catchingup process? luxembourg: office for officialpublications of the european communities.organisation for economic cooperation and development. 2000. is there a new economy? a firstreport on the oecd growth project. paris, france: organisation for economic cooperationand development.organisation for economic cooperation and development. 2002. information technology outlook2002ñthe software sector. paris, france: organisation for economic cooperation and development. p. 105.organisation for economic cooperation and development. 2003. ict and economic growth. paris,france: organisation for economic cooperation and development.organisation for economic cooperation and development. 2003. report of the oecd task forceon software measurement in the national accounts. statistics working paper 2003/1. paris,france: organisation for economic cooperation and development.pc world magazine. 2003. “20 years of hardware.” march.paganetto, luigi, ed. 2004. knowledge economy, information technologies, and growth. burlington,vt: ashgate.pakes, g. e. 1966. physics survey and outlook. national academy of sciences. washington d.c.:national academy press.pakes, ariel. 2001. “a reconsideration of hedonic price indices with an application to pcs.” harvarduniversity. november.parker, robert p., and bruce grimm. 2000. “recognition of business and government expendituresfor software as investment: methodology and quantitative impacts, 195998.” washington,d.c.: bureau of economic analysis.porter, michael. 2004. “building the microeconomic foundations of prosperity: findings from thebusiness competitiveness index.” in x salaimartin, ed. the global competitiveness report20032004. new york: oxford university press.poulsen, kevin. 2004. “software bug contributed to blackout.” security focus. february 11.pritchard, stephen. 2003. “munich makes the move.” financial times. october 15.prud’homme, marc and kam yu. 2002. “a price index for computer software using scanner data.”unpublished working paper, prices division, statistics canada. ottawa, on.the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix c193raduchel, william. 2006. “the economics of software.” in national research council, software,growth, and the future of the u.s. economy. dale w. jorgenson and charles w. wessner, eds.washington, d.c.: the national academies press.rao, h. raghaw and brian d. lynch. 1993. “hedonic price analysis of workstation attributes.”communications of the association for computing machinery (acm) 36(12):94–103.robertson, jack. 1998. “die shrinks now causing logic chip glut.” semiconductor business news.october 15.ruttan, vernon. 2001. technology, growth, and development. new york: oxford university press.samuelson, paul. 2004. “why ricardo and mill rebut and confirm arguments of mainstreameconomists supporting globalization.” journal of economic perspectives 18(3).schaller, robert r. 1999. “technology roadmaps: implications for innovation, strategy, and policy.”ph.d. dissertation proposal, institute for public policy, george mason university.schaller, robert r. 2002. “moore’s law: past, present, and future.” accessed at <http://www.njtu.edu.cn/depart/xydzxx/ec/spectrum/moore/mlaw.html> on july 2002.schlender, brent. 1999. “the edison of the internet.” fortune february 15.semiconductor industry association. 2004. international technology roadmap for semiconductors:update. accessed at <http://www.itrs.net/common/2004update/2004update.htm>.semiconductor industry association. 2005. international technology roadmap for semiconductors.accessed at <http://www.itrs.net/common/2005itrs/home2005.htm>.semiconductors international. 2000. “sematech forms international sematech.” march.shapiro, carl and hal r. varian. 1999. information rules. boston, ma: harvard business schoolpress.sharpe, william f. 1969. the economics of the computer. new york, ny and london, uk: columbiauniversity press.sichel, daniel, e. 1997. computer revolution: an economic perspective. washington, d.c.: thebrookings institution.siebert, horst. 2002. economic policy issues of the new economy. heidelberg, germany and newyork: springer.sigurdson, jon. 1986. industry and state partnership in japan: the very large scale integratedcircuits (vlsi) project. lund, sweden: research policy institute.sirgudson, jon. 2004. “vsli revisited—revival in japan.” working paper no. 191. tokyo, japan:institute of innovation research of hitotsubashi university.soete, luc. 2001. “the new economy: a european perspective.” in daniele archibugi and bengtake lundvall, eds. the globalizing learning economy. oxford, uk and new york: oxforduniversity press.solow, robert m. 1987. “we’d better watch out.” new york times book review. july 12.solow, robert m., michael dertouzos, and richard lester. 1989. made in america. cambridge, ma:the mit press.spencer, w. j. and p. grindley 1993. “sematech after five years: high technology consortiaand u.s. competitiveness.” california management review. 35.spencer, w. j. and t. e. seidel. 2004. “national technology roadmaps: the us semiconductorexperience.” in national research council. productivity and cyclicality in semiconductors:trends, implications, and questions. charles w. wessner, ed. washington, d.c.: the nationalacademies press.statistics finland. 2000. “measuring the price development of personal computers in the consumerprice index.” paper for the meeting of the international hedonic price indexes project. paris,france. september 27.stiroh, kevin j. 2001. “investing in information technology: productivity payoffs for u.s. industries. federal reserve bank of new york current issues in economics and finance 7(6):1–6.stiroh, kevin j. 2002. “are ict spillovers driving the new economy?” review of income andwealth 48(1).the telecommunications challenge: changing technologies and evolving policies  report of a ...copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194the telecommunications challengestiroh, kevin j. 2002 “information technology and the u.s. productivity revival: what do theindustry data say?” american economic review 92(5):1559–1576.stiroh, kevin j. 2002. “measuring information technology and productivity in the new economy”world economics 3(1):43–58.stoneman, paul. 1976. technological diffusion and the computer revolution: the u.k. experience.cambridge, uk: cambridge university press.temple, jonathan. 2002. “the assessment: the new economy.” oxford review of economic policy18(3):241–264.triplett, jack e. 1985. “measuring technological change with characteristicsspace techniques.”technological forecasting and social change 27:283–307.triplett, jack e. 1989. “price and technological change in a capital good: a survey of research oncomputers.” in dale w. jorgenson and ralph landau, eds. technology and capital formation.cambridge, ma: the mit press.triplett, jack e. 1996. “hightech productivity and hedonic price indexes.” in organisation foreconomic cooperation and development. industry productivity. paris, france: organisationfor economic cooperation and development.triplett, jack e. 1997. “the solow productivity paradox: what do computers do to productivity?”paper presented at the conference on service sector productivity and the productivity paradox,ottawa, on. april 11–12.triplettt, jack e. 1999. “did the u.s. have a new economy?” paper presented for the association decompatible nationale 9th conference on national accounting.triplett, jack e. 1999. “economic statistics, the new economy, and the productivity slowdown.”business economics. january.triplett, jack e. 1999. “the solow productivity paradox: what do computers do to productivity?”canadian journal of economics 32(2):309–334.triplett, jack e. and barry bosworth. 2002. “baumol’s disease has been cured: it and multifactorproductivity in u.s. service industries.” presented at the brookings workshop “servicesindustry productivity: new estimates and new problems.” march 14. accessible at <http://www.brook.edu/dybdocroot/es/research/projects/productivity/workshops/20020517.htm>.united states congress. 2001. “information technology and the new economy.” washington, d.c.:joint economic committee study.van ark, bart, robert inklaar, and robert h. mcguckin. 2002. “changing gear, productivity, ictand service industries: europe and the united states.” brookings seminar paper on productivityin services. washington, d.c.: the brookings institution.van mulligen, peter hein. 2002. “alternative price indices for computers in the netherlands usingscanner data.” prepared for the 27th general conference of the international association forresearch in income and wealth, djurhamn, sweden.van welsum, desirée and xavier reif. 2005. “potential offshoring: evidence from selected oecdcountries.” paris, france: organisation for economic cooperation and development.vatter, harold g. and john f. walker. 2001. “did the 1990s inaugurate a new economy?” challenge!44(1):90–116.the wall street journal. 2003. “searching for computing’s kilowatt.” july 17.the wall street journal. 2004. “outsourcing may create u.s. jobs.” march 30.the washington post. 2004. “election campaign hit more sour notes.” february 22.whelan, karl. 2002. “computers, obsolescence, and productivity.” review of economics andstatistics 84(4):445–462.wolff, alan wm., thomas r. howell, brent l. bartlett, and r. michael gadbaw, eds. 1992. conflictamong nations: trade policies in the 1990s. san francisco, ca: westview press.world semiconductor trade statistics. 2000. annual consumption survey.wyckoff, andrew w. 1995. “the impact of computer prices on international comparisons of labourproductivity.” economics of innovation and new technology 3:277–293.