detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11706studying media effects on children and youth: improvingmethods and measures: workshop summary36 pages | 8.5 x 11 | paperbackisbn 9780309102759 | doi 10.17226/11706alexandra beatty, rapporteur; program committee for a workshop on improvingresearch on interactive media and children's health; board on children, youth,and families; division of behavioral and social sciences and education;national research council; institute of medicinestudying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures workshop summary alexandra beatty, rapporteur program committee for a workshop on improving research on interactive media and children's health  board on children, youth, and families division of behavioral and social sciences and education institute of medicine  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001 notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.  this study was supported by contract no. 041101310 between the national academy of sciences and the henry j. kaiser family foundation. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project. international standard book number isbn 0309102758  additional copies of this report are available from national academies press, 500 fifth street, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.edu printed in the united states of america copyright 2006 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.  suggested citation: national research council and institute of medicine. (2006). studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures. alexandra beatty, rapporteur. program committee for a workshop on improving research on interactive media and children™s health. board on children, youth, and families, division of behavioral and social sciences and education and institute of medicine. washington, dc: the national academies press.  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.  the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academy of engineering.  the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.  the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.  www.nationalacademies.org . studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. v program committee for a workshop on improving research on interactive media and children™s health   aletha c. huston (chair), department of human ecology, university of texas, austin daniel r. anderson, department of psychology, university of massachusetts mark p. becker, office of the provost, university of south carolina natasha j. cabrera, department of human development, university of maryland judy s. deloache, department of psychology, university of virginia david forsyth, computer science division, university of california, berkeley sandra l. hofferth, department of family studies, university of maryland sheppard g. kellam, american institutes for research, baltimore susan m. mchale, department of human development and family studies, pennsylvania  state university donald f. roberts, department of communication, stanford university janet ward schofield, learning research and development center, university of  pittsburgh victor c. strasburger, school of medicine, university of new mexico ellen wartella (liaison to the board on children, youth, and families) office of the  executive vice chancellor and provost, university of california, riverside  rosemary chalk, project director wendy keenan, program associate studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. vi board on children, youth, and families  michael i. cohen (chair), department of pediatrics, albert einstein college of medicine barbara wolfe (vice chair), department of economics and population health sciences, university of wisconsin william beardslee, department of psychiatry, children™s hospital, boston p. lindsay chaselansdale, institute for policy research, northwestern university thomas dewitt, division of general and community pediatrics, cincinnati children's hospital medical center mary jane england, office of the president, regis college brenda eskenazi, school of public health, university of california, berkeley christine c. ferguson, school of public health and health services, george washington university neal halfon, school of public health, university of california, los angeles susan millstein, division of adolescent medicine, university of california, san francisco elena nightingale, institute of medicine, the national academies, washington, dc laurence steinberg, department of psychology, temple university ellen wartella, office of the executive vice chancellor and provost, university of california, riverside  rosemary chalk, board director wendy keenan, program associate studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. vii contents   page preface ix 1: introduction 1  2: media consumption as a public health issue 4  3: the current state of media research 8  4: methodological questions, challenges, and opportunities 13  5: perspectives from other kinds of epidemiological research 16  6: where next? 19  references 22  appendix: workshop agenda and participants 23   studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. ixpreface concerns about the theory, quality, and rigor of methods and measures in studies of the impact of media technologies on child health and development have emerged in recent academy studies. a 2006 study of the impact of food marketing on the diets and health of children and youth (institute of medicine, 2006) and an earlier 2004 study on underage drinking (national research council and institute of medicine, 2004) both called attention to the pervasive nature of media in the social environments of today™s children and youth and the limited capacity of research studies to understand its nature, intensity, duration, or effects.  in response to these concerns, members of the board on children, youth, and families of the national research council and institute of medicine sought to organize a planning discussion to explore the strengths and limitations of the methods and measures of interactions between media influences and child and adolescent health and development. board member ellen wartella framed a set of key questions that ultimately led to a collaboration with the kaiser family foundation in organizing a planning meeting to examine these issues and to identify strategies that could inform the design and implementation of future surveys and studies. a program committee chaired by aletha huston met by phone to plan the agenda for the meeting and to identify speakers and other participants.  the program committee commissioned two papers to guide the discussions: elizabeth vandewater from the university of texas prepared an overview of the types of measures currently employed in selected media studies, and michael oakes from the university of minnesota presented an analysis from the perspective of a social epidemiologist on the merits of selected study designs and assessment measures. both papers are available online, along with slides from presentations by other speakers (www.bocyf.org).  this workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the report review committee of the national research council. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the process. we thank the following individuals for their review of this report: judy s. deloache, department of psychology, university of virginia; susan mchale, department of human development and family studies, pennsylvania state university; w. james potter, department of communication, university of california at santa barbara; richard scheines, department of philosophy, carnegie mellon university; and ellen wartella, office of the executive vice chancellor and provost, university of california, riverside.  although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. the review of this report was overseen by gary studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. xsandefur, college of letters and science, university of wisconsinmadison. appointed by the national research council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the author(s) and the institution.  aletha c. huston  chair  program committee for a workshop on improving research on interactive media and children's health  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 1chapter 1 introduction     the presence and intensity of media influencesštelevision, radio, music, computers, films, videos, and the internetšare increasingly recognized as an important part of the social ecology of children and youth, and these influences have become more visible and volatile in recent decades. research that explores the level and effects of media influences calls for measurements of the quantity and character of exposure to a variety of potentially overlapping media sources, an analysis of the content of the media output, and examination of the social context and relationships that are associated with the media experience. additional effort is needed to develop theories that can identify underlying processes and mechanisms that link media influences to outcomes. outcomes in turn call for tools that can measure, evaluate, and help explain how certain media experiences influence, and are influenced by, health and behavioral factors as well as cognitive and developmental processes. methodologies from a variety of disciplinesšcommunications, economics, neuroscience, pediatrics, and psychology, to name a fewšhave been applied to these questions, and a strong body of research and valuable findings has emerged. nevertheless, the field is relatively young and many methodological and theoretical questions remain, even as new digital technologies continue to pose unique challenges to researchers. while current media studies focus on the social environment of the millennium generation, there is nothing new in adults being worried about corrupting influences on young people. early greek philosophers argued about the relative merits of a focus on rhetoric in the education of their youth at the expense of reason and understanding. when novels were first published during the eighteenth century, many people were concerned that readers, especially the young, would be corrupted by the licentious and immoral behavior described, as well as by the indolent lifestyle they perceived novel readers to follow. by the twentieth century, the potential causes for concern had proliferated dramatically. today, media experiences seem to expand by the month, and while much of the concern about their influence on young people may represent older worries in new forms, the media ecology of today™s children and youth also presents a new frontier that offers unique challenges for research studies. a child born in the 1930s might have spent as much as several hours a week listening to the radio; reading comic books, newspapers, or magazines; or watching a film at a local theatre. since television was first introduced in the 1950s, the number of hours young people spend interacting in some way with media, as well as the range and capabilities of the many devices and activities that could be considered media experiences, have increased to an extent far beyond the imagining of today™s grandparents when they were young. children today use electronic media from two to five hours daily, and infantsševen in uterošare regularly exposed to a variety of media studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 2stimuli. this pervasive experience has raised many questions about how media exposure, content, and context influence young people™s health, development, and behavior. researchers are increasingly concerned not only with how much time children spend with the media in general, but also with how they apportion their exposure over different sources and types of media. furthermore, interest is growing in examining how the experience with media exposure, content, and context has changed over the decades in response to new media features and technologies as well as reflecting other social and economic trends. as an increasingly pervasive and vibrant part of the social ecology of children and youth, media influences have drawn the attention of parents, practitioners, and policy makers who seek to curb risky exposures as well as to identify ways to promote positive media practices that can foster healthy development. these questions are extremely complicated to investigate. recognizing the importance of this research, the board on children, youth, and families, under the auspices of the national research council and the institute of medicine, and with the sponsorship of the henry j. kaiser family foundation, held a workshop in march 2006. its purpose was twofold: to examine the quality of the measures used in studies of the effects of media on children™s health and development and to identify gaps in both research and practice. the goal was for a variety of experts to consider steps and strategies that could move this research forward and improve its utility for helping parents, practitioners, and policy makers guide young people in navigating a mediarich environment. the specific charge to the program committee for a workshop on improving research on interactive media and children™s health, which planned the workshop, was to consider: 1. the nature of key research literatures that examine different types of media exposure among children and youth; as well as the types of behaviors and interactions associated with media use (including television, video games, computers, cell phones, and the internet); 2. the strengths and limitations of different types of measures used in studies of media, children, and youth; and 3. opportunities and strategies for developing one or more studies in this field that can inform the development of research, policy, and practice guidelines regarding media use, content, controls, and guidance for children and youth.  the committee met once by phone and collaborated via electronic mail to develop strategies for describing how media research is conducted and the methodological issues it poses. this planning effort prompted the development of two background papers and a subsequent daylong discussion that included sessions on the state of the art in current measures of media exposure; the research designs, tools, and frameworks used in social epidemiological and prevention research; and the role of theory in explaining relationships among media exposure and outcomes. in this way the committee was able to represent a variety of perspectives, even though the available time would not allow for comprehensive coverage of any of the issues. this report provides a summary of that discussion, supplemented with information from two papers prepared for the workshop, which are available at studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 3<http://www.bocyf.org/030206.html>. it begins with an examination of the potential impact of media exposure, followed by a description of the basic research questions and the methods currently used to study them.  methodological questions and challenges and theoretical approaches are described; they are discussed from the perspective of other kinds of epidemiological research. the report closes with a discussion of future directions for the field.  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 4chapter 2 media consumption as a public health issue     a range of attitudes and beliefs are evident in public discourse about the effects of media exposure. parents are especially concerned with how media exposure and content may influence the healthy development of their children. yet efforts to restrict the content of media influences have raised important questions about the types of features or interactions that warrant attention, the extent to which media choices should be restricted for certain age groups, and the need for policy interventions as well as parental and professional guidance. early proposals for parental warning labels on cds with explicit lyrics, for example, have been part of an extensive and frequently spirited public debate about puritanism, censorship, and the first amendment to the u.s. constitution. at present, only limited and frequently conflicting data are available to examine the effects of music lyrics on health and development or the role that they play in the formation of youth identity, social networks, and parentchild relationships. claims and counterclaims about possible benefits and detrimental effects of different kinds of media exposure appear regularly in the popular press, but often without strong grounding in peerreviewed research. survey data from the kaiser family foundation indicate that many parents are concerned about the amount of sex and violence that their children see on television. but many parents do not understand the available ratings systems for tv and other media, and only 6 percent of parents of young children are aware that the american academy of pediatrics has recommended that children under age 2 not watch television or videos at all (kaiser family foundation, 2004). the amount of television to which young people are exposed suggests that, despite their concern, parents are not effectively limiting their consumption. recent data provide a general overview of children™s current media consumption (see box 1); sources and methods for collecting these data are addressed in detail in chapters 3 and 4. with these data as a backdrop, the workshop began with a conversation about why research on media exposure is important, led by ellen wartella and dan anderson. both called attention first to the growing proliferation of media experiences. the ubiquitousness of televisions in homes and public spaces and the large number of daily activities that adults now conduct online are only part of the story. the advent of digital technology in particular has expanded the possibilities for the use of different media technologies simultaneously (the multitasking phenomenon) and in new settings. computers now allow kids (and adults) to move rapidly between the internet and a word processing program, frequently with music in the background, as well as detours to play an electronic game or to engage with email or instant messaging functions. all this can be done with earphones on, or with music or television (or both) on in the background, interspersed with cell phone calls, and so forth. cell phones can be used to transmit digital photographs, and new mp3 players allow users to download video clips, movies, studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 5and television shows to be watched anywhere, any time. many media experiences, such as giant screens with surround sound, for example, are far more intense than ever before. and software for babiesševen devices alleged to promote the development of fetuses in the wombšare bringing new forms of sensory intensity to young nervous systems that are highly malleable and vulnerable to significant developmental changes. what impact might all this have on people and their behavior? anderson noted that multiple claims are made of negative effects on social behavior, health, education, and cognition (e.g., increases in aggression and obesity, interference with reading, increase in problems with attention), as well as positive effects and opportunities in the same areas (e.g., teaching or modeling prosocial behavior, providing a vehicle for public health messages that reduce obesity, teaching reading and other skills, enhancing attention skills). some, he explained, view media in general as a toxin, exposure to which should be controlled in the same way that environmental pollutants are permitted in small doses. the problem with this approach is that it does not address the significant variation in media content and the context in which exposure takes place, nor does it account for variations in the findings about the effects of exposure. a more promising approach may be to consider the components of a media diet in terms of the different types, amounts, and effects of media influences, anderson suggested. in this analysis, certain media influences could be viewed as desserts or stimulants rather than toxic agents. as with food, the overall quantity ingested is important, but equally important are quality and balance. thus, for example, children may benefit from information, educational programmingšand, most likely, entertainment, as wellšalthough the research base for developing precise guidelines as to the recommended levels or proportions of each is insufficient. while the harmful effects of media influences such as violent programming are well established, the basis for making concrete recommendations related to the degree or nature of the violence, maximum safe exposure, and so forth, is similarly absent. the alternative concept of a media diet accommodates recommendations that address such qualitative aspects as the nature, content, and context of media exposure, as well as the quantity, allowing for flexibility in the face of almost overwhelming pressure to consume media. an extensive research literature is now available that examines the health effects of media use, especially in the areas of violent and sexual behavior and, increasingly, in dietary choices and eating behaviors. the workshop participants focused on these initial areas to review how research studies currently measure important dimensions of media interactions with children and youth.  effects of violent or sexual programming  regardless of which metaphor is most useful for public health recommendations, a strong research base is available for some important conclusions about media exposure. perhaps strongest is the case for the effects of violent programming, which some researchers have suggested is at least as strong as the evidence base regarding links between exposure to tobacco smoke and lung cancer (oakes, 2006; anderson et al., 2003). a metaanalysis of the varied research base on this issue has shown that exposure to media violence has demonstrable long and shortterm effects on the likelihood of studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 6aggressive or violent behavior.1 exposure can have the effect of glamorizing violence; trivializing its effects, consequences, and moral significance; and desensitizing the viewer or participant to its impact. the shortterm effects include changes in behavior (such as reductions in helping behavior or increased willingness to inflict punishment in an experimental setting), thoughts, and emotions; the longterm effects include increased likelihood of engaging in physical assaults or spousal abuse. these casual relationships are disputed by others, however, primarily on the basis of imprecise measurement and confounding variables. questions remain as to the potential influences of several variables on the outcome of exposure to media violence. the characteristics of viewers, the precise content of the programming, and mediation by parents or others may all either intensify or mitigate the effects. moreover, the psychological processes through which these effects occur are not yet fully understood. nevertheless, the evidence suggests that the effects are pervasive and significant from a public health perspective. an association has also been demonstrated between media consumption and sexual activity among teenagers (l™engle, brown, and kenneavy, 2006). one recent study has shown that adolescents whose media diet includes more sexual contentšand content that presents sexuality in a riskfree lightšare also likely to engage in more sexual activity and report a greater degree of openness to sexual activity. media that portray sexual content together with violence can have a particularly strong effectšspecifically in increasing the likelihood that male viewers will behave aggressively or physically assault females who have provoked them (anderson et al., 2003). findings such as these clearly indicate the importance of considering the media diet as part of any effort to address adolescent sexuality. effects on obesity the possible links between obesity and food marketing on television are another public health concern that has been investigated, and the results illustrate well some of the difficulties researchers have in tracing media effects, wartella pointed out. a previous study reviewed 122 studies, covering four decades, of television advertising and children™s diets (institute of medicine and national research council, 2006). the results established a causal connection between advertising and both food preferences and food choices, but they could not confirm a link to adiposity (i.e., fatness). in her remarks, wartella speculated that a possible explanation for this lack of strong relationship in the obesity studies may reside in the methodological limitations of earlier studiesšand that other research designs might yet uncover a causal relationship.  1 although the majority of research has addressed violence in television programming, movies, and music videos, some similar findings have been produced with regard to violence in computer and video games. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 7 box 1 growing up in a media saturated environment  ! the average american home contains: ! 3.5 television (82 percent of families have cable access or satellite tv) ! 1.9 vcrs/dvd players ! 1.5 computers (74 percent of families have internet access; 60 percent have instant messaging software) ! children use electronic media from 2 to 5 hours daily, spending more time with television than in any other activity except sleep. ! 75 percent of children ages 818 have a television in their bedroom; 36 percent of children ages 06 do. ! 44 percent of children ages 818 use a computer every day, and 39 percent play video games every day.   source: vandewater and lee (2006) studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 8chapter 3 the current state of media research     research on children™s media exposure frequently begins with three basic questions: how much media do children use?  what kinds of media messages are they exposed to? what are the effects of this exposure? elizabeth vandewater provided an overview of the principal methods used to explore these questions, which, she explained, have proved generally unsatisfying, even before consideration of the complexities of multitasking in a digital era (vandewater and lee, 2006).  measuring use current methods for measuring the amount of time spent with media include global time estimates, time diaries, media diaries, experience sampling methods, video or direct observation, and electronic monitoring systems. global time estimates are obtained by asking subjects to answer such questions as how many hours they spent watching television the previous day or in a typical week, or how frequently they do a particular activity (e.g., on a likert scale that ranges from ﬁneverﬂ to ﬁvery frequentlyﬂ). such questions are frequently included in largescale surveys and are an inexpensive, easy way to collect data. however, the simplicity of the design yields imprecision. the respondent is expected within 1020 seconds to recall all relevant experiences, determine whether they should ﬁcountﬂ as a primary activity, and estimate the time spentšand to not shape the answer to fit perceived social expectations. time use diaries were first developed by economists interested in the ways americans spend their paid work time. they differ from global time estimates in that the answer format is openended, allowing respondents to record their activities, usually for 24hour stretches. questions typically include the principal and secondary activity, duration of the activity, other participants, and location. this method is less frequently used in media research, in part because it is expensive, but it allows for a more accurate and complete picture of the activity being investigated. this technique easily captures routine or daily activities, but it usually misses sporadic activities or those that occur only on days that are not monitored. it also can easily miss activities that are so automatic they escape notice, are considered private, or occur simultaneously with more than one other activity. television watching that occurs while a meal is being prepared or eaten, for example, may be hidden, as might brief but frequent internet use, such as using a computer to check the weather, movie reviews, or email. media diaries are targeted time use diaries, focused on a single activity. participants are asked to highlight the shows they watched on a program grid or to record whether the tv was on, who was watching, what channel, etc., by hour of the day. this method is less burdensome than a diary of all daily activities and thus allows data to be collected over longer time periods. it also allows for the collection of supplementary information, such as the participants™ reasons for doing the activity at a particular time. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 9media diaries do not generally allow for the collection of data regarding context, such as other activities done at the same time. experience sampling methods provide a look at typical activities by sampling at random times of the day, often by paging participants and asking them to fill in particular information in a booklet of selfreport forms. this method can capture internal aspects of the experience (motivation, mood, cognition), as well as external information (location, context, etc.). it is somewhat less burdensome than other methods, but it is useful only with participants who can write coherently about their experiences (i.e., not most children under 10ša key target for media research).  it also does not allow researchers to determine the total amount of time spent on activities of interest. direct observation (or video observation) is an ethnographic technique for investigating social phenomena in natural settings. it provides very accurate and rich information about such issues as television viewing habits, but it is extremely time and laborintensive and consequently expensivešwhich limits the sampling that is possible. moreover, although observation eliminates bias in answering questions, the presence of the observer or camera may have significant influence on participants™ media choices and behaviors. electronic monitoring is a commercial method designed to collect the data that are used to generate ratings for television programming. two somewhat different technologies for this purpose are owned by two companies, nielson and arbitron, which have occasionally made them available to researchers for a fee. in the nielson method, each viewer in the household is assigned a button on a device supplied by the company and is asked to push it when they begin and end a viewing session. thus all programming played on that channel before the button is pushed off is counted as ﬁviewedﬂ by that family member, although he or she may have wandered off or begun a different activity. the arbitron company uses a device called the portable people meter, which can detect codes that are embedded in video and audio programming and thus record the viewing and listening patterns of the people carrying them. both these methods produce the same kind of data that a media diary yields; that is, they do not provide information about the context in which the media use occurs or its relation to other activities in which the participant engages. having called attention to the limitations of each of these methods of measuring the quantity of media consumption, vandewater raised the question of how much precision is really needed to answer important questions about media exposure. the reliability and validity of these measures vary. diary estimates, for example, are highly correlated with observational measures (.80 to .85), whereas global time estimates show only moderate correlation with observational data (.20) or diary data (.40). however, despite the variation, the big picture result from all of these sources is that the average level of television viewing for adolescents is 2.5 to 3 hours per day. this figure may be sufficiently precise for many purposes, while a much greater degree of detail may be needed for predictive research, or for exploring error variance. what is of greater concern is the introduction of imprecise measures as an independent variable in another study, such as the effect of parenting restrictions on media habits. in such cases, low reliability of the media measures can bias the estimate of the main effect. dimitri christakis commented that no more studies demonstrating how much tv children watch are needed. instead, he argued, the focus should be on studies that studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 10illuminate how and what they watch and that suggest opportunities to improve viewing and other media habits. a related question for vandewater is what, precisely, is meant by a ﬁuserﬂ of a given type of mediašand this question is critical to the validity of a measurement. the influence a given media stimulus may have is clearly dependent on the degree of attention the user is paying to it and the context in which it is being used, which are more difficult to measure than the amount of time a device is in use, for example.  measuring exposure to content  the content of media exposure may be at least as important as the quantity of exposure, but existing research methods lack precision in measuring or capturing important dimensions of content, and many measures have serious validity problems. moreover, they do not capture incidental messages, such as those contained in advertisements, movie trailers, or product placements, vandewater explained. asking viewers is the most direct way to determine at least the general nature of what is being consumed. children might be asked to list their favorite shows or to include the names of the programs they watch in diaries or other records of their viewing. coding the content of television programs or video games is also possible, although current coding schemes have yielded only general programming information in designated categories, such as educational (e.g., children™s programming on public broadcasting), drama, comedy, etc. some efforts have been made to code the content and to capture more specificity of sample episodes of popular children™s programs. this method allows for greater precision, but it does not readily allow researchers to connect particular viewing experiences to particular children, which would be necessary to examine possible effects. sandra calvert described some work she has done on coding content on the internet using categories similar to those used to code television programming (calvert, alvy, and strong, 2006). however, site content, links, and advertising change frequently on the internet; moreover, each of the links on an internet site can be considered an independent part of the site and thus needs to be sampled and scored as well. as a result, the results are not stable. other participants mentioned recent efforts to analyze the content of computer games and to describe the ways in which users interact with them. participants agreed that, given the increasing time children and adolescents spend on these activities, more information and consistent classification codes are necessary for describing the content of and modes of interaction with different sources of electronic and interactive media technologies.  measuring developmental effects on young children  in addition to the public health effects of media as described in chapter 2, the meeting participants discussed research on the potential effects of media exposure on very young children, who are the fastest growing segment of media audiences. dimitri christakis and judy deloache provided close looks at significant potential risks and benefits of media exposure to babies and young children. christakis began with the observation that young children have only recently become heavy consumers of media studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 11and that, consequently, comparatively little research has been done on effects for this age group (christakis, 2006; zimmerman and christakis, 2005). yet the developmental significance of the first three years of life has been well documented (national research council and institute of medicine, 2000), and exposure during these years has been increasing dramatically. moreover, because young children are still sleeping 12 or more hours a day, even a modest amount of exposure can occupy a significant percentage of their waking hours. television exposure in the early years is also highly predictive of later viewing patternsšand once established, viewing patterns are very difficult to change. christakis™s research has shown that children under age 3 watch television an average of 2.2 hours per day, and that 3 to 5yearolds watch 3.3 hours per day. yet each hour of daily viewing by children in this age group is associated with measurable detriments to their cognitive development. benefits have been identified as well, although because much of the research is somewhat dated, it does not reflect changes in viewing patterns, such as the increase in the number of minutes of commercial time per hour, increases in sexual and violent content, and the increasing likelihood that children will watch alone. television programming and media or screenbased electronic products for very young children are an increasing businessšalthough, as christakis noted, their quality and content vary. christakis argued that media exposure is one of the most profound influences on children in the united states and that it intersects with many public health concerns: violence, obesity, tobacco and alcohol use, and risky sexual behaviors. the public health question for him is to find ways to mediate the influences of this exposure on young children, to optimize their exposure in terms of time spent, age of exposure, and contentšrather than hoping to eliminate it.  other participants called attention to the importance of social context in heightening or diminishing certain types of media exposures. deloache raised questions about media influences on the development of very young children in terms of the perspective that all media, because they are symbolic representations of some kind, offer more cognitive complexity than does direct experience. thus, media experiences may have profound impacts on very young children because they do not bring to these experiences the same context and background understanding of basic properties of reality (such as solidity, continuity, and support) that adults and older children have. her research has focused on five questions about media and early development. her answer to the first, whether infants can learn from media, is yes. the remaining questionsšwhat and how well they can learn, and what the benefits and risks might befollow from that conclusion. her research suggests that certain developmental pathways offer potential risks that could present challenges and opportunities for parental, policy, and practice interventions. deloache observed that the key developmental risks for infants and very young children of exposure to media are (1) interference with the acquisition of crucial developmental skillsštime spent with media is time taken from such activities as motor skill development and learning through playing with objects; (2) deprivation of social interactionštime spent viewing media would decrease infants™ opportunity for crucial social interaction with other people; and (3) interference with learning about realityšbecause infants can be confused about the basic nature of media, substantial media viewing could interfere with learning fundamental facts about the nature of reality (e.g., studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 12the fact that objects cannot pass through other objects or disappear into thin air). a fourth risk, which may not rise to the level of a public health concern, is that products purporting to educate infants may not only waste parents™ time and money, but also the existence and advertising of such products may generate unrealistic concerns and goals with respect to their infants™ development. these analyses of media effects on very young children involve both studies of longitudinal data as well as experimental observations. christakis described research studies in which he and his colleagues used data from the national longitudinal survey of youth 1979 to investigate the effects of frequent television viewing on cognitive development. measures of cognitive development in children at ages 6 and 7 were regressed on television viewing at younger ages. the conclusion was that modest adverse effects can result from viewing at young ages, when potential confounding variables, such as parental characteristics, were controlled. in contrast, other participants observed that certain educational programs for young children are associated with improvements in their cognitive developments. these differences suggest that media influences may differ by developmental stage as well as across social and cultural groups. deloache described experimental research that has explored the effects of symbolic representations and media exposure on the development of very young children, noting that the potential for both beneficial learning and harm needs to be further investigated (deloache, pirroutsakos, and uttal, 2003; deloache, 2005). the experimental research she described was mainly based on the premise that the best way to determine what infants and toddlers can learn or be taught is to try to teach them, for example, to imitate a series of actions or problemsolving exercises. in addition, simple observations of the length of time that infants look at particular displays can be used to assess what kinds of visual stimuli they prefer. such research can help identify what kinds of media might have beneficial effects on infant learning and development. participants were intrigued with the research on young children, but many commented on how much remains to be understood. socioeconomic differences and many other contextual factors, for example, have not been thoroughly investigated. at the same time, the mechanisms by which many influencesšfrom early literacy experiences, to family placement, to the nature of their media exposurešaffect children are also not yet fully understood. such mechanisms may include the content or exposure of certain forms of media, the social context and relationships surrounding the child™s experience with different types of media, and the displacement effects of media on other behaviors and exposures. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 13 chapter 4 methodological questions, challenges, and opportunities    the overview of current research methods generated a variety of ideas about ongoing challenges in media research, at both a practical and a theoretical level. to start, participants pointed out, at a time when new forms of media are proliferating, the field lacks operational definitions both of what constitutes a medium of interest from a public health perspective and of what counts as media exposure. current distinctions among media are platformbased; that is, they are based on the kind of technology that determines the way they operate. yet the rapid arrival of new technologies is blurring the uses of electronic devices, now that computers and handheld devices can be used for activities traditionally available only with a television or radio, and so on. electronic toys and other new gadgets are likely to further complicate the question until the field can develop a functional, comprehensive definition. the definition of media use is complicated by the fact that different media require different kinds of processing and yield different kinds of interactions. for example, the nature of a child™s experience with ambient media (such as music, which may be prevalent in multiple settings) may be substantially different from the experience with media that is confined to certain times of the day or certain locations. questions of attention, of what else is taking place in the vicinity of the media user, and of new roles that media experiences may play in people™s lives are not generally taken into account conceptually or methodologically, yet they may be critical to understanding how this powerful influence really affects people. on a practical level, the field lacks baseline information about some of the fundamental processes of concern in this kind of research, anderson and others noted. such processes may include information retrieval patterns, attention, memory, pattern recognition, and the ways in which children interpret narratives. to understand the ways in which users interact with media, for example, it would be useful to have a clear taxonomy of the technical design features used in many media, such as cuts, zooms, screen sizes, and the like. similarly, existing descriptive research about eyetracking patterns and other physiological processes as they relate to media exposure is not sufficient. for example, anderson noted, thousands of eeg (electroencephalogram) and erp studies have been done in other clinical and psychological studies, but their potential for improving understanding of media effects has not been fully explored. a far more detailed understanding of how the brain responds to media stimuli, as well as how cognition and behavior are affected in turn, would be possible if a stronger taxonomy to classify media technologies based on their design features was available. concerns such as these are linked to broader issues and to research questions in related fields. in order to understand how media exposure might affect children™s attention spans, for example, one must begin with a theory of how certain internal  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 14 processes and ecological interactions contribute to the development of attention. without that understanding, it is difficult to identify the effects of rapid scene changes or other specific aspects of media exposure on natural or unusual developmental processes. this kind of investigation is truly interdisciplinary, anderson pointed out. the lack of a disciplinary ﬁhomeﬂ for this type of research has contributed to its marginal status in many research centers and the lack of systematic training and the development of rigorous theoretical frameworks, causing its importance to be often overlooked. a number of participants stressed the point that, although available research methods may be unsatisfying in some respects, existing methods and levels of precision are sufficient to begin to address important questions. for example, differences in the exposure of socioeconomic subgroups to various mediašand possible differences in the resulting effects on groupsšcan be identified using largescale surveillance studies. the degree of accuracy typical of current studies would be sufficient for exploring potentially significant differences in the overall media diets of different groups, but relatively little has been done in this area. an ecological approach to the study of youth and the media  susan mchale brought the perspective of a researcher in human development and family studies to bear on the analysis of media influences on developmental processes and family interactions. she began with a reference to the theory of the ecology of children™s development, a model developed by uri bronfenbrenner in the late 1970s. in this ﬁonionﬂ model, the child is seen as nested within successively more distal layers of environmental influences, the impact of each of which is mediated by the impact of the others. in this model, media are placed in the outermost layer, along with cultural attitudes and values, influencing children from some distance. in bronfenbrenner™s view, each of these influences can affect a child™s interactions, and the focus of attention should be ﬁmolar activitiesﬂšthose the child chooses in a particular setting and that therefore reflect his or her predilections, opportunities, and constraints. the ecological approach calls attention to who is participating in an activity, how it is carried out, and why it is undertaken. with regard to television viewing, for example, the important questions are, who turns on the tv in this kind of family? who decides what will be watched? what kinds of conversations accompany tv viewing? an ecological perspective is not a theory but a perspective from which processesšor they might be termed mechanisms or mediatorsšwork. much of the research on children™s time use has focused on links between activities and outcomes, but this approach does not directly address the ways in which selected activities produce outcomes. using an ecological approach, a researcher would dig much deeper into the patterns of social interactions and relationships that influence development. for example, if a family watches television during dinner time, the nature and form of exposure may be affected by the conversation among family members. conversely, the timing or setting of the dinner event itself may be affected by certain media features or programs. daily activities, such as media consumption, are viewed as both the causes and consequences of development. the focus is on the social and psychological processes that link the activities to development and on identifying discrete interactions in these processes that may be influenced by variations in the characteristics that children, studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 15 adolescents, or families bring to the activities or the contexts in which they live. by improving understanding of the mediating processes that link activities (media consumption) to outcomes of interest, researchers can assess the strength of hypotheses about the causes of particular outcomes.  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 16 chapter 5 perspectives from other kinds of epidemiological research     the field of media research is relatively young and its methods and contributions are not widely understood or appreciated beyond its borders. social epidemiologist michael oakes brought the perspective of an outsider to an analysis of the extant research on the effects of media consumption on children (oakes, 2006). the discussion began with mark becker™s point that the prevailing research model for media studies has been based on research methods typical of psychology. he suggested that other statistical or epidemiological models may be more effective for some types of media research analysesšmost especially for developing the kinds of causal links that are needed to support policy and public health measures that could influence behavior and improve outcomes for children. the focus of oakes™s presentation was to compare the research designs, standard measures, and modeling frameworks used in media research with those used in other social epidemiology and prevention studies.  he began by stressing the high quality of much of the media research he has reviewed. he was favorably impressed by the volume of compelling studies and reiterated the point that the evidence for links between exposure to violence in the media and aggression is as strong as that for links between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. from his perspective, the measures of media exposure are effective and are likely to improve, although he recommended an intensified focus on the coming challenges of new technologies and changing ways of interacting with media, as well as marketing innovations. several gaps in the research base were evident as well. one notable lack was in what oakes called the study of effect modification by social subgroup. in this category he included examination of media effects by social subgroup and by other socialenvironmental contexts besides race and class, as well as efforts to investigate the effects of social interactions on individual and group outcomes. while differences between boys and girls and across age categories are frequently explored, unexamined differences related to wealth, region of the country, and other factors related to socialization may have profound influences on how children are affected by media. other contextual effects insufficiently addressed in media literature include school settings, neighborhoods, family structures, and social and cultural interactions; all these factors may have important influences on the way children process media exposure and may in turn be influenced by media themselves.  other types of social subgroups may be categorized by the preferences of children and youth for certain types of media content or technology (including design features as well as technical source). significant differences may reside in how light or heavy media users respond to certain program themes or stimuli. traditional regression models make it difficult to isolate selected contextual effects, oakes explained, since media exposure is frequently pervasive. this challenge is similar to studying the effects of smog or water quality on different populations; the level studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 17 of exposure cannot be determined with precision. multilevel regression models are increasingly being used in epidemiology and public health studies to examine contextual influences in a variety of areas. he used john snow™s discovery that removing the handle of a pump reduced the incidence of cholera in the neighborhood (by limiting access to tainted water) to emphasize the importance of exploring all potential factors. this finding led to efforts to disentangle more proximal causes for diseasešwhich in turn led to the breakthrough discovery of germ theory and the effects of bacteria in sewage. oakes also found little innovation in media research methodologies in their approaches to inferring cause in observational studies. the axiom that correlation does not imply cause remains true, but the potential of surveys and correlational studies to illuminate cause, even in the absence of an explanatory theory or mechanism, is dismissed too readily, he argued. other research fields are making significant strides in finding innovative ways to infer causation. counterfactual causality, originally identified by philosopher david hume as the ﬁbut forﬂ conditionšthe case in which situation x would not be true but for intervention yšhas been used in contemporary research to account for alternate outcomes that result from differing exposure to particular influences. this line of analysis compares scenarios in which two conditions with similar features produce very different outcomes as a result of the presence or absence of intervening factors. this model helps to compensate for the basic challenge of causal inferencesšthat it is never possible to observe the exposure of one individual to two different sets of influences in the same period of time. a substitute for the unobservable conditionšthe individual exposed to influences other than those to which he or she was in fact exposedšmust be found. bias creeps in when the substitutes are not good controls because they are not sufficiently similar to the research subjects. randomized groups of sufficient size provide one means of ensuring that the control group is similar to the targeted group, but in observational studies, in which no intervention is done, there is no opportunity for randomization. to approximate the benefits of randomization when it is not possible, a variety of new statistical techniques can be used to analyze the data from observational studies to identify causal relationships. one such method, developed by rosenbaum and rubin (1983), is called propensity score analysis. this approach begins by developing a statistical model to predict exposure independent of the outcome in question. in a study of the impact of exposure to media on children™s diets, for example, logistic regression could be used to estimate the probabilityšcalled the propensity scorešthat a child is exposed to food advertising on tv as a function of parental monitoring and other factors. the probability of exposure, known as the propensity score, is then used as a control variable in an analysis of the relationship between diet and food advertising. under certain assumptions, it has been shown that the relationship between the outcome (diet) and exposure (advertising) that can still be observed after controlling for other factors using the propensity score can be attributed to food advertising. like any other statistical method, however, the validity of the inference depends on the assumptions, and propensity score analysis results can be biased if the assumptions are not correct (rubin, 1997). oakes stressed that propensity score analysis is a relatively new approach that may be particularly well suited to the kinds of questions that media researchers tackle. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 18 not only epidemiologists, but also economists, political scientists, and other researchers who are especially concerned with public policy, have been struggling to find new ways to make inferences about people™s behaviors and the choices they make. instrumental variable analysisšanother method of accounting for the unmeasured confounding variable used in econometricsšmight also have an application in media research. another approach is group randomized trials, in which the effects of policies are assessed using random samples of families, schools, neighborhoods, and even towns. oakes noted that longitudinal research designs, although they are the prototype for epidemiological research, may not be as helpful in media studies as other approaches. longitudinal designs, he explained, are very useful for identifying random, unintentional exposures or the natural occurrence and progression of a disease. but when individual choices affect outcomes, the background characteristics and preferences that influence those choices are too difficult to disentangle. moreover, factors that change over time, such as the nature of media technology or content, and the cumulative effects of ongoing exposure, have changing effects on outcomes, which can affect the findings in a longitudinal study. the general challenge underlying most epidemiological research, and media research in particular, is that research subjects are not robinson crusoe, affected only by the conditions on a small island. individuals respond to certain stimuli on the basis of their prior experiences as well as current conditions, and they are affected as well by the presence or absence of others. individuals™ choices and experiences are dependent on an infinite number of choices that others have made, as well as infinite other ways in which they are influenced by the individuals and groups that surround them. the more basic question is the perennial one about how social environment influences biological, psychological, and social processes, and vice versa. thus, oakes argued, the most valuable approach may be to use field experiments to investigate the potential impact of interventions. while models that posit causality are needed to support the choices of interventions to evaluate, conclusively resolving the relative contributions of individual versus social factors (nature versus nurture arguments) may not be necessary to achieve public health objectives. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 19 chapter 6 where next?    in her comments, wartella observed that new researchers are increasingly drawn to study media and their potential effects, and this new generation has brought different perspectives about how to measure, what to measure, and how studies should be designed. the preponderance of existing media research has focused on television viewing, but the research models developed for that purpose may have limited value in studying new, very different kinds of mediašand different kinds of questions about their effects. the field is in need, she explained, of some consensus and guidelines about methods and standards of evidence, particularly because of the intense public interest in and press coverage of findings about media exposure. in the current budgetary climate, funding for largescale research studies on children and media is uncertain, although bills have been proposed to foster studies in this area. in the interim, researchers in this field will need to proceed without extensive public support to develop consensus about research agendas, methods, and designs.  key themes several key themes emerged in the discussions that provided a basis for formulating areas of future interest and attention. first, current media studies focus predominantly on process measures (exposure, content, and other media features). although these dimensions are important, the field lacks a deeper understanding of the underlying biological, cognitive, and developmental mechanisms that may affect the experience with the timing, duration, or content of media influences. limited opportunities exist for media researchers to interact with colleagues from these other fields, and few research studies have emerged that build from truly interdisciplinary work. second, linking the study of process measures with theorydriven research will require more attention to experimental and longitudinal research designs. if current measures of media exposure and content are ﬁclose enoughﬂ to achieve reliability and consistency across study designs, researchers can turn their attention to other, more important questions that can deepen understanding of important social phenomena. third, emerging theory and interdisciplinary research designs also need to address the increasing proliferation and complexity of highly versatile media technology. measures that were initially developed for studies of television viewing must be adapted to capture the new features of cable television, tivo, ipods, and other digital technologies that emphasize the power of choice, selection, and customizing media preferences. fourth, although most media research with children focuses on schoolage and adolescent populations, a virtual explosion of media exposure has occurred among very young children. the ubiquity of media exposure and the rapid pace of developmental studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 20 changes in infants and toddlers introduce new complexities in understanding the pathways by which media influences may interact with developmental stages. fifth, new research designs are emerging that make it possible to infer causal relationships from nonexperimental data. methods drawn from social epidemiology and environmental studies offer a unique opportunity to strengthen the quality and rigor of current and future media research designs. these methods are especially valuable in examining conditions in which it is not possible to isolate certain media exposures or to establish control conditions because of the pervasiveness of the media environment.  suggested research topics in the course of the discussions, a number of participants offered suggestions for specific research topics that deserve further exploration, including: ! how children and adolescents watch television and how viewing habits can be improved; ! the potential benefits of media consumption; ! interventions that might dilute negative effects or promote positive ones; ! how family contexts influence the impact of media exposure on children™s health outcomes; ! how people choose media experiences; ! documentation of what aspects of contemporary media have negative or positive effects on development, at what ages they have those effects, and what individual or familial characteristics affect risk or opportunity for benefit; ! whether appropriate use of educational video games increases language acquisition and reading in preschool children; and ! whether modeling appropriate eating and sexual practices reduces obesity and risky sexual behaviors. this brief sampling of the kinds of issues researchers want to explore suggests that the field has much work to do, but several larger themes emerged as well. first, many participants noted that a greater degree of interdisciplinary cooperation, as is common in research on diet and nutrition, would be very useful in media research. communications, economics, neuroscience, pediatrics, psychology, psychiatry, sociology, all have valuable contributions to make, but not all have been as involved in media research as they could be. several participants pointed out structural problems, such as lack of funding and a dearth of younger researchers, that have limited both this kind of cooperation and the growth of the field. others focused on methodological challenges, such as the kinds of validation studies that are needed and the question of the degree of precision that is needed in measuring exposure. for vandewater, for example, priorities in the field should be nationally representative samples, longitudinal designs, samples incorporating very young children, the inclusion of family context and interaction measures, a focus on program and game content, and the inclusion of appropriate covariates. others focused on practical concerns. for them, ways to influence two key targetsšparents and producers of mediašshould be the guiding goal of media research. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 21 there is a need to incorporate this nearly universal activity into what is already known about children™s development. the isolation of media research studies from other fields could be addressed if better links to basic developmental, psychological, or social processes could be established. this would make it easier to offer credible and effective guidance and tools to parents, policy makers, and those who control media content.  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 22 references      anderson, craig a., leonard berkowitz, edward donnerstein, l. rowell huesmann, james d. johnson, daniel linz, neil m. malamuth, and ellen wartella. (2003). the influence of media violence on youth. psychological science in the public interest, 4(3), 81110. calvert, s.l., l. alvy, and b.l. strong. (2006). children's websites content analysis scoring system. children's digital media center, georgetown university. christakis, dimitri. (2006). media as a public health issue. editorial. archives of pediatric and adolescent medicine, 160, 445446. deloache, judy s. (2005, august 7). mindful of symbols. scientific american, 377. deloache, judy s., sophia l. pirroutsakos, and davis h. uttal. (2003). the origins of pictorial competence. current directions in psychological science, 12, 4. institute of medicine and national research council. (2006). food marketing to children and youth: threat or opportunity? washington, dc: the national academies press. kaiser family foundation. (2004). parents, media, and public policy: a kaiser survey. available online at <http://www.kff.org/entmedia/entmedia092304nr.cfm>. l™engle, kelly ladin, jane d. brown, and kristin kenneavy. (2006). the mass media are an important context for adolescents™ sexual behavior. journal of adolescent health, 38, 186192. national research council and institute of medicine. (2000). from neurons to neighborhoods: the science of early childhood development. washington, dc: national academy press. oakes, j. michael. (2006). the effect of media on children: a methodological assessment from a social pathologist. background paper prepared for workshop on media research measures and methods. board on children, youth, and families, national research council and institute of medicine, washington, dc. available at <http://www.bocyf.org/030206.html>. rosenbaum, p., and donald b. rubin. (1983). the central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. biometrika, 70, 4155. rubin, donald b. (1997). estimating causal effects from large data sets using propensity scores. annals of internal medicine, 127(8), 757763. vandewater, elizabeth, and sookjung lee. (2006). measuring children™s media use in the digital age: issues and challenges. background paper prepared for workshop on media research measures and methods. board on children, youth, and families, national research council and institute of medicine, washington, dc. available at <http://www.bocyf.org/030206.html>. zimmerman, frederick j., and dimitri a. christakis. (2005). children™s television viewing and cognitive outcomes: a longitudinal analysis of national data. archives of pediatric and adolescent medicine, 159, 619625. studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 23appendix workshop agenda and participants  agenda workshop on media research methods and measures march 23, 2006 national academy of sciences building washington, dc  thursday, march 2 welcoming remarks and introductions   aletha huston, university of texas  vicky rideout, henry j. kaiser family foundation  rosemary chalk, board on children, youth, and families   participant introductions  session 1: why should we care about media research measures?  moderator aletha huston  presenters  ellen wartella, university of california at riverside  dan anderson, university of massachusetts, amherst   general discussion  friday, march 3 session 2: assessing the current landscape of media research measures  moderator aletha huston  presenter elizabeth vanderwater, university of texas  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 24 general discussion   session 3: research design and measurement issues: lessons learned in other fields moderator mark becker, university of south carolina  presenter michael oakes, university of minnesota  general discussion   session 4: the role of theory in explaining relationships among media exposure and selected outcomes  moderator victor strasburger, university of new mexico presenters  dimitri christakis, university of washington  judy deloache, university of virginia  susan mchale, pennsylvania state university   general discussion  session 5: next steps and future directions moderator aletha huston  general discussion  studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 25 participants  daniel r. anderson,* professor, department of psychology, university of massachusetts, amherst mark p. becker,* executive vice president for academic affairs and provost, university of south carolina, columbia martina bebin, robert wood johnson health policy fellow, senate help committee jane d. brown, james l knight professor, department of journalism and mass communication, university of north carolina, chapel hill natasha j. cabrera,* professor, department of human development, university of maryland, college park sandra l. calvert, professor, department of psychology, georgetown university rosemary chalk, director, board on children, youth, and families, the national academies dimitri christakis, director, child health institute, university of washington, seattle judy s. deloache,* professor, department of psychology, university of virginia niki denmark, department of human development, university of maryland, college park rachel fisher, program analyst, division of nutrition research coordination, national institutes of health, bethesda, md lauren lynch flick, pillsbury winthrop shaw pittman llp, washington, dc melissa ghera, department of human development, university of maryland, college park lisa guernsey, independent journalist, alexandria, va christine hartel, director, center for studies of behavior and development, the national academies, washington, dc lynne haverkos, national institute of child health and human development, bethesda, md james c hersey, senior research psychologist, research triangle institute, washington, dc sandra l. hofferth,* professor, department of family studies, university of maryland, college park aletha c. huston,* associate director, center for population research, university of texas, austin sheppard g. kellam, senior research fellow and director, center for integrating education and prevention research in schools, american institutes for research, baltimore, md woodie kessel, senior child health science advisor, office of disease prevention and health promotion, washington, dc jennifer kotler, director, education & research, sesame workshop, new york deborah linebarger, annenberg school of communication, university of pennsylvania valeria o. lovelace, media transformations, teaneck, nj studying media effects on children and youth: improving methods and measures: workshop summary copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 26susan m. mchale,* professor, human development and family studies, pennsylvania state university jeff j. mcintyre, senior legislative and federal affairs officer, public policy office, american psychological association, washington, dc patricia l. morison, associate executive director, division of behavioral and social sciences and education, the national academies, washington, dc gail m. mulligan, national center for education statistics, washington, dc michael oakes, assistant professor, division of epidemiology, university of minnesota, minneapolis deborah a. phillips, professor and chair, department of psychology, georgetown university vicky rideout, vice president, henry j. kaiser family foundation, menlo park, ca michael robb, department of psychology, university of california, riverside donald f. roberts,* professor, department of communication, stanford university victor c. strasburger,* professor, pediatrics adolescent medicine, deptartment of pediatrics, university of new mexico school of medicine, albuquerque georgene l. troseth, assistant professor of psychology, department of psychology and human development, vanderbilt university elizabeth vandewater, director, center for research on interactive technology, television & children, university of texas, austin rong wang, department of sociology, university of maryland, college park ellen wartella,* executive vice chancellor and provost, university of california, riverside robert c. whitaker, senior fellow, mathematica policy research, inc., princeton, nj amy yaroch, program director, health promotion research branch, national cancer institute, rockville, md  *members of the program committee  