detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11710strategies for preservation of and open access to scientificdata in china: summary of a workshop152 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309102308 | doi 10.17226/11710paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, rapporteurs; u.s. national committee forcodata; board on international scientific organizations; national researchcouncilstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, rapporteursu.s. national committee for codataboard on international scientific organizationsthe national academies presswashington, dcwww.nap.edustrategiesforpreservationof andopenaccesstoscientificdata in chinasummary of a workshopstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press ¥ 500 fifth street, nw ¥ washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governingboard of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councilsof the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and theinstitute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report werechosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.support for this project was provided by the national institutes of health (under grantno. 467mz400266), the national science foundation (under grant no. geo0407487), and the open society institute (under grant no. 40006515). additionalsupport was provided by the ministry of science and technology of china, chineseacademy of sciences, chinese national natural science foundation, the committeeon data for science and technology, the international council for science, and theunited nations educational, scientific and cultural organization. any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of theauthor(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies thatprovided support for the project.international standard book number 0309102308copies of this report are available from the board on international scientific organizations, 500 fifth street, n.w., washington, d.c. 20001; 2023342807; internet, http://www7.nationalacademies.org/biso/.additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500fifth street, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202)3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2006 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americastrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society ofdistinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to thefurtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon theauthority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has amandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technicalmatters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter ofthe national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. itis autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing withthe national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimedat meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulf is president of the national academyof engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute actsunder the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressionalcharter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, toidentify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciencesin 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academyõspurposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning inaccordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has becomethe principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, andthe scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly byboth academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. wm. a.wulf are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.steering committee on strategies forpreservation of and open access toscientific data in china*william anderson (cochair), praxis101xianõen zhang (cochair), ministry of science and technology ofchinapeter arzberger, university of california, san diegorobert chen, center for international earth science informationnetworkhuadong guo, department of international cooperation, chineseacademy of sciencesheather joseph, bioonechuang liu, global change information and research center,chinese academy of sciencesbaoping yan, computer network information center, chineseacademy of sciencesprincipal project staffpaul uhlir, project directorjulie esanu, program officervalerie theberge, communications associateamy franklin, program associaterepresentatives of chinese program committeejun chen, china association for geographical information systemsjianguo han, national natural science foundation of chinadingcheng huang, institute of geophysics, chinese academy ofscienceszongqi shen, ministry of science and technology of chinamianzhen teng, ministry of science and technology of chinajinning zhu, chinese association for science and technology*chinese names are presented here, and throughout the rest of this report, in thewestern approach to personal names, with given name first and family name second.ivstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.u.s. national committee for codataroberta balstad (chair), center for international earth scienceinformation networkwilliam anderson, praxis101peter arzberger, university of california, san diegokate beard, university of mainehelen berman, rutgers universitychristine borgman, university of california, los angelesbonnie carroll, information international associatesjanet gomon, smithsonian institute*sara graves, university of alabama, huntsvillemyron gutmann, interuniversity consortium for political andsocial researchjan hopmans, university of california, davis*maureen c. kelly, consultant*gary king, harvard university*reynaldo morales, los alamos national laboratory, retiredkrishna rajan, iowa state universityjames sweeney, consultant*alexander szalay, the johns hopkins universitystaffpaul uhlir, directorjulie esanu, program officer (until may 2005)amy franklin, program associate*member until june 30, 2004.vstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethe u.s. national committee for codata in collaboration withthe chinese national committee for codata and the codata taskgroup on preservation of and access to scientific and technical data indeveloping countries, and together with the chinese ministry of scienceand technology, jointly organized an international workshop on òstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data.ó local logistical support and meeting planning was provided by the chinese academyof sciences and the chinese association for science and technology. theinternational council for scientific and technical information providedadditional substantive expertise.the workshop, which was held june 2224, 2004, in beijing, china,served as an international and interdisciplinary forum to promote a deeperunderstanding of, and requirements for, longterm preservation and openaccess to digital scientific information resources. the meeting was organized into seven sessions, each led by two cochairs and including severalinvited presentations. the first two sessions introduced the workshop participants to the chinese strategies and initiatives for implementing scientific data sharing. the following sessions explored the policy and legal,institutional and economic, management and technical, and local and regional issues in preserving and providing open access to data in the lifesciences and public health; data in the earth and environmental sciences;and scientific information, journals, and digital libraries. this publicationpresents a summary of the workshop.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacethe statements made in this summary are those of the individualrapporteurs based on presentations made at the workshop and do not necessarily represent the views of the steering committee, the u.s. or chinesenational committees for codata, or the sponsoring organizations inchina or the united states. this volume does not contain summaries of allof the presentations.paul f. uhlirdirector, u.s. national committeefor codatajulie m. esanuprogram officer, u.s. national committeefor codata (until may 2005)william l. andersonpraxis101planning committee cochairchuang liuchinese academy of sciencesplanning committee cochairstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixacknowledgmentsthe u.s. national committee for codata and the board on international scientific organizations of the national research council of thenational academies wish to express their sincere thanks to the many individuals who played significant roles in planning the international workshop on strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data.the workshop steering committee was chaired by xianõen zhang, ministry of science and technology, china, and william anderson, praxis101,united states. additional members of the steering committee were peterarzberger, university of california at san diego, united states; jun chen,china association for geographical information systems; robert chen,columbia university, united states; huadong guo, chinese academy ofsciences; jianguo han, national natural science foundation, china;dingcheng huang, chinese academy of sciences; heather joseph, bioone,united states; chuang liu, chinese academy of sciences; zongqi shen,ministry of science and technology, china; mianzhen teng, ministry ofscience and technology, china; baoping yan, chinese academy of sciences; and jinning zhu, chinese association for science and technology.we also would like to thank the following individuals (in order ofappearance) who made presentations during the workshop (see appendixa for symposium agenda): jinpei cheng, ministry of science and technology, china; roberta balstad, columbia university, united states; williamanderson; zhihong xu; xianõen zhang; qin dahe, china meteorologicaladministration; depei liu, chinese academy of medicine, chinese acadstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xacknowledgmentsemy of engineering; qiheng hu, chinese association of science and technology; yasuyiki aoshima, unesco; peter schrıder, ministry of education, culture, and science, the netherlands; carthage smith, internationalcouncil for science; michael clegg, u.s. national academy of sciences;peter weiss, u.s. national weather service; raymond mccord, oak ridgenational laboratory, united states; menas kafatos, george mason university, united states; qinmin wang, fujian province, china; jun chen,basic geographical information center, china; jerome reichman, dukeuniversity law school, united states; paul uhlir, u.s. national academies;panqin chen, chinese academy of sciences; tieqing huang, chineseacademy of sciences; lan zeng, national macro economic research institute, china; jun li, national macro economic research institute, china;john willinsky, university of british columbia, canada; chuang liu, chinese academy of sciences; belinda seto, national institutes of health,united states; yun xiao, chinese national committee for codata;shunbao liao, chinese academy of sciences; theodore carl bergstrom,university of california at santa barbara, united states; yixue li, shanghaibiomedical center, china; anne linn, u.s. national academies; chengquansun, chinese academy of sciences; zukang feng, protein data bank, unitedstates; helen doyle, public library of science, united states; shuichi iwata,university of tokyo, japan; honglie sun, codata; ling yin, chinese plageneral hospital; yiyuan tang, dalian polytech university, china; baoyanliu, chinese academy of medicine; donglie qin, the capital hospital university, china; james edwards, global biodiversity information facility, denmark; xiaofeng fu, administrative center for chinaõs agenda 21;khudulmar sodov, national remote sensing center, mongolia; dingshengliu, chinese academy of sciences; jiansheng qu, chinese academy of sciences; zhengxing wang, chinese academy of sciences; paul richards, columbia university, united states; raymond willemann, gem technologies,united states; dake yang, china earthquake administration; xiaolin zhang,chinese academy of sciences; lulama makhubela, national developmentagency, south africa; liansheng meng, chinese academy of sciences; andpippa smart, international network for the availability of scientific publications, united kingdom.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national academiesõ report review committee.the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and criticalcomments that will assist the institution in making its published report asstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acknowledgmentsxisound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for quality and objectivity. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of thisreport: heather joseph, sparc; goetz oertel, consultant; john rumble,consultant; and wang zhengxing, global change information and research center.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructivecomments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content ofthe report, nor did they see the final draft before its release. responsibilityfor the final content of this report rests entirely with the authors and theinstitution.the u.s. national committee for codata would like to recognizethe contributions of national research council staff and consultants. pauluhlir, director of international scientific and technical information programs, was project director of the symposium and served as the primaryeditor of this report. julie esanu helped to organize the symposium and editthe report. valerie theberge organized and coordinated the logistical arrangements, and amy franklin assisted with the production of the manuscript.in addition, the committee would like to thank the other individualswho contributed to the success of the workshop: wenneng zhou, secretarygeneral of the local organizing committee, and kathleen cass, executive director of codata.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontents1introduction12presentations on chinaõs scientific data sharingpolicy and project6the development of chinaõs scientific data sharing policy, 6jinpei cheng, vice minister, ministry of science and technologyof chinaintroduction to the china scientific data sharing project, 12xianõen zhang, director general of the division of basic research,ministry of science and technology of china3summaries of presentations on international perspectives21trends in development of international scientific data andinformation, 21yasuyuki aoshima, united nations educational, scientific andcultural organizationtowards international guidelines for access to research datafrom public funding, 25peter schrıder, ministry of education, culture, and science,the netherlandsinternational perspectives on data and information for science, 26carthage smith, international council for science, francestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivcontentsinteracademy panel initiatives on promoting access toscientific information, 29michael clegg, interacademy panel and the u.s. nationalacademy of sciencesfuture role of the committee on data for science andtechnology, 31shuichi iwata, university of tokyo, japan, and president,codatachinaõs national committee for codata, 33zhihong xu, chinese national committee for codata,chinau.s. national committee for codata, 34paul f. uhlir, u.s. national academies4summaries of presentations on crossdisciplinary issues35panel discussion on legal and policy issues, 35introduction, 35paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, u.s. national academiesglobal trends to restrict access to data fromgovernmentfunded research, 37jerome reichman, duke university school of law,united statesa contractually reconstructed research commons forscientific data in a highly protectionist intellectualproperty environment, 38jerome reichman, duke university school of law,united statesbalancing the general public interests and copyright inscientific information management, 39john willinsky, university of british columbia, canadaborders in cyberspace: maximizing social and economicbenefit from public investment in data, 40peter weiss, u.s. national weather servicepolicy considerations on government informationsharing in china, 42jun li, national macro economic research institute, chinacomparative aspects of policies for open access to scientificdata in the united states, european union, and china, 43chuang liu, global change information and resourcecenter, chinese academy of sciencesstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxvdata sharing in scientific databases of the chineseacademy of sciences, 44yun xiao, computer network information center,chinese academy of sciencesthe data sharing policy of the chinese ecosystem researchnetwork, 45panqin chen and tieqing huang, bureau of science andtechnology for resources and environment, chinese academyof sciencesdata sharing policy of the national institutes of health, 45belinda seto, national institute of biomedical imaging andbioengineering, national institutes of health, united statespanel discussion on economic and institutional issues, 47introduction, 47paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, u.s. national academiesthe peculiar economics of scientific information, 47theodore carl bergstrom, university of california,santa barbara, united stateslaunching an openaccess journal, 49helen doyle, public library of science, united statesinvolving the private sector in the environmental enterprise, 50anne linn, u.s. national academiespanel discussion on management and technical issues, 52introduction, 52paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, u.s. national academiesoperating a twentyfirstcentury data center, 52roberta balstad, center for international earth scienceinformation network, united statesmanaging the effects of programmatic scale and enhancingincentives for data archiving, 53raymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory,united statesmanaging the effects of change on archiving research data, 54raymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory,united statesspecial considerations for archiving data from fieldobservations, 56raymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory,united statesstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvicontentstoward a balanced performance appraisal system in thedigital era for data archiving and sharing in china, 58zhengxing wang, global change information and researchcenter, chinese academy of sciencesearth science data and information management inwestern china, 59chengquan sun, scientific information center for resources andenvironment, chinese academy of sciencesdata integration and management: the protein data bankperspective, 60zukang feng, protein data bank, united states5summaries of presentations on thematic issues62examples of life sciences and public health data activities, 62the chinese management and sharing system ofscientific data for medicine, 62depei liu, chinese academy of medicine and chineseacademy of engineeringinternational medical scientific data sharing, 64ling yin, peopleõs liberation army general hospital andgraduate medical school, chinachinaõs contributions to the organisation for economiccooperation and developmentõs neuroinformatics datasharing initiative, 65yiyuan tang, institute of neuroinformatics, dalian universityof technology; ling yin, neuroinformatics center, plageneral hospital and graduate medical school; and xiaoweitang, neuroinformatics center, zhejiang university, chinalongterm studies of human anatomy using the digitalhuman and scientific data sharing, 67donglie qin, bme college, capital university of medicalsciences, chinathe protein data bank: a key biological resource, 68zukang feng, protein data bank, united statesthe safeguarding and sharing of traditional chinesemedicine database resources, 69baoyan liu and meng cui, china academy of traditionalchinese medicinestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.contentsxviiopen access to scientific data on biological diversity:an urgent need for china, 70james edwards, global biodiversity information facility,denmarkthe nih roadmap for medical research, 72belinda seto, national institute of biomedical imaging andbioengineering, national institutes of health, united statesexamples of earth sciences, environmental, and naturalresources data activities, 73progress in meteorological data sharing in china, 73dahe qin, china meteorological administrationthe world data center for renewable resources andenvironment, 75shunbao liao, geosciences and natural resources institute,chinese academy of sciencesinformation system for earth science data of china, 76jiansheng qu, scientific information center for resourcesand environment, chinese academy of sciencespresent status and future development strategy of chinaõssustainable development information network, 76xiaofeng fu, administrative centre for chinaõs agenda 21,ministry of science and technology, china; and xintong li,state key laboratory of resources and environmentinformation system, chinese academy of sciencesprogress toward a national spatial data infrastructure inchina, 77jun chen, national geomatics center, chinauses of seismic data and the importance of open accessto major data centers in seismology, 78paul richards, columbia university, united statesexisting infrastructure for international exchange ofseismic data, 80raymond j. willemann, gem technologies, united statesdigital fujian, 81qinmin wang, department of science and technology,fujian province, chinastrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviiicontentslocal and regional earth system science applications andassociated infrastructure: the midatlantic geospatialinformation consortium, 82menas kafatos, george mason university, united statesthematic issues in scientific information, journals, anddigital libraries, 84policies and mechanisms for literature resource sharingñthe practice of the chinese national scientific and technicallibrary, 84qiheng hu, chinese association for science and technologyperspectives on the future of the library and on theeconomics of open access, 87john willinsky, university of british columbia, canadaan openaccess future, 88helen doyle, public library of science, united statesother opportunities in the changing informationenvironment, 90pippa smart, international network for the availability ofscientific publications, united kingdomscientific information and digital libraries:can developing countries become key players in theinformation society?, 91lulama makhubela, national development agency,south africaappendixesaworkshop program97bbiographical summaries of workshop speakers andsteering committee members111strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.this study is dedicated in fond memory ofpeter weiss,national weather servicestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11introductionas a major producer of scientific data,1 and as a partner for international cooperative research, china has a great deal to offer to the worldõsknowledge base. although chinaõs research capabilities are rapidly improving, some significant problems remain. among the recognized impedimentsare inadequate digital archiving and access policies and practices that inhibit progress and improved international cooperation. particularly noteworthy in this regard was the highlevel data access initiative announced infebruary 2003 by guanghua xu, the chinese minister of science and technology (most), and supported by the national peopleõs congress. thischina scientific data sharing program includes òcreating a law to ensurethat scientific information is communicated more widely, and coordinatingefforts by government departments to develop information centers and databases to facilitate the communication of scientific and technological information.ó2 this new policy toward greater openness with publicly fundedscientific data is part of a broader effort to modernize the national researchand development infrastructure and its management in china.in 2000, the u.s. national committee (usnc) for codata andthe chinese national committee for codata held two bilateral meet1in the context of this report, òscientific dataó refer to scientific, technical, and medicaldata, and literature.2hepeng jia, òchina urges its researchers to share data,ó scidevnet, march 14, 2003.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2open access to scientific data in chinaings with senior science officials and data managers from both countries todiscuss various data management and policy issues.3 following these twoinitial meetings of the u.s. and chinese codata committees, the chinese side was augmented by other experts from the chinese academy ofsciences and most who are leaders of the scientific data sharing program. the usnc for codata hosted a delegation of these chinese datapolicy experts in the summer of 2002.the fourth of these bilateral meetings of data experts was held inbeijing in october 2003. focused on scientific resources sharing policy,that meeting provided some of the advance groundwork for the june 2004workshop that is the topic of this report. it also reconfirmed the commitment of the chinese science policy community to promoting greater openness regarding chinese scientific data and identified the priority areas foradditional focus.the effective longterm preservation of and open access to digital scientific resources in all countries increases in importance as an essential component of the global public research infrastructure, which can now be integrated through the internet. the challenges in storing and maintainingaccess to these growing collections of data and information are substantial,even in economically more developed countries. moreover, although manyof the challenges that require sustainable solutions are the same for digitaldata and information across all disciplines, others are distinct or unique tocertain disciplines or types of information. and while all solutions are context dependent, some may be based on extending or emulating existingsuccessful models, and others may require and benefit from entirely newapproaches.china faces substantial hurdles in this regard. although many of itsdata resources and especially journal literature still reside in paper formats,china already has significant digital information preservation and accessrequirements that in many cases are not being successfully addressed. factual databases and journals can provide an important research and economic tool for chinañjust as they do in more economically developedcountriesñfor capacity building in science and education, for supportingsustainable development of commerce and industry, and for promotinggood governance. resolving the many difficulties in preserving and making3for additional information, see http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/chinausdataseminars.html.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction3broadly available the digital scientific data resources successfully today willprovide great benefits for future generations; the costs of inaction are incalculable, but certain to be substantial. at the same time, it is important torecognize that even the most economically developed countries have encountered various difficulties with the preservation and open access issues.careful consideration is needed to develop longterm plans for sustainabledigital archiving in china, as in all other countries.workshop on strategies for preservation of andopen access to scientific datathe international workshop on strategies for preservation of andopen access to scientific data was held on june 2224, 2004, in beijing. itbuilt on the results of the four previous bilateral codata meetings andon the new chinese scientific data access policy initiative noted above. theworkshop explored in detail the various scientific and technical, legal andpolicy, institutional and economic, and management aspects that need tobe addressed in successfully implementing sustainable and accessible archives of digital health and environmental data resources in china. it examined various models of open archiving that might be adopted or adaptedfor use within the chinese context. it also provided much needed highlevel attention to these typically underappreciated problems by bringingtogether scientific information managers, digital archiving experts, nationalscience policy and funding officials, and representatives of developmentorganizations, who will be able to incorporate the results of this projectinto their future planning.4the workshop was organized pursuant to the following statement oftask:1.identify research areas in which preservation of and open access todigital scientific information require highpriority attention in china, andprovide the underlying rationales for the areas chosen.2.identify and discuss the scientific and technical, institutional andeconomic, legal and policy, and management factors relevant to providingopen access to digital scientific information resources (both the data andthe literature), including an examination of different possible models and4see appendix b for the biographical summaries of all the speakers at the workshop.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4open access to scientific data in chinatheir potential benefits and shortcomings in china, and drawing on examples of other digital archiving and access regimes in related areas.3.review and discuss the current status of access and archiving regimes for the types of scientific information identified in task 1.4.identify possible followup activities to improve open access andpreservation for each major type of digital scientific information selectedfor discussion in task 1, taking into consideration the results of the discussions under tasks 2 and 3.the workshop addressed these four tasks over two and a half daysthrough a mix of invited presentations, focused panel presentations, andsome discussion by all of the participants in both plenary and breakoutsessions.5 the primary areas of focus were on biomedical data, earth andenvironmental data, and related scientific, technical, and medical literature. although many of the issues identified and discussed during the workshop were focused on the chinese context, they also likely are relevantthroughout much of the developing world. because of significant languagebarriers and time constraints the identification of followup activities requested in task 4 could not be done through group discussions in thebreakout sessions. any potential followup activities were identified only inthe context of individual presentations.structure of this reportbecause this report is a summary of the workshop, it is limited in scopeto the presentations and other information identified during the meeting.chapter 2 presents two keynote speeches in their entirety by highrankingofficials at the ministry of science and technology who describe the development and status of chinaõs national scientific data sharing policy.subsequent chapters include summaries of the other speakersõ presentations. several international perspectives on the preservation of and openaccess to public scientific data are presented in chapter 3. chapter 4 discusses the crossdisciplinary issuesñpolicy and legal, institutional and economic, and management and technicalñthat affect the preservation of andopen access to public scientific information. the report concludes with adiscussion of these issues in the areas of life sciences and public health data;5see appendix a for the workshop agenda.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction5earth sciences, environmental, and natural resources data; and scientificinformation, journals, and digital libraries.the appendixes to the report provide additional background information, including the workshop agenda and the biographical summaries ofthe workshop speakers. the presentation materials used by the invitedspeakers are available in english on the usnc for codata web site athttp://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/chineseworkshop.html.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2presentations on chinaõs scientific datasharing policy and project6the development of chinaõs scientificdata sharing policyjinpei chengvice minister, ministry of science and technology of chinaat the present rate of rapid advances in modern science and technology many areas, such as cosmology, earth system science, cognitive science,and nonlinear science, are becoming the new scientific frontiers. the integration of information science, bioscience, and materials science, as well asthe interaction between natural sciences and social sciences, marks our entrance into a decade of unprecedented intensive knowledge and innovation.since opening to the outside world, the chinese government has attached much importance to the development of science and technology, asevidenced by the national strategies of ònational renewal through scienceand educationó and òrealization of a prosperous china through humaneducation.ó the chinese government recognizes that knowledge and innovation are essential elements for realizing the goals outlined in these strategies, and the key components for obtaining and fostering national andinternational competitiveness. in recent years, china has achieved a seriesof advances in science and technology, including manned space flight, superhybridized rice breeding, and supercomputer research and developstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chinaõs scientific data sharing policy7ment. these achievements highlight some of chinaõs ability for innovation.science and technology are playing important roles in agricultural advancement, industrial technology upgrades, socially sustainable development, andthe evolution of chinaõs advancedtechnology industries.in 2002, the chinese government established a new initiative with thecentral objective of building an affluent society throughout the country. in2003, the third plenary session of the 16th central committee of thechinese communist party formulated and adopted five scientific development goals that collectively direct the national economic and social development. a large gap still exists, however, between the requirements foreconomic and social development in china and the capacity of its scienceand technology to meet these requirements. for example, insufficient investment in science and technology infrastructure, lack of worldclass research teams, and an outdated research management system greatly constrain chinaõs innovation and international competitive ability in scienceand technology. among these constraining factors, the inefficient use ofscientific and technological resources and the repetitiveness and duplication of research efforts have been prominent bottlenecks to chinaõs advancement in innovation.in 2002, the state council authorized the ministry of science andtechnology (most) to initiate a pilot project of the national science andtechnology infrastructure platform in coordination with 16 other ministries and departments. based on reforms that strengthen data sharing andscientific resource system integration, this project focuses on increasingchinaõs international competitiveness and science and technology innovation potential. china will use modern information technology and international resources to construct the public, fundamental, and strategic scienceand technology infrastructure platform. the primary objective is to createan environment that fosters scientific and technological innovation by providing the necessary infrastructure that best enables advancements in science and technology, and that best supports longterm developments thatare the cornerstones of discovery and innovation. the sharing of scientificdata is the core component in this project.most regards scientific data sharing as a national science and technology infrastructure platform, considers it of national interest, and treats it asan important research component based on several factors. scientific dataare the most active and innovative resource in the information era. scientific data have remarkable research and application possibilities, and decisionmaking potential. they are fundamental for meeting the needs for thestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8open access to scientific data in chinaadvancement and innovation of science and technology, and for social development, economic growth, and national security. the value of scientificdata resources is strongly correlated with their sharing characteristics in tworespects. first, scientific research requires the use and sharing of data, information, and knowledge from other pertinent disciplines to make innovative advancements most efficiently and effectively. solutions to world problems require an interdisciplinary approach. second, the envisioned chinesescientific data sharing platform would facilitate simultaneous and unlimited copying and uses of data. the scientific datasharing platform will thusbe based on the principle that all data be fully shared to facilitate the use ofthe data for fully realizing their maximum value.scientific data are derived from scientific and technological activitiessuch as observation, monitoring, investigation, experiments, and researchanalysis in various organizations and institutions. the types of scientificdata include numerical, spatial, graphical, and text data, which are complex, widely distributed, in multiple formats, and massive in scope.scientific data are a knowledge resource for the whole society, so chinashould manage the data sharing to best serve the entire country. chinaõsmassive data holdings are obtained and accumulated as a result of nationalinvestment plans. as such, they are a national asset and resource shared bythe whole society. the capital accumulated by the taxpayers is used to obtain scientific data. therefore, the taxpayers should have the right to accessand share the data resources, which means that the producer of public datamust distribute the data to the public and serve the whole country andsociety. it is on this basis that the data should be shared.the insufficient use of chinaõs massive data holdings has been an urgent problem. over time, the chinese government has organized differentobservations, surveys, and experiments in many scientific fields, and accumulated large quantities of scientific data. however, most of these data arenot shared or used efficiently because of the lack of a policy of opennessand the lack of a mechanism for sharing the data. this results in great wastesince the national investment is used primarily for repeatedly collectingbasic data. for example, there are 18 data receivers in the united states forthe moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer sensors on nationalaeronautic and space administration (nasa) earth observing satellites,while in china there are more than 30 stations, and their number continues to increase. overall, the existing 5,000 to 6,000 scientific databases inchina do not really support the development of the country and society.one can see that the problem of not sharing scientific data is pervasivestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chinaõs scientific data sharing policy9because of policy, management, technology, and other factors. as a result,it is difficult for scientists to obtain the needed research information, andprecious national resources are wasted due to repeated and redundant collection. therefore, scientific data sharing and the means for china to useits resources more effectively are essential.the development of international scientific data sharing policies hasprovided good references for the chinese data sharing project. in recentyears, many developed countries have carried out scientific data sharingactivities. for example, in the united states nasa established distributedactive archive centers for earth and environmental data, the white housedeveloped an open data management policy for global change research in1991, and the federal government has adopted other regulations and policies concerning data management, many of them since 1990. some international scientific organizations have also strengthened the work of dataexchange and sharing. for example, the world meteorological organization manages a data exchange system of global meteorological data. thereis also the global disaster information network, and many other globaldata sharing projects have been established. these examples all provideapproaches that china can adopt in carrying out its own scientific datasharing.the quick growth of chinaõs massive data holdings and the development of information technology have provided support for scientific datasharing. according to the statistics for the past 30 years, rapid developments of science and technology in the world have produced massive scientific datañmuch more than the data produced during all previous history.china has entered a new phase, with its national information infrastructureand information superhighway developing quickly. series of networks arebeing established successively (e.g., the science and technology network,education and science network, gold bridge network, chinese publicnetwork, and the new broadband networks). these can all help to ensurethat the scientific data are extensively, conveniently, and quickly shared. itis not only an urgent requirement for the scientific and technological innovation system to implement scientific data sharing and to create the neworder of opening and distribution for scientific data, but also to promotechinaõs participation in the global economy.in the process of implementing its scientific data sharing policy, chinamust consider national strategic requirements and the worldõs technological evolution. there are five major steps that need to be emphasized aschina moves forward on its data sharing strategy.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10open access to scientific data in china1. change and enhance perspectives, and advocate resource sharing. fora long time, the attitude that public scientific data in china are the exclusive private possessions of individuals and departments has made the development of scientific data exchange and sharing difficult. in order to raisethe awareness of scientific data sharing and to enhance its effectiveness,china must break the òinformation exchange barrieró; that is, change thetraditional view that the scientific data resources are private property, andfoster a new culture of scientific resource sharing.chinese researchers need to recognize that public scientific data arenational resources that no organization or individual is allowed to keepprivately. public scientific data are derived from observations and experiments that are established through a national investment, as a nationalresource. this call for open scientific data sharing and reinforcement ofthe national interest subrogates the individualõs interest to the nationalinterest, facilitates the active circulation of scientific data among sciencedepartments, and develops its substantial value in the economy, society,and research.china should encourage organizations to devote their efforts towardscientific data sharing through improved data management systems andmechanisms. most has established special funds to facilitate these developments of data sharing. at the same time, most also has created andimplemented an evaluation policy for scientific data sharing to help ensurethat data sharing develops in an orderly manner.through the demonstration of data sharing benefits, people graduallywill be encouraged to change their traditional views and to make scientificdata sharing part of their research activity. some organizations that haveinitiated data sharing have provided scientific data conveniently and quicklyto many users, which helps to change the data usersõ and the data managersõthinking and approach. this encourages more organizations and individuals to adopt a data sharing ethic and practice.2. plan and develop the scientific data sharing policy and system. inorder to ensure the implementation of a scientific data sharing project, it isnecessary to develop and integrate a national policy and operational system. òsharingó requires a management system to regulate and ensure dataexchange; to streamline scientific data linkages among data collection, integration, and application; and to promote the relationships between dataowners, administrators, and users to ensure data sharing progress.scientific data sharing is not limited to one type of industry, departstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chinaõs scientific data sharing policy11ment, or person; it needs the cooperation of the state and the whole society.the adoption of new laws can aid the nationallevel policy and regulationto help normalize the various social relationships associated with data sharing. under a sound legal system, scientific data resources can be valuedfully and serve scientific innovation and national development.3. strengthen the establishment of scientific data sharing standards. inorder to share scientific data fully, a standard approach must be established.this should include establishing the technological system for the scientificdata sharing platform, enacting standards for scientific data sharing anddistribution, classifying data into different categories for different users,adopting the data distribution policy, and guiding data integration andcommunication. during the establishment of such a standard approach, itis necessary to import and use the related standards from other countries, asappropriate. it also is important to emphasize the combination of basic anduniversal standards, and their application.4. construct a service system for national scientific data sharing. it alsois a very important task to implement scientific data sharing for existingdata resources and for all new scientific data. scientific data resources thatare derived from government scientific and technological programs anddistributed among research groups and individuals should be organizedand shared efficiently.scientific data centers typically need to be organized at the departmentor organizational level. most has chosen some initial departments andorganizations, such as resources and environment, medicine and sanitation, and agriculture, and established related data centers and networks.this preliminary work can demonstrate successful experiences and promote the development of scientific data sharing platforms.5. strengthen cooperation and improve the sharing of global data resources. international cooperation is essential for data resource sharing.many important and complex scientific problems cannot be solved by onlyone country. researchers need to share scientific data resources globally.china is reforming and opening, learning from other advanced experiencesabroad, and encouraging its scientists to show their research results to theworld. china also believes that the challenges it addresses can serve as anexample for other countries.most has signed bilateral and multilateral treaties on scientific andstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12open access to scientific data in chinatechnological cooperation with more than 100 countries. on the basis ofthese treaties, the chinese government is developing activities to encourageits scientists to cooperate with international scientific organizations and totake active part in data exchanges with international data centers. chinaalso welcomes other international scientists to china to establish longtermcooperation in the scientific data and information fields.the worldõs scientific community is rapidly entering into a new eradominated by digital technologies. scientific data sharing, which is a basicstrategy for this coming decade, can strongly improve worldwide scientificand technologic abilities with the combined efforts of international organizations, national governments, and individual scientists and engineers. anew knowledge society based on data and information sharing will be created soon.introduction to the china scientificdata sharing projectxianõen zhangdirector general of the division of basic researchministry of science and technology of china1scientific data have become a new resource in the information era andwill play a key role in the process of scientific and technological innovation.more reliable, comprehensive, and richer scientific data mean more opportunities for original innovation. the fact that innovations in science andtechnology are, for the most part, interdisciplinary indicates that such collaboration is the future of science. successful research depends on openaccess to data, information, and knowledge from various fields to the greatest extent possible.the current status for scientific data sharing is far from meeting thedemands of chinaõs scientific and technical development, its emergingeconomy, and growing national power. the scarcity of scientific and technical data resources has become a major obstacle for innovation. the existing, limited resources cannot be used fully because of the outdated research1based on a presentation available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/zhangxianenpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chinaõs scientific data sharing policy13management system. funding also is not sufficient, and the supportingfunding system needs to be improved immediately.the china scientific data sharing project (chinasdsp) waslaunched in 2002 in response to this situation, as well as in response tomeeting chinaõs need for sustainable development based on science andtechnology in the information society. chinasdsp is a part of the national facility information infrastructure for science and technology. thispresentation provides a brief introduction to chinasdsp activities.general considerations and objectives of chinasdspthe major objective of chinasdsp is to establish a data sharing architecture that facilitates the use of scientific data by establishing laws, policies, and standards that are supportive of scientific data preservation andsharing and taking advantage of information and communication technology. chinasdsp is being developed through comprehensive planning atthe national level; it is collecting and reorganizing data from governmentagencies, institutes, programs, and individual investigators while makingfull use of international scientific data resources through cooperation.chinasdsp should make all these data accessible to all interested users atan affordable cost, or free if possible. by utilizing modern information technology, integrating scientific data resources from all kinds of departments,establishing a data sharing policy, and improving management, scientificdata resources can be integrated into a uniform framework of national scientific data sharing management. the methodology of the chinasdsp isto build up a data center cluster and a sharingoriented network, with thegoal of forming a multifaceted, distributed scientific data sharing systemthat bridges the gaps between different agencies, institutes, and geographical regions. by 2020, the project is expected to achieve the following goals:to form a scientific data management and sharing system that is more userfriendly; to develop a set of supportive laws, policies, and standards; and toestablish a core base of data service professionals through a career rewardmechanism. by that time, 80 percent of scientific data funded by the government is expected to be made available to the general public.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14open access to scientific data in chinaframework architecture of chinasdsplogical framework of the projectchinasdsp has three major elements: master databases, scientific datacenters and networks, and a gateway web site.master databases. a major part of the development of the masterdatabase component is to reorganize the existing databases. master databases disseminate authoritative and reliable data to users. the òmaster databaseó designation normally corresponds with some specific academic discipline, and contains and describes data that are important for innovationsand the advance of science. approximately 300 such databases have alreadybeen identified.scientific data centers and networks. as with the development ofthe master databases, the establishment of scientific data centers and networks is also a result of reorganizing existing data centers and networks.priority will be given to those centers or networks that have stable datasources and wellplanned data archiving in fields such as natural resourcesand the environment.gateway web site. the gateway web site will link the master databases to all of the other information in every data center. it will deliverservices, including content exchange, metadata, and information distribution in order to provide onestop querying and information dissemination.figure 1 provides a schematic diagram of the gateway web site.scope of data sharing supported by chinasdspchinasdsp also functions as a catalyst. its original purpose has beento integrate publicly funded data resources, but its longterm goal is toleverage all possible data resources from government to the private sectors,and make them available to the general public.the data flow is illustrated in figure 2. the data may come from threetypes of sources: large programs funded by the central government, programs funded by other agencies and institutes, and international cooperation programs. data will be submitted and integrated into an easytouseform at following common guidelines and standards. qualified users willhave the right to access these datasets.six data sharing systems will be on the priority list: natural resources andstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chinaõs scientific data sharing policy15gateway to china scientific data sharing programnatural scienceand environmentagriculturepopulationand healthbasic and frontier sciencesengineering andtechnologyregional developmentmeteorological scientific data centerrural development scidata centeragricultural scientific data centerbasic medicine scientific data centerrural development scidata centerpopulation control scidata centerearth system scientific data centerspace environment scidata centerabout300 master databasesin 40 data centersdisciplines disciplines data centers / networksdata centers / networksmaster databasemaster databasedata users....................................................................ääfigure 1architecture and framework of china scientific data sharing program.scientific data sharingscientific data sharingsubmission from submission from agencies and agencies and institutesinstitutesexchange data exchange data with other with other countriescountriessubmission from submission from major national major national programprogramdata data disseminationdisseminationdata data integration / integration / submissionsubmissiondata data generatorgeneratorscientific research & scientific research & technology development technology development sectorsectorobservation, monitoringobservation, monitoringsurvey and evaluationsurvey and evaluationstatistics sectorstatistics sectorfigure 2data flow diagram for chinasdsp.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16open access to scientific data in chinaenvironment management, agriculture, population and health, basic andfrontier science, engineering and technology, and regional development.service architecture of chinasdspchinasdsp is expected to provide services in the following four ways:data management services will integrate uptodate technologies,such as distributed databases, data warehouses, metadata, and networks,and build up a distributed database system that facilitates data submission,processing, archiving, and updating.content services will provide content query based on metadata so thatusers can obtain information about specific data in a timely and effectivemanner.data services based on a successful content query service will supportdata browsing and downloading of many kinds of data, either spatial ornonspatial, wellstructured or nonstructured.extended services will provide tools for various users to search in massive amounts of data, integrate data from different sources, and mining ofdata to find new knowledge. data centers may develop more customizedservices, such as subjectoriented computation.major tasksmajor tasks that need to be addressed include scientific data resourcedevelopment, standardization, and policy and law aspects.scientific data resource developmentdata resource development is the process of data collecting, integrating,reorganizing, and mining. the master databases are the natural result of thisprocess. the major tasks are to improve existing data resources; safeguard orrescue endangered scientific data and records; develop the master databasesfor large research programs funded by the government; introduce international data resources based on their scientific values, quality, and usability;integrate multisource data; and conduct valueadded research.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chinaõs scientific data sharing policy17standardizationstandardization is a prerequisite for scientific data sharing in the digital era. there are two kinds of standards being addressed by chinasdsp:platform technical standards and data sharing standards. data standardswithin major application areas will also be on the list of priorities.policy and law aspectsthe policy and law aspects for scientific data sharing are also key tasksthat need to be addressed. policy making should be considered first as ameans for guiding legislation, which is a long and complex process andrequires sufficient feedback from sharing practices. thus both theoreticalinvestigations and case studies are important inputs for a sound data sharing policy. the relevant policy and law system will be developed stepbystep and should handle such issues as guidelines, data classification for sharing, copyrights, incentives, performance evaluation, and so on.the chinese data sharing policies and legislation should be improvedfor several reasons. the existing scientific and technical legislation has notfully represented the sharing spirit and principles. targets for data sharingare not defined in current policies and regulations. no relevant descriptionfor a specific data sharing system could be found in the current policies andregulations. finally, the existing policies and legislation provide no guidance to research institutions about data sharing, or their proper rights andobligations.as of this time, over 20 countries have issued relevant policies for scientific data sharing management, thereby forming a primitive global system for scientific data exchange and sharing services in some domains. thepolicies and laws of these countries provide useful examples.tasks that should be addressed in the policy arena include the establishment and implementation of several types of guidelines: the implementation and management guidelines of the chinasdsp; data submissionguidelines of major science and technology programs funded by the government; guidelines for scientific and technological data classification fordata sharing; and performance evaluation (merit appraisal) of scientific datasharing activities.scientific data sharing legislation in china will be important for several reasons. it will provide one of the basic resources for transferring basicscientific and technical results (i.e., data) into real productivity. the implestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18open access to scientific data in chinamentation of scientific data sharing could produce new types of information business, such as data product processing and data distribution services. scientific data sharing could also provide open scientific data resources and a fair competitive environment for data resources in theinformation industry. for the purpose of fully participating in worldwidehighlevel collaboration and competition, china should improve its national scientific and technical competitive ability and lay a foundation forefficiently supporting its emerging economy.data sharing legislation and regulations therefore need to define property rights in data; encourage data sharing; and establish a system for supervising data sharing, for the technical decisions about data sharing, and fordata sharing evaluation. there are several legislative and regulatory actionsthat should be taken in constructing a domestic legal system for scientificdata sharing.revise the scientific and technical improvement law. as the basic national law of science and technology and the standard for sharing scientificand technical resources, this law should represent the most important òsharing principleó for platform construction. it should make sure the data resources are open and shared with the public by data managers and publicresearch managers, give rights to relevant bodies that need access to dataresources, as well as define the characteristics of national scientific and technical data resources and regulate public scientific and technical data resource sharing on proper terms.draft a scientific and technical resource sharing and protection law.this law should define basic obligations for data resource managers andowners regarding open and shared data resources with the public, regulatebasic qualifications and procedures for users, and stipulate the requirementsfor providing service and education. such measures are needed to preventimproper or illegal activities and to provide the national scientific and technical resource management center with adequate funding, information, andtimely data.regulation on scientific data sharing. this regulation should definescientific data, clarify the obligations for scientific data owners and managers to open and share their resources, and establish a standard managementsystem for scientific data resource and standard data formats. the personsin charge should be held accountable for the waste of resources and othertypes of mismanagement.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.chinaõs scientific data sharing policy19regulation on opening government information. this nationallevel regulation will clarify the principle for government to freely issue its information,similar to the resource sharing in the scientific and technical fundamentalplatform. the resource sharing on the platform could be greatly improvedwith the announcement and implementation of this major regulation.there may be other relevant laws and regulations that need to be considered or amended as well.summary of the chinasdsp work planthe following activities are being implemented during the initial experimental period, 20012005: overall planning and design; research andplanning on the policy and legal framework; drafting and issuing relevantpolicies and regulations; developing technology and standards; establishingscientific data centers and networks and initiating a data sharing pilotproject; identifying the optimal mechanisms for existing data consolidationand sharing; launching of the program gateway web site, selecting 25 datacenters for the data sharing pilot project, and selecting other candidatecenters for further development; summing up experiences from various aspects of the experimental period; and preparing a feasibility report aboutthe overall implementation of public data sharing in the next period ofactivity.in 2001, the meteorological data sharing project was launched,2 whichheralded the start of the scientific data sharing program in china.the chinasdsp was formally initiated in 2002. by the end of 2002,another five data centers (land survey, hydrology and water resources, seismic, forestry, and agriculture) and three networks (earth system sciencedata center network, modern agricultural technology and rural development network, and sustainable development network) had joined the pilotproject.in june 2003, a coordinating group and a scientific group were established for scientific data sharing. the main task of these groups was to develop the plan for the chinasdsp by may 2004 with the following sixmajor components: current status and major national requirements; overall2see the summary of the presentation on òprogress in meteorological data sharing inchinaó by dahe qin in chapter 4.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20open access to scientific data in chinaconsiderations; principles and objectives; strategic framework and tasks;implementation and measurements; and supporting conditions and facilities.as of june 2004, the gateway web site has become pivotal to thechinasdsp. its function and technical specifications have been clarifiedand the overall design and specific modules are finished. data from the fivedata centers and three networks are being integrated into this gateway andwill be available by the end of 2004.in terms of policy making, a working group for data sharing was established and investigated the current status and trend of data policy, both athome and abroad, compiled relevant materials and information, establishedthe òguidelines of data submission from major national programs,ó began researching the framework of relevant law and policy, and finished theconceptual design for data classification for sharing.a research group for data standards also has been established. it hasinvestigated the current status and trend of data standards both at homeand abroad, compiled relevant standards, and drafted the framework andguidelines for data sharing management. in general, the chinasdsp isstill in the overall planning phase, accumulating the experiences of technology and policy making, as well as overseeing pilot data sharing projects.during the implementation period, 2006 to 2010, the following workwill need to be done: continue the establishment of data sharing technology, policy, and law; extend the program coverage of scientific data centersor networks and make them operational; gradually improve technologyand standards; enforce the cooperation among data centers in different research areas; and enhance the capacity to develop highlevel data productsand to ensure quality. after each yearly performance evaluation of the 25pilot data centers or networks, the qualified ones will be included in theònational scientific data master networkó and will start regular operation. the amount invested in each center will depend on its merits andperformance. another 15 to 20 data centers will be launched, including200 new master databases. by 2010, a mechanism is expected to be established through which data are submitted from various governmental agencies and programs and delivered to potential users efficiently.in conclusion, it is important to emphasize that science respects noborder. the establishment and implementation of the chinasdsp needsthe support and assistance of the international community, and in turn willcontribute to the development of global science and technology.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.213summaries of presentations oninternational perspectivesthe perspectives of five international organizationsñthe united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization (unesco), theinternational council for science (icsu), the organisation for economiccooperation and development (oecd), the interacademy panel on international issues (iap), and the committee on data for science and technology (codata)ñwere presented at the workshop. these presentations,summarized below, were focused on activities that are either under way orrecently completed by these organizations in the areas relating to the preservation of and open access to public scientific data and information. thechapter concludes with brief overviews of the chinese and u.s. nationalcommittees for codata.trends in development of internationalscientific data and information1the commitment of unesco2 to the essential good of the free flowof information and access to knowledge sources is inspired by its constitution, which states that òthe wide diffusion of culture, and the education of1based on a presentation by yasuyuki aoshima, united nations educational, scientificand cultural organization, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/aoshimapresentation.ppt.2for more information about unescoõs many activities see http://www.unesco.org.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22open access to scientific data in chinahumanity for justice and liberty and peace are indispensable to the dignityof man and constitute a sacred duty which all the nations must fulfill in aspirit of mutual assistance and concern.ófor several years, various resolutions of the unesco general conference and the executive board have urged member states and associatemembers to promote free and universal access to public domain information for the purpose of education, science, and culture. as a result,unesco has taken several proactive measures in order to encourage member states to establish a right of universal access to information and formulate policies and regulatory frameworks, which would determine the futureorientations of the information society.after an extensive round of negotiations, the general conference ofunesco adopted at its 32nd session in october 2003 the recommendation concerning the promotion and use of multilingualism and universalaccess to cyberspace. the recommendation recognizes the importance ofpromoting equitable access to information and knowledge, especially in thepublic domain, and reiterates unescoõs conviction that the organizationshould have a leading role in encouraging access to information for all,supporting multilingualism and cultural diversity on the global information networks. the recommendation proposes a number of specific measures fostering universal access to digital resources and services, and facilitating the preservation of their cultural and language diversity. unescothereby encourages its member states to support equitable and affordableaccess to information and to promote the development of a multiculturalinformation society.the current evolution towards knowledge societies through an increased use of information and communication technologies (icts) facilitates the movement and handling of data as well as the process of generating and validating information and knowledge. thus, the various aspects ofaccess to scientific data and information in the digital world, including thevery important questions concerning intellectual property rights, will continue to attract attention.publicdomain information, which is free of copyright and other intellectual property rights, often is not sufficiently well known to potentialcontributors and users. in some countries, there are growing restrictions onthe availability and use of public data and information. the publicdomainprinciple also can be extended conceptually by the adoption of òopen accessó to information, which is made freely and openly available by its rightsholders. one example of open access is the opensource software license, bystrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international perspectives23which computer programs are distributed free of charge by their authorsfor exploitation and further development. another is the documentationproduced and made available free of charge by the united nations and itsspecialized agencies, as well as public data and official information produced and voluntarily made available by governments.a significant aspect of the recommendation concerning the promotion and use of multilingualism and universal access to cyberspace is thepromotion of the social and cultural dimensions of universal access and theequitable balance between the interests of rights holders and the publicinterest. it is a major challenge for all those involved in the expansion of theemerging information society to contribute to maintaining a balance between copyright protection and access to information in the public domain. international copyright systems have been changed over time to adjust to the new digitally networked environment. in this sense, adoptingcoherent national legislative measures and ensuring international harmonization among countries is essential to avoid potential conflicts of interestsin an increasingly globalized world. through the adopted recommendation unesco recognizes the importance of an equitable balance betweenthe interests of rightsholders and those of users when valuable works andperformances are exploited in the digital environment in the fields of education, science, and culture.as one specific followup to the recommendation, unesco published in 2004 policy guidelines regarding governmental publicdomaininformation3 in order to advise countries on policies for the developmentand promotion of such information, taking account of both national needsand international practices. these guidelines serve as an advisory tool forgovernments. they emphasize the importance of governmental publicdomain information, which contributes to economic and social development,promotes democratic ideals through greater transparency of governance,enhances public health and safety, and serves essential scientific and technical research functions. the guidelines also encourage governments to define the scope of available governmental publicdomain information according to national needs, adopt a òfreedom of informationó law, and3see policy guidelines for the development and promotion of governmental publicdomain information prepared by paul f. uhlir. 2004. paris: unesco, available at: http://portal.unesco.org/ci/en/ev.phpurlid=15863&urldo=dotopic&urlsection=201.html.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24open access to scientific data in chinadevelop and implement a comprehensive governmental public information policy framework.freedom of expression and freedom of opinion, as enshrined in article19 of the universal declaration of human rights,4 are essential premises ofthe information society. in building such a society, the ability for all toaccess and produce information, and generate ideas and knowledge isindispensable.scientific research leads to the development of new technologies andto the production of data and information that can benefit society as awhole.while some countries are leading or keeping up with scientific andtechnical progress and with the digital information revolution, developingcountries have to make huge efforts to gain access to the necessary infrastructure and to take full advantage of icts. it is indeed paradoxical that ificts facilitate communication from the global to the local levels and viceversa, they can also broaden the digital gap between those who participatein the information society and benefit from it and those who cannot.the impact of icts in the production, use, and dissemination of scientific knowledge is immense. there are many opportunities to bridge thescience gap, for example by improving networking among scientists locallyand internationally, and by providing scientific information and knowledge to decision makers for better governance. moreover, icts are centralto scientific research itself. they enable scientists to perform fundamentaland applied research, build partnerships and scientific international consortia, conduct experiments, manage data, coordinate laboratory activities,and communicate their findings to their colleagues and the public.based on the assumption that scientific knowledge produced throughpublic investments is a òpublic good,ó scientific data and informationshould be as widely available and affordable as possible, since the morepeople that are able to share such information, the greater the positive effects and returns will be for society. the importance of scientific data tosociety therefore should be described clearly since all areas of research nowrequire availability of highquality data for their progress.finally, in light of all these developments, the sustainable, longtermpreservation of digital data and information is a very important concern.for several years now, specialized agencies and organizations of the united4see http://www.un.org/overview/rights.html.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international perspectives25nations have highlighted the fact that despite the growing efforts of thevarious stakeholders involved in generating, organizing, and providing access to digital scientific data and information, these resources are still at riskof being lost to future generations. the issue of digital archiving is thusessentially a matter of scientific and public policy, which should be of concern to decision makers.towards international guidelines for access toresearch data from public funding5the ever increasing use of information communication technologies isbringing dramatic changes to the way our global science system operates.digitization has become an essential part of the scientific process and themanagement of research. yesterdayõs scientists studied nature. todayõs scientists study digital datañdigital data on nature to be sure. sir isaac newton did not need more than a pencil and a pad to process his observationaldata into groundbreaking scientific laws. but today the next advance inhighenergy physics requires a large hadron collider that will produce 12to 14 petabytes of digital data per year, the full capacity of about 16 millioncd roms. these data will be analyzed by some 6,000 researchers scattered around the world, but tightly knit by the grid computer network ofour global science system.the use of icts has made collections of scientific data in many respects comparable to musical scores: to be used time and again for a diversity of performances by a diversity of artists for different audiences of society. optimum access to research data should enable researchers from allover the world to compose the full score for our knowledgebased international society. consequently, access to the gold mine of research data quicklyhas become a major issue in international science policy and research management. the traditional exchange arrangements between scientific colleagues no longer suffice to guarantee the necessary openness of access todigital data resources. optimum access requires formal agreements on theconditions of access at both the national and international levels. the maintask of establishing an adequate regulatory framework lies within the re5based on a presentation by peter schrıder, ministry of education, culture, and science, the netherlands, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/schroderpresentation.pdf.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26open access to scientific data in chinasearch communityñat the national research councils, scientific institutes,universities, and funding agencies. the general principles to build data access regimes should be a responsibility of governments, however. considering the international dimensions of the scientific effort in general and ofaccess to data in particular, national data access policy regimes will onlywork when closely connected to international agreements.at the ministeriallevel meeting of the oecd committee for scientific and technological policy on january 30, 2004, the ministers responsible for science policy endorsed the òdeclaration on access to researchdata from public funding,ó6 including a draft set of principles and therecommendation that oecd should develop these principles into moredetailed guidelines. the declaration is an important step towards furtherinternational scientific cooperation.the guidelines will address the technical, institutional, financial, legal,and cultural aspects of data access regimes. the basic premise of the guidelines will be open access to and unrestricted use of publicly funded researchdata, subject only to legitimate restrictions. at least nine areas will be addressed in the guidelines: transparency, formal responsibility, professionalism, protection of intellectual property, legal conformity, interoperability,quality, efficiency, and accountability.in short, new governmental science policies on data access and newdata policies of research funding organizations will influence the futurecourse of international research practices. the development of internationalapproaches to data access holds the promise of opening up exciting newdimensions of international scientific cooperation.international perspectives on data andinformation for science7the mission of icsu is to strengthen international science for thebenefit of society. one of the key principles that underpins this mission isthe òuniversality of scienceó; that is, all scientists should have the possibility to participate, without discrimination and on an equitable basis, in legitimate scientific activities whether they be conducted in a national, trans6see http://www.codataweb.org/unescomtg/drydendeclaration.pdf.7based on a presentation by carthage smith, international council for science, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/carthagesmithpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international perspectives27national, or international context. scientific data and information are theinput and product of scientific research, and the practices and policies thatdictate their use must reinforce the universality of science. in so doing theywill improve science for the benefit of everyone.since its inception, icsu, whose membership includes both international disciplinary science unions and national interdisciplinary sciencebodies, has been involved in scientific data and information issues. a particular focus has been on the international and interdisciplinary issues relating to data production, management, and access. when icsu was established in 1932, the challenges were very different than they are today. whiledata exchange was logistically more difficult and much slower in 1932, it isparadoxical that the incredible advances in information and communication technologies that have taken place in the last decade have also, inmany ways, made the exchange of data much more complex.in order to address the key management and policy challenges, icsuhas established a number of specific interdisciplinary bodies for data andinformation, including codata, a coorganizer of this workshop, andthe international network for the availability of scientific publications,also represented at the meeting. moreover, icsu has developed the majorinternational research programs on global environmental change and is currently planning large new scientific initiatives, such as the internationalpolar year (20072008), which produce, collect, analyze, and disseminatelarge amounts of diverse scientific data from and for many sources aroundthe world.with regard to data policy, icsu is a strong advocate of òfull and openaccessó8 to scientific data and òuniversal and equitable accessó9 to scientificpublications. icsu also has been very actively involved with codata,unesco, and other international science partners in the two phases ofthe united nations world summit on the information society (wsis).on behalf of the international science community, these groups argued8icsu defines òfull and open accessó to data as equitable, nondiscriminatory access toall data that are of value to science. it does not necessarily equate to òfree of costó at the pointof delivery, although this is certainly the ideal in many situations, particularly with regard topublicly funded data that are made available online.9icsu defines òuniversal and equitable accessó to scientific publications as ensuringequal opportunities both to publish and to obtain scientific information for all scientistswherever they are located. it does not necessarily imply without any cost at the point ofdelivery.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28open access to scientific data in chinavery strongly for recognition of the critical role and needs of science in theinformation society. in particular, an agenda for actionñscience in theinformation society10ñwas developed by icsu and its partners. it highlighted the key issues relating to preservation of and access to scientific dataand information. this agenda was very influential because its main recommendations were incorporated into the formal documents that were agreedby heads of state at the end of phase i of wsis, which was held in genevain december 2003.in light of the rapidly changing international scientific (and political)landscape and in parallel to wsis, icsu recently completed a priorityarea assessment of the international needs for scientific data and information11ñproduction, management, access, and dissemination. the reportaddresses many of the future challenges related to data preservation andaccess and identifies clear actions for icsu, the scientific community, policymakers, funders, and other stakeholders. many of the existing practices,mechanisms, structures, and policies relating to scientific data and information need to be updated and improved if the optimum benefit from dataand information is to be obtained for both science and society.the priority area assessment report also identifies a number of priorities and needs in the area of scientific data and information, includinglongterm strategic planning and investment, professional data management, and modernization of current infrastructure and systems, as well asnew infrastructure in some areas. it also underscores the need for international cooperation and supportive data and information policies at the national and international levels.in the area of data preservation, the report recommends that theremust be a prioritization of what data to preserve. other areas of importanceare data rescue and recovery and the need for òopenly availableó metadata.the report also identifies longterm support for archiving and considerations regarding data integrity and data privacy as essential requirementsfor effective data preservation.10see http://www.icsu.org for the full agenda for action and details of other icsupublications and activities relating to the wsis.11international council for science. 2004. icsu report of the cspr assessment panel onscientific data and information. the background description, terms of reference, final report,and panel membership for the icsu priority area assessment on scientific data and information can be obtained from http://www.icsu.org/1icsuinscience/datapaa1.html/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international perspectives29the icsu priority area assessment defines access in two ways: (1) toprovide data and information and publish them, and (2) to be able to useand read the data and information. minimal constraints on access shouldbe maintained. the report recommends the development of stable systemsfor providing universal access to quality data and information. new economic models for providing access to scientific, technical, and medical literature need to be developed. scientists also should become more involvedin the development of policies, such as intellectual property rights, thataffect access. finally, the interests and needs of scientists in developing countries must be considered and addressed.interacademy panel initiatives on promotingaccess to scientific information12the iap is a global network of over 90 academies of science designedto promote their greater participation in science policy discussions as wellas policies that strengthen scientific institutions. toward that end, the iapcreates partnerships among its member institutions and works closely withother scientific organizations. the iap is governed by an executive committee with a rotating membership of 11 member academies and two cochairs. in 20032006, the cochairs are professor zhu chen of the chineseacademy of sciences and professor yves qu”r” of the french acad”mie dessciences. the third world academy of sciences and icsu are also exofficio members.since its inception, the iap has issued statements on population growth(1994), urban development (1996), sustainability (2000), human reproductive cloning (2003), science education (2003), health of mothers andchildren (2003), scientific capacity building (2003), science and the media(2003), and access to scientific information (2003).13 the iap also organizes its activities according to major programs and shorter, more focusedinitiatives. currently, its programs are in the areas of capacity building foracademies, science education, health education for women, and water. italso has three initiatives focused on biosecurity, genetically modified organisms, and access to scientific information.12based on a presentation by michael clegg, foreign secretary of the u.s. nationalacademy of sciences, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/michaelcleggpresentation.ppt.13for more information on the interacademy panel, see http://www4.nationalacademies.org/iap/iapga.nsf/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30open access to scientific data in chinabecause of the importance of the issue of improving access to scientificdata and information as a matter of science policy at the national and international levels, the iap issued a policy statement on this topic in december2003.14 the iap statement on access to scientific information focuses onaccess to numerical scientific data, databases, and scientific literature. italso attempts to address the high cost of scientific journal subscriptions.the statement recommends that:electronic access to journal content be made available worldwidewithout cost as soon as possible, within one year or less of publication forscientists in industrialized nations, and immediately upon publication forscientists in developing countries;journal content and, to the extent possible, data upon which research is based be prepared and presented in a standard format for electronic distribution to facilitate ease of use;journal content be archived collectively, either by private or government organizations;governments and publishers work together to raise awareness inthe scientific community of the availability of free electronic access to scientific journals; andscientific databases obtained by intergovernmental organizations bemade available without cost or restrictions on reuse.as noted above, the iap also has launched a new initiative under theleadership of the u.s., chinese, and senegalese academies of science onaccess to scientific information in developing countries. the iap will convene a meeting of interested members to define this new initiative.15 inaddition, it may also develop positions on subcategories of the broad topicof information access including electronic access, access to databases, responsibilities of the publishing industry, publicsector responsibilities, andthe information communication technologies infrastructure supporting access to data and information.14see the interacademy panel on international issues. 2003. an iap statement on access to scientific information, mexico city, december 4. http://www4.nationalacademies.org/iap/iaphome.nsf/weblinks/wwww5u6hhg?opendocument.15since this workshop, the iap convened two related meetings in paris in november2004 and in dakar, senegal, in january 2006.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international perspectives31future role of the committee ondata for science and technology16codata17is an interdisciplinary committee of icsu concerned withvarious types of quantitative data resulting from experimental measurements or observations in the natural and social sciences, and the engineering disciplines. particular emphasis is given to data management problemscommon to different scientific fields and to data sharing among these disciplines. codataõs objectives focus on:improving the quality and accessibility of data, as well as the methods by which data are acquired, managed, and analyzed;facilitating international cooperation among those collecting, organizing, and using data;promoting an increased awareness in the scientific and technicalcommunity of the importance of these activities; andconsidering data access and intellectual property issues.in addition to traditional activities such as meetings, workshops, and publishing, codata is now working to enhance such international activitiesby (1) promoting projectoriented approaches to highlight models tofollow up on fruitful ideas; (2) articulating issues in global access to scientific and technical data through intensive commitments to global and societal activities, such as the wsis; and (3) expanding human dimensionsto enhance data flows beyond borders, disciplines, organizations, andgenerations.codata has identified data preservation and data access as prioritymandates. there is a diverse portfolio of activities focused on the preservation of scientific and technical data, primarily through the work of its taskgroup on preservation of and access to scientific and technical data indeveloping countries. the task group has been working to identify thescientific, technical, management, and policy issues related to the preservation of scientific and technical data, and the task group members havecompiled a comprehensive, annotated bibliography of archiving resources.16based on a presentation by shuichi iwata, university of tokyo, japan, and president,codata, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/iwata6presentation.ppt.17for more information, see http://www.codata.org/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32open access to scientific data in chinathey also have initiated a series of international, interdisciplinary workshops, including this workshop, to highlight the importance of permanentaccess to scientific information resources, and to examine the policy andlegal, management and technical, and institutional and economic issuesthat are important to providing permanent access to digital scientific data.finally, codata, along with the task group, has worked with the international council for scientific and technical information (icsti) to create an online portal of resources related to the permanent access of scientific data and information.18in the area of access to scientific data, codata has worked closelywith icsu as well to provide an international voice in support of òfull andopenó access to scientific and technical data as new legislative and treatyregimes have been considered and implemented. between 1997 and 2003the joint ad hoc icsucodata working group on data and information monitored the implementation of the european union database directive in europe, and participated as an official òobserveró in the discussions of a potential new database treaty at meetings of the world intellectualproperty organization (wipo). the icsucodata white paper ondata access (1997)19 was a major defining document on this subject fromthe scientific community perspective at the wipo. a workshop involvingrepresentatives from the u.s. and european academies of sciences anddata law experts was held in conjunction with the 2000 codata conference in baveno and stresa, italy. several sessions on these issues were convened during the 2002 codata conference in montreal as well.finally, codata, in collaboration with the u.s. national committee for codata, icsti, icsu, and unesco, organized a major international symposium on open access and the public domain in digital dataand information for science in march 2003. this activity also helped toidentify and analyze important issues for followup by the icsu family oforganizations and for the development of an action plan in this area byicsu and unesco in preparation for the wsis. the first phase of wsiswas held in geneva in december 2003, and the second was held in tunis innovember 2005. codata discussed wsis at its general assembly in18see http://www.nap.edu/shelves/data for the codata/icsti portal on permanentaccess to scientific data and information.19see access to databases: principles for science in the internet era at http://www.codata.org/codata/dataaccess/principles.html.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.international perspectives33berlin in 2004. codata will continue to highlight the role of science inthe information society in preparations for the tunis phase of the summit.the resulting documents from this process are expected to create solutionson òdigital divide issuesó based on the individual care principle with respectto the institutional, legal, ethical, emotional, and cognitive aspects of data.chinaõs national committee for codata20china joined codata in 1984, with the chinese academy of sciences serving as the national member organization. since then, the chinesenational committee for codata21 has made efforts to promote chinaõsscientific and technical data activities through its executive bodyñthe secretariat located at the computer network information center of the chinese academy of sciences.the mission of the chinese national committee for codata is tofacilitate construction of scientific databases in china and to promote interdisciplinary and international exchanges, cooperation, and data sharing.the committeeõs main activities are to:1.investigate the domestic data activities and trends for establishingscientific and technical databases;2.convene an annual general assembly of the chinese national committee for codata, with the purpose of discussing its activities, providing an overview of the ongoing tasks of its data groups, and updating thecommunity on the academic achievements of codata;3.promote domestic scientific and technical information resources tomake more efficient use of scientific and technical data;4.organize domestic working groups and relevant meetings withindifferent academic spheres; and5.initiate and organize the implementation of programs on scientificdatabase construction and data sharing.20based on a presentation by zhihong xu, representative of the chinese national committee for codata, china, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/xuzhihongpresentation.ppt.21see http://www.codata.cn for more information.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34open access to scientific data in chinau.s. national committee for codata22the u.s. national committee (usnc) for codata23 provides abridge between the scientific and technical community in the united statesand the international codata on data issues. the usnc operates withinthe national research councilõs board on international scientific organizations and is the principal organizational entity within that boardõs officeof international scientific and technical information programs.the usnc undertakes special studies and activities, counsels the u.s.national delegate to codata on the u.s. position regarding officialcodata business, and provides a link between u.s. and internationaldata compilation and evaluation activities, taking into account the needs ofthe scientific and technical user community.finally, the usnc works closely with the international codata onpermanent access to scientific and technical data. it is a coorganizer of theaforementioned series of workshops relating to permanent access to scientific and technical data, including this one.22based on a presentation by paul f. uhlir, director of the u.s. national committeefor codata at the u.s. national academies.23see http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.354summaries of presentations oncrossdisciplinary issuesthree parallel breakout panel discussions focusing on crossdisciplinary issues in open access to and preservation of scientific data and information from the viewpoint of china were convened during the course of theworkshop. these sessions were organized according to (1) legal and policy,(2) institutional and economic, and (3) management and technical issues.the objective of these thematic breakout discussions was to examine different possible models in these areas and their potential benefits and shortcomings in china.panel discussion on legal and policy issuesintroduction1with regard to scientific data resources, most databases and data centers in china are managed directly or funded by government ministries andare subject to a relatively restrictive state information regime based on official secrecy requirements. this is a major challenge to the adoption of anopenaccess model because the past policies have been based on deeplyrooted political, institutional, and cultural factors. some of the restrictionshave applied generally to the overall public information regime, while oth1paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, u.s. national academies.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36open access to scientific data in chinaers have been more specific to science and based on perceived political oreconomic sensitivities (e.g., domestic disease statistics or highresolutiongeospatial data). the chinese government, however, increasingly recognizesthat many types of scientific data should be made openly available andusable, especially within the country, and not just for research purposes. asdiscussed in chapter 2, the recent highlevel focus by the chinese government on the laws and policies regarding access to governmentproducedand governmentfunded academic research data has made this a very propitious time to examine these issues.the case for change in access policies to governmental scientific datacan be made at many levels, both internally and externally. the most effective approach is one based on the realization of national selfinterest. acomparison with the policies of other countries can be effective as well.particularly auspicious is the trend over the past decade by many developing countries to adopt freedom of information laws.2of course, there are legitimate publicpolicy reasons for limiting accessto certain types of data, including appropriate national security restrictions,the protection of privacy and confidentiality, and the protection of private(as opposed to government) intellectual property rights. a related and verysignificant problem exists in getting scientists to contribute the data produced in the course of their research to public repositories. barriers includethe lack of an appropriate data center in which to deposit the data, norequirement by the funding source to deposit the data or to share themopenly, insufficient recognition of the importance of data activities by thescientistõs institution, a lack of effective incentives or rewards to make thedata available, the desire of researchers to sell their data at unreasonableprices despite very weak market estimates, inadequate funding to preparethe data sufficiently to make them usable by others, and a lack of trainingto do so.with regard to scientific, technical, and medical journals, these too aremostly published by government or governmentsponsored organizationsin china. because they are meant to be read by the research community,they do not have many of the same official constraints based on nationalsecurity considerations as the underlying data. they are, however, still published almost exclusively in print form, so their open availability on digitalnetworks raises new policy issues for the chinese journal publishers andresearch establishment.2for more information, see, for example, http://www.freedominfo.org.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues37the presentations summarized in this section focus on some of thelegal and policy barriers to more open access for publicly funded scientificdata at both the national and international levels, outline some of the policyarguments in favor of greater unrestricted access, and offer some policyguidelines in support of open availability.global trends to restrict access to data fromgovernmentfunded research3scientific data produced from governmentfunded research constitutea fundamental element of the modern research infrastructure and, if wellmanaged, can greatly accelerate scientific progress at the national and international levels. newly emerging possibilities for enhancing this role of scientific data resources in the digital environment truly constitute anotheròendless frontier.ó highlevel policy attention is necessary at the nationaland international levels in order to maximize the inherent value of datacollections and to minimize the negative effects of restrictions on accessand use.indeed, many economic, legal, and technological restrictions have beenplaced on publicdomain scientific data throughout the world. from aneconomic perspective, the trends to privatize governmental publicgoodfunctions and to commercialize more of the academic sectorõs research activities have been under way over the past two decades, particularly in biomedical and engineering areas. while these trends can support significantresearch advances and economic benefits, they are not without their owneconomic and social costs. a further continuation of privatization and commercialization of upstream publicsector information resources can beviewed as potentially having greater associated costs than benefits.recent changes to international and national intellectual property laws,such as new digital copyright protection and the adoption of exclusive property rights protection for noncopyrightable databases in many countries, aswell as the adoption of licensing agreements on onerous terms for researchtoolsñincluding datañin academia are further diminishing the broadavailability of publicdomain data in science. moreover, these highlyprotectionistic legal mechanisms are increasingly enforced by more effective digital rights management technologies. such developments are intensifying the tensions that already exist between the policies that favor shar3based on a presentation by jerome reichman, duke university school of law.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38open access to scientific data in chinaing of scientific data and the perceived need to restrict access to and uses ofdata in pursuit of increased commercial opportunities. restrictions on thedissemination of potentially sensitive research data and information basedon national security considerations are further constraining the availabilityof substantial amounts of material in the public domain. finally, the recentenactment of a powerful new database protection statute in europe andproposals for equivalent legislation in the united states and in other countries might be expected to push these tensions into other areas of publicresearch, which up to now have been less affected by the proprietary pressures from the commercialization and privatization trends.a contractually reconstructed research commons for scientificdata in a highly protectionist intellectual property environment4if the economic, legal, and technological pressures on publicdomainscientific data that were identified in the previous section continue unabated, they will result in lost opportunity costs across the entire researchenterprise. these pressures, which are especially pronounced in biomedicaland engineering research, could elicit one of two types of responses. one isessentially reactive, in which the public research community continues toadjust as best it can on an ad hoc basis, without organizing a response to theincreasing encroachment of a commercial and proprietary ethos on dataproduced by governmentfunded research. the other would require a science policy response to the challenge by formulating a strategy that wouldenable the scientific community to take more active control of its basic datasupply. the idea is to reinforce, by voluntary means, a public space in whichthe data sharing ethic in public science can be promoted and insulatedfrom some of the excessive privatization and commercialization trends,without impeding socially beneficial commercial opportunities. there aresome contractual approaches that are now being considered in the unitedstates and europe, which the chinese science policy community mightconsider as well in addressing this challenge in biomedical and other typesof publicly funded research.54based on a presentation by jerome reichman, duke university school of law.5these approaches are examined in detail in an article by j.h. reichman and paul f.uhlir. 2003. òa contractually reconstructed research commons for scientific data in ahighly protectionist intellectual property environment,ó law and contemporary problems,duke university school of law, vol. 66, winter/spring.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues39balancing the general public interests and copyright inscientific information management6in both the policy and legal arenas, there is a rising sense of researchand scholarship falling within the more general publicõs right to know andsupporting initiatives for increasing and opening access to research. thereare two policy aspects to consider, as government policies can determinehow scientific knowledge circulates and as policies are affected by the research that is consulted in their formation. shifts are taking place in policies affecting science, and these shifts are motivated by the basic humanright to know as recognized, for example, by the united nations universaldeclaration of human rights. they also are motivated by greater demandsfor accountability and transparency in the public administration of funding in areas such as government research grants. in canada, for example,one of the principal granting councils for the social sciences and humanities is transforming itself into a òknowledge council,ó which gives a highpriority to the public impact and awareness of research. according to auniversity of british columbia study of policy makersõ actual use of research,7 online access is having a substantial impact and is increasing theamount of research consulted, even as the policy makers are largely restricted to òopen accessó or free materials due to budgetary restrictions andthe limited number of subscriptions held. online access also has expandedpolicy makersõ circle of consultation, as they are relying less on a small set ofacademics to advise them. the role of research in policy making is an issueraised in many countries and in many contexts. greater public access to theresearch literature and to the underlying data sources would help supportmore informed and rational policy making.in terms of legal issues, two pertinent areas of law are freedom ofinformation legislation and copyright. in the united states, for example,recent legislation has brought federally funded scientific data produced inuniversities that are used to support the formation of federal governmentregulations within the purview of the freedom of information act (foia).previously, the foia applied only to data produced within the federal government itself. charges also have recently been made in new york against a6based on a presentation by john willinsky, university of british columbia, canada.7see willinsky, j. 2003. òpolicymakersõ online use of academic research,ó educationpolicy analysis archives, 11(2), january 11. retrieved january 28, 2005, from http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v11n2/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40open access to scientific data in chinamajor drug company for suppressing research unfavorable to its medication. these examples are indicative of rising public expectations of scienceand that people have a right to know what is known.copyright protection in scholarly publishing is occasionally portrayedas a matter of protecting authors from plagiarism. open access reducesconsiderably the likelihood of getting away with plagiarism. the more substantial legal issue, however, concerns the basic principle of copyright,namely, to protect the interests of the author and the public. here a newargument can be introduced in favor of openaccess scholarly publishing,serving the interests of the author and the public better than publishingmodels that depend on subscriptions and copyright control, which actuallyreduce both the authorõs and the publicõs rights in scholarly publication andcommunication. in short, increasing access to research has much to contribute to the policy and legal considerations in scholarly publishing.borders in cyberspace: maximizing social and economic benefitfrom public investment in data8many nations are now embracing the concept of open and unrestrictedaccess to publicsector informationñparticularly scientific, environmental, and statistical information of great public benefit. federal informationpolicy in the united states is based on the premise that government information is a valuable national resource and that the economic benefits tosociety are maximized when taxpayerfunded information is made availableinexpensively and as widely as possible. this policy is expressed in the paperwork reduction act of 19959 and in office of management and budget circular no. a130, òmanagement of federal information resources.ó10 the policy actively encourages the development of a robustprivate sector, improved access to critical information in the academic andresearch sector, and offers to provide publishers with the raw content fromwhich new information services may be created, at no more than the cost ofdissemination and without copyright or other restrictions.8based on a presentation by peter weiss, j.d., u.s. national weather service. see alsoweiss. 1997. òinternational information policy in conflict: open and unrestricted accessversus government commercialization,ó in borders in cyberspace, kahin and nesson, eds.,mit press.9see http://www.cio.gov/archive/paperworkreductionact1995.html.10see http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a130/a130trans4.html.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues41in a number of nations, particularly in europe and in many developing countries, publicly funded government agencies treat their informationholdings as a commodity to be used to generate revenue in the short term.they assert monopoly control on certain categories of information in anattemptñalmost always unsuccessfulñto recover the costs of its collectionor creation. such arrangements tend to preclude other entities from developing markets for the information or otherwise disseminating the information in the public interest. the world scientific and environmental researchcommunities, and especially developing nations, are particularly concernedthat such practices have decreased the availability of critical data and information. moreover, firms in emerging informationdependent industriesseeking to utilize publicsector information find their business plans frustrated by restrictive government data policies and other anticompetitivepractices.recent economic research and initiatives at the european commission, the united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization, and the organisation for economic cooperation and development,as well as in individual countries, such as chinaõs scientific data sharingprogram, are helping to create an international framework for open andglobal data sharing. there has been an emerging recognition in europe aswell that open access to government information is critical to the information society, environmental protection, and economic growth. a ògovernment commercializationó policy for public information cannot succeed inthe face of social and economic evidence and evenhanded application ofcompetition policies. conversely, open government information policiesfoster significant, but not easily quantifiable, social and economic benefitsto society.in order to achieve a successful international framework for open access to public scientific information, governments should:1.support full, open, and unrestricted international access to scientific data for public interest purposesñparticularly statistical, scientific, geographical, environmental, and meteorological information of great publicbenefit. such efforts to improve the exploitation of publicsector information contribute significantly to maximizing its commercial, research, andsocial values.2.allow the private sector to take an active role in using publicsectorinformation to meet the diverse needs of citizens and users for such products and services. meeting these needs requires entrepreneurial and pubstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42open access to scientific data in chinalishing skills that are most evident in the private sector. market needs arebest served by open and unrestricted access to publicsector information.3.prohibit copyright protection for government information, limitfees to recouping the cost of information dissemination only, and eliminaterestrictions on reuse. this will allow diverse entities to make new and innovative uses of publicsector information. however, attribution of datasources should be made, e.g., through the use of electronic watermarks orappropriate citations.4.avoid asserting a monopolyñeither public or privateñon publicsector information. governments and societies both lose when governmentstreat their information as a commodity to be sold or allow a privatesectorentity to òcaptureó the information on an exclusive basis.5.develop and maintain strong freedom of information laws to fostergreater transparency and public trust in government.policy considerations ongovernment information sharing in china11information policy research may be divided according to government,public, and commercial information. this section focuses on governmentinformation policies in china.as in the united states and other countries, government informationsharing activities in china must be based on policy studies. the key issue iswhether government information should be free and open or not. theopening up of government information is subject to competing policies ofstate security, commercial confidentiality, and personal privacy. there areconflicts and coordination between the state and the private sectors, andamong different groups. information sharing is also subject to informationsystem security.there are several key values and principles informing the sharing ofgovernment information. information is a strategic national asset of potential value to society and the economy. government policy should seek topromote information sharing and the information sector. however, thisneeds to be done by balancing the costs and benefits to the providers andusers of the information. the principles of open access, publicdomain sta11based on a presentation by jun li, national macro economic research institute,china.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues43tus, and free use of information must be balanced against the protection ofrights of the producers of the information. government information sharing requires consideration of the following aspects:planning the national system as a whole;developing directories and catalogs for government information;establishing a chief information officer system for government information, and responsibility for information access and restrictions;development of a onestop information service;understanding the social and economic benefits of access and sharing;marketing and exploitation of information;classification of information by users;integrating government information research across the government; andenhancing exploitation and usage of government information toincrease information availability and benefits to government, and to drivethe information industry.comparative aspects of policies for open access to scientific data inthe united states, european union, and china12effective management of scientific data has become a vital componentof the research infrastructure in the information era. many countries havedeveloped their own policies and mechanisms to manage and share theirscientific data and, as a result, a set of laws and regulations governing theseactivities has been gradually formed and improved. the united states, theeuropean union, and china have different policies regarding access to publicly funded scientific data. the united states supports òfull and openóaccess to many kinds of scientific data and considers publicly funded dataas a public good. however, european dissemination policies are based onthe market value of publicsector scientific data. as a potentially big producer and user of scientific data, china needs to clarify its policies and12based on a presentation by chuang liu, global change information and resourcecenter, institute of geography and natural resources research, chinese academy of sciences. see also, chapter 18, òrecent developments in environmental data access policies inthe peoplesõ republic of china,ó by chuang liu in open access and the public domain indigital data and information for science: proceedings of an international symposium, nationalacademies press, washington, dc, 2004.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44open access to scientific data in chinaestablish different management mechanisms for various data produced orfunded by the government. china has already begun to do so with its recent scientific data sharing program, as discussed in chapter 2.data sharing in scientific databases of thechinese academy of sciences13ever since its initiation in 1983, the chinese academy of sciencesõscientific database and applications system (sdas) has developed quicklyin its construction, technology application and development, informationservices, and other functions. it has become the largest scientific databasecluster in china, with 45 collaborative institutions providing over 8terabytes of data through 313 specialized databases. there are still greaterchallenges to scientific data sharing and services, however, requiring innovation for the traditional project management and application models.therefore, from the beginning of the tenth fiveyear plan of the chinesecommunist party, the sdas has focused on research on data sharing policies with standard criteria, in addition to its data resources and systemplatform construction, to meet the growing external and interdisciplinarydemand for data sharing through remote access, research collaboration, andinformation integration.setting up sharing policies for the sdas is a major project to promotescientific data exchanges, enable further applications, and establish a seriesof fundamental standards for continuous data development. the methodsfor data sharing and management involve the establishment of sharing principles, classification, distribution requirements, collective management, andthe protection of data ownersõ rights and interests. the principle of òfulland openó data access is being clarified and costs and revenues are distributed on a reasonable basis. based on current legal sources in china, therights, obligations, and proper conduct relevant to data sharing are definedin three main categoriesñthe data producers, distributors, and end users.the sharing policy of the sdas is not merely an ordinary administrativemanagement regulation, but the creation of a new scientific tradition basedon data sharing in research developed from changing legal sources. thepolicy encourages data sharing, which can provide theoretical and practical13based on a presentation by yun xiao, computer network information center, chinese academy of sciences, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/xiaoyunpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues45guidelines for data sharing services and the continuous development ofscientific databases, consistent with the trends of the knowledge economy.the data sharing policy of thechinese ecosystem research network14the chinese ecosystem research network (cern) has 36 field observation and research stations across china, and each station has produceda large amount of data through monitoring, experiments, and research.users worldwide can share most of those data, in accordance with thecern data sharing and management rule, which was issued in 2002 bythe chinese academy of sciences.15 this rule protects the rights of thedata producers and permits these data to be shared widely, following theprinciple of keeping a balance between rights and obligations. the regulation divides data into two types, monitoring data (e.g., observational datafrom sensors) and data from research projects. in addition, it specifies fiveclasses of users: related national departments, cern members, membersof the chinese academy of sciences, domestic research and other nonprofit institutions, and others. this last category includes nonchinese researchers. users in each class have the same rights and obligations.the rule established initial periods of exclusive use for data producers,typically ranging from onehalf year to two years. the producers have priority to use their own data within the initial protection periods; other userscan access those data following those periods, or even within the periods, ifthey obtain permission from the producers and provide attribution. dataproducers may make data available on their own initiative.data sharing policy of the national institutes of health16the sharing of biomedical data is essential for expedited translation ofresearch results into knowledge, products, and procedures to improve hu14based on a presentation by panqin chen and tieqing huang, bureau of science andtechnology for resources and environment, chinese academy of sciences.15both cernõs data policy and metadata are available on the cern web site athttp://www.cern.ac.cn:8080/index.jsp.16based on a presentation by belinda seto, national institute of biomedical imagingand bioengineering, u.s. national institutes of health, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/setopresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46open access to scientific data in chinaman health. the u.s. national institutes of health (nih) endorses thetimely sharing of research data to serve these and other important scientificgoals, particularly research data from nihsupported studies for use byother researchers.the nih established new guidelines through its data sharing policy,which became effective on october 1, 2003.17 the nih expects timelyrelease and sharing of final research data for use by other researchers. ingeneral, timely release means no later than the acceptance for publicationof the main findings from the final dataset. no timeline is specified; however, the time of release will vary depending on the nature of the datacollected. the policy also recognizes that investigators who collected thedata have a legitimate interest in benefiting from their investment of timeand effort, and have a right to an initial period of exclusive use. nih alsoexpects grant applicants to include a plan for data sharing or to state whydata sharing is not possible, especially if $500,000 or more of the directcost is requested in any single year. finally, nih expects contract offerorsto address data sharing regardless of cost.the nih recognizes that there are different ways to share data. theresearcher may provide the data in publications, share the data upon request, place datasets in public archives, or place data in restrictedaccessdata centers. the nih also provides support for data sharing, either directly through the grant application through a budget line item and budgetjustification or through administrative supplements.nonetheless, there are challenges to sharing data from research on human subjects because of data sensitivity, the need to protect confidentiality,and the danger of deductive disclosure. investigators need to carefully consider release of data in studies with very small samples or studies collectingvery sensitive data. however, even these data can be shared if safeguardsexist to ensure confidentiality and protect the identity of subjects.the solution is a multitiered system that divides data into three categories: open publicuse data, restricteduse contractual data, and a coldroom for onsite data use for certain authorized users only. additional specific procedures are used to help ensure the privacy of all human subjects.17see http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/noticefiles/notod03032.html. additional details about the nih data sharing policy and privacy restrictions are available fromthe nih office of extramural research web site on data sharing policy at http://grants.nih.gov/grants/policy/datasharing; from the office for civil rights web site withdepartmental guidance on privacy at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/; and from nih andother research agencies about the privacy rule at http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues47panel discussion on economic andinstitutional issuesintroduction18scientific data and journal activities in publicly funded researchthroughout the world have public good characteristics that make their broadavailability especially beneficial. some of these aspects were already discussed in the previous section on legal and policy issues. in this section,the first two presentations briefly examine some of the economic and institutional issues associated with the publishing of scientific journals. thefinal one looks at the interface of the public and private sectors in the areaof environmental data.the peculiar economics of scientific information19the technology of the production and distribution of information isvery different from that of producing and distributing consumer goods likeautomobiles or shoes. the marginal cost of providing an automobile or apair of shoes to one more consumer is about the same as the average costper consumer of producing these goods. in contrast, while there are costs togathering or creating information, the marginal cost of supplying this information to an additional consumer is small. in fact, with access providedon digital networks, this marginal cost of dissemination to each additionaluser is almost zero. because of this simple technological fact, efficient pricing methods are very different for information goods than for ordinaryphysical goods. prices for ordinary commodities serve the dual purpose ofrepaying the producers for the costs they have incurred and of restrictingconsumers from consuming goods that are worth less to them than thecosts to others of providing these goods. with information goods this doesnot happen. the social cost of allowing an extra reader online access toinformation is negligible. thus it will not be possible to repay the costs ofproducing information in the first place by pricing at marginal cost. if, on18paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, u.s. national academies.19based on a presentation by theodore carl bergstrom, university of california, santabarbara, united states, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/bergstrompresentation.ppt and http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/bergstrompresentation7.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48open access to scientific data in chinathe other hand, prices are set high enough so that revenue from users willrepay the total supply cost of the information, then many potential userswill be excluded from access to this information even though they wouldbenefit.institutions responsible for provision of scientific information, particularly journals, that have been prominent in the academic communityinclude notforprofit scientific societies and university presses, forprofitpublishers, and government agencies. in recent years, there have been extensive discussions regarding the benefits and costs of the notforprofitversus the forprofit business models, open access versus subscriptionbasedpublishing, and the practice of some of the ònonprofitó societies of usingprofits from their journals to subsidize other activities.the professional scientific societies publish journals, books, and datasets. they usually charge subscriptions to libraries and individuals to covertheir costs. some make a profit from their journal subscriptions and use itfor other activities (e.g., science of the american association for the advancement of science). university presses are used to enhance the prestigeof the university.forprofit commercial publishers own journals and charge subscriptions to libraries and individuals in order to make profits. because theyown copyrights to the articles in their journal, they have a monopoly onthese articles. the prices charged by the commercial publishers are usuallymuch higher than notforprofit journal prices.there are several potential advantages of the professional society journals. societies can lend prestige and attract top authors. society journals arenotforprofit and usually very cheap. the society journals also tend tomaintain very high quality standards. the professional society journals alsohave some disadvantages, however. societies tend to be conservative. theyoften are slow to adopt new ideas and are controlled by an aging elite.there is little incentive for officers of society journals to invest new effort,or expand into new fields.one advantage of commercial journal publishers is their entrepreneurship. for example, in the 1970s the economics profession was growingrapidly, but society journals expanded slowly. specialized field journals wererare, so northholland (and other companies now merged into elsevier)started about 30 new journals. about 12 of these could now be called leading field journals. nevertheless, there are substantial disadvantages fromcommercial journals. high prices to libraries mean access only for thewealthiest users. there is also great inefficiency in restricting access to pubstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues49licly funded scientific information when the marginal cost of providingaccess online to each additional user is near zero.overall, the policies for electronic journals that publish the results ofpublicly funded research in the networked environment should seek to:promote open internet access to scientific papers by supportingopenaccess archives for scientific work and requiring government supported research to be posted in these archives.encourage evaluation and quality standards without discouraginginnovation.avoid intellectual monopolies and cliques.encourage independent scientific societies and university pressesñmore than one per discipline, to prevent monopoly and cliques.encourage innovative òjournal substitutesó with alternative formsof evaluation and certification.search for new solutions to match new technology.launching an openaccess journal20the rapid spread of the internet and concurrent innovations in electronic publishing have dramatically transformed scientific publishing andthe dissemination of technical information and data. electronic publishinghas spawned an entirely new economic model for the sharing of scholarlyresearch, just as the internet has transformed other areas of commerce andinformation management. this model, known as openaccess publishing,is predicated on the fact that an article published on the internet can beread by ten readers or ten million with virtually no additional cost to thepublisher. many new openaccess publishers, including the u.s.based public library of science (plos) and the u.k.based biomedcentral, generaterevenue through onetime publication charges, which are generally paidfrom the authorõs research grant or from institutional or library funds, ratherthan by charging subscriptions or fees for readers. covering the cost ofpublication once through publication charges then allows the content to bemade free to all readers.new openaccess journals face many challenges, just as any new journaltrying to compete with the most prestigious ones in their field would. in20based on a presentation by helen doyle, public library of science, united states,available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/helendoylepresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50open access to scientific data in chinaaddition to questions about the viability of the open access economic model,these challenges include: convincing authors to submit their best work; establishing a rigorous peer review system and respected editorial board; creating ahighquality production; and marketing the journal to the appropriate audiences. conversely, there is also great opportunity for new electronic openaccess journals to be innovative in their publishing practices. some recentinnovations include managing manuscripts and the peer review process electronically; developing interactive web functionalities for different contentand audiences; and encouraging the creative reuses of the content allowed bya more liberal copyright license. these challenges and opportunities are allbeing confronted by the plosõs new openaccess journal, plos biology, whichwas launched in october 2003.involving the private sector in the environmental enterprise21the conduct of environmental (atmosphere, ocean, land) research andapplications requires extensive and thus costly observations taken from allparts of the world and participation by the government, academic, andprivate sectors. ten years ago, the roles of these sectors in the united stateswere reasonably straightforward: government agencies collected observations and disseminated information to the public; academia used governmentcollected data for research; and privatesector organizations used observations collected by governments for developing information productstargeted to paying customers.however, advances in science and technology have made it possible forprivatesector organizations and academia to perform many governmenttasks, including collecting data, running models, and disseminating information. these overlapping activities create potential inefficiencies and friction, especially because the sectors have different goals and require differentdata policies.on the one hand, u.s. government agencies and environmental science researchers require full and open access to data (i.e., data are availablewithout restriction for any use for no more than the cost of reproduction).on the other hand, privatesector organizations generally need to restrict21based on a presentation by anne linn, u.s. national academies, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/annelinnpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues51access to data in order to generate a financial return and their policies areusually proprietary. two recent national research council reports provideguidelines for resolving these different data policy requirements and foreasing friction between the sectors.22the fair weather: effective partnerships in weather and climate services report examined conflicts among government, academia, and theprivate sector dealing with weather data. it concluded that establishingrigid boundaries between the sectors and defining what each should do iscounterproductive.the resolving conflicts arising from the privatization of environmentaldata report examined these issues for all environmental data and providedcriteria for purchasing data from the private sector and for transferringgovernment data collection and product development to the private sector.the report concluded that transferring government data collection andproduct development to the private sector can be beneficial as long as thefollowing conditions exist:avoiding market conditions that will give private companies a monopoly;preserving full and open access to key data sets and products;assuring that a supply of highquality information will continue toexist; andminimizing disruption of ongoing uses and applications.for economic and data policy reasons, however, public funding for datacollection and analysis should continue, focusing contributions of the private sector primarily on distribution of valueadded products and collection of certain observations.22national research council (nrc). 2003. fair weather: effective partnerships inweather and climate services, national academies press, washington, dc; nrc. 2001. resolving conflicts arising from the privatization of environmental data, national academypress, washington, dc.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52open access to scientific data in chinapanel discussion onmanagement and technical issuesintroduction23although the technical aspects of digital scientific data and information activities are typically quite well understood and do not raise inordinate barriers except, perhaps, related to costs, the proper management ofsuch activities, especially data preservation and dissemination, poses someunique hurdles. in the discussion below we identify some of the problemsthat ought to be considered in properly planning scientific data centeractivities.operating a twentyfirstcentury data center24in the past several decades, largescale data resources have assumed anincreasing role in scientific research, particularly research on earth and itsenvironment. there are a number of reasons for this, including advances incomputational technologies, software, and observational capabilities, and agrowing emphasis on empirical and interdisciplinary research. one of theconsequences of the increasing dependence on data resources across fieldsof science is that in the coming years, the scientific community must devote a larger share of its resources and energies to data management andpreservation than it has in the past.a recent priority area assessment on scientific data and information,presented to the strategic planning committee of the international councilfor science (icsu) in june 2004, emphasized that the scientific communityneeds to develop strategies for data management over time periods of decadesto centuries.25 effective planning for longterm data management requiresclarification of the role of data centers versus archives, obtaining regular scientific advice on data management and archiving decisions, and developinglongterm financial support for data center and archival operations.the report also stressed the critical importance of professional management of data. that is, it is no longer sufficient for the scientists whoanalyze scientific data to be responsible for managing those data; profes23paul f. uhlir and julie m. esanu, u.s. national academies.24based on a presentation by roberta balstad, center for international earth scienceinformation network, columbia university, united states.25the final priority area assessment on scientific data and information report isavailable from icsu at http://www.icsu.org/1icsuinscience/datapaa1.html.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues53sional data managers, with professional expertise, are needed. professionaldata managers must be knowledgeable about the technological drivers ofdata center operations. they have to understand the financial implicationsof hardware, software, and training. they must be able to manage the rapidpace of change and the timely updating of data, software, and hardware.and they should develop career incentives and rewards for effective dataproduction and management.finally, the report recommended that there be a common international approach to data and information management. the benefits of aninternational approach to scientific data need to be properly understoodand communicated so that common strategies, standards, and softwareinteroperability can be developed.managing the effects of programmatic scale andenhancing incentives for data archiving26the challenge of a digital scientific archive is to engage scientists in theprocess of archiving their data and provide the mechanism for archiving.the functions of an archive are to store data safely and reliably; build acatalog and structure; maintain storage across technology generations; review new data (quality assurance, metadata); òadvertiseó contents; find datafor users with query and browse logic; and distribute data by providingaccess and references to documentation.an effective scientific data archive operates on several presumptions.information sharing is important. multidisciplinary data access will fostermore robust scientific discoveries. archiving can always be improved. thenumber of permanent data archives will increase, which will increase thevalue of all archives connected on an interoperable basis through digitalnetworks.even if an appropriate archive exists, however, there are many reasonswhy scientists do not archive their data. they lack incentives and properacknowledgement; they may be concerned about giving up publicationrights; their research may have poor planning or insufficient resources fordata management and preservation; they may not believe the archive will26based on a presentation by raymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory,united states, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/raymondmccordpresentation5.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54open access to scientific data in chinaget longterm support; and they may lack training or be unsure about themetadata content they should provide.nevertheless, research managers can provide many good argumentsand incentives to scientists for archiving their data, including the followingpoints:recognition for archiving. scientists need to receive some careerbenefits for their archivingrelated work. consider scientific journals thatalso provide companion òdata publications.óemphasize good scientific practice.promote professional development and training. provide daily interactions between scientific and information specialists. allow a reasonable time for initial discovery. provide support for longterm òstewardship.óprovide institutional incentives. archiving should be required bythe sponsor. data archiving should be òin the planó and resources availableto support it. interweave archiving with the planning and publication processes.exploit technological advances. it is technically easier now and thereare more options.plan for managing change. change is inherent in research, but managing change without prior planning can become consumptive. changesmay cause confusion and diminish data usefulness. (see the next section formore details about managing change in archiving.)perhaps the best argument is that effective archiving supports betterscience. archiving extends data usefulness. archived data increase the volume and diversity of our information base for doing research.managing the effects of change on archiving research data27the archiving of scientific data and information is made more difficultby the evolving changes associated with research accomplishments. researchdiscoveries lead to a continual series of revisions to sampling schemes,measurement methods, and scientific objectives. all of these changes add to27based on a presentation by raymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory,united states, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/raymondmccordpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues55the scope and complexity of information that must be recorded and logicallyorganized as part of a successful data archive. recording and communicatingthese changes for future data users is facilitated by additional supporting information and an evaluation of the rules that define the information. most ofthe available information technology (hardware, software, and implementation methodology) originates from business applications, which are designedto accommodate fundamentally different patterns of change. managers ofscientific data archives will need to adapt the traditional designs of information systems to meet these special features of research data and its users.management also needs to encourage extra effort during initial design andlater operations to accommodate the future changes that will occur.the structure and content of scientific data and information can bevery complex. successful archiving of data requires that the variation in thiscomplexity be minimized. the efficient operation of information systemsand effective communication with future data users are enhanced by minimizing the variation in the logic, concepts, and keywords used in themetadata. some of the complexity is inherent to the variety of measurements and materials included in the research and cannot be avoided. additional complexity occurs as archived information is aggregated into moreextensive systems and accessed by broader user communities.there are many management and institutional issues that must be considered to avoid unnecessary complexity and uncertainty in the archivedinformation. the effects of the varying dimensions of programmatic scale(volume, diversity, longevity of data and research programs) need to beconsidered. institutional impediments and incentives also affect the willingness of scientists to contribute information to archives. the documentation and archiving of data should be integrated with the publication process as part of the òmodern scientific methodó and should receive similarincentives. management should reinforce these practices by insisting onearly planning for data archiving and providing specific rewards for theseactivities. other management issues include protecting initial discoveryopportunities, supporting longterm stewardship of data (answering questions after the project is completed), and providing òcrosstrainingó ofarchive personnel in both scientific and information disciplines.there are several key rules for creating data sets for archiving:unique occurrences. each type of measurement should be representedin a consistent way and each measurement event should be represented byonly one value. if multiple versions of datasets accumulate, provide versionstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56open access to scientific data in chinainformation, explain version differences, and document the effective datarange for each version.identifiers. each value should be associated with a parameter nameand each measurement value should have a quality indicator and link to amethod description. whenever possible, remove multiple aliases for thesame identifier (e.g., sample identifier, site identifier or name, measurement name, etc.).place and time. each value should be associated with a unique placename with a quantitatively defined location (geographic coordinates). eachvalue also should be associated with a date and time. do not confuse dataand time for measurements with data and time for storage revisions or dataand time ranges for measurement or encoding methods.data storage and transport. data should be stored or managed with adatabase management system or selfdocumenting data format. includedata analysis software in the data management suite. this is useful for comparing versions of data that accumulate over time. also include data formatconversion software in data management suite, which is useful for migrating data from one storage technology to another.finally, there are a number of best practices for preparing ecologicaland groundbased data sets to share and archive:28assign descriptive file names;use consistent and stable file formats;define the parameters;use consistent data organization;perform basic quality assurance;assign descriptive data set titles; andprovide the necessary documentation.special considerations for archiving data from field observations29archives depend on logical rules for information structures and consistent codes for metadata. different types of data and information pose different types of challenges and archiving requirements, however. for ex28cook et al. 2001. bulletin of the ecological society of america. available at http://www.daac.ornl.gov/daac/pi/bestprac.html.29based on a presentation by raymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory,united states, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/raymondmccordpresentation5.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues57ample, scientific data from field investigations are fundamentally differentfrom laboratory observations. laboratory studies are conducted under controlled conditions, whereas field observations are collected from incompletely controlled environments. data archives for field observations mustinclude additional design features to accommodate, but minimize and rationalize, this additional complexity. these features include a need to address multiple schemes for location information, temporary changes inmethods, unmeasurable events, evolving reference lists, and a containmentstrategy for exceptions.location information typically involves multiple geographic coordinate systems. conversions from one system to another may not be reversible without some loss of information. it is important, therefore, to testchanges before largescale conversions are made. a visualization capabilityis essential. location information also usually encounters multiple namingschemes, such as unofficial òfolkó names; divergence in naming schemes atlocal, regional, and national scales; and connecting historical name changes.archives also must take account of temporary changes in data collection methods. for example, the field sampling protocol may be insufficient, resulting in a need to restructure the metadata to record the temporary change. field observations at remote sites can experience variousanomalies and instrument malfunctions. a robust scheme for missing valuerepresentation is needed and data analyses must correctly exclude missingvalues.there also may be unmeasurable events that are either too small or toolarge. how do you record values that are below the detection limit (but notzero)? you can set all values to the minimum detection limit, set all valuesto the midpoint between detection and zero, set all values to zero, or retainestimated value, but include a quality flag. you will need to select one ofthese strategies and document the choice, realizing that the choice can havesignificant impacts on summary statistics.how do you record the biological population when there are too manyindividuals to count? you can record some arbitrary large number or flag itas unmeasurable. similar problems can occur with wide ranges in chemicalconcentrations. different schemes may have impacts on results from statistical analyses or on setting quality assurance limits.evolving reference lists pose further challenges. taxonomic lists assumeagreement on a single and accepted classification scheme, which may notbe true. individuals who are involved only infrequently also may not befully identifiable. later samples may enable fuller identification, which maystrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58open access to scientific data in chinarequire recoding earlier records to match newer identification. chemicalconstituents may have similar classification problems.a containment strategy is thus needed to deal with the exceptions. theò90/10ó rule is a useful guideline: approximately 90 percent of the data canbe described by a few logical rules, while approximately 10 percent of thedata cannot be described by rules and contain numerous and isolated exceptions. put the information that cannot be described by rules in an alternative structure that can be labeled as òuser beware,ó support detailed andvarious documentation, and accommodate and communicate numerousexceptions. however, when there are òtoo manyó logical rules, the archivingprocess will become inefficient and tedious, so it is important to makeadjustments as needed.toward a balanced performance appraisal system in the digital erafor data archiving and sharing in china30although data archiving and sharing are not new problems in china,they became worse with the advent of the digital era. traditionally, the dataproducers and the data users were not very different in terms of their academic recognition and reputation. they collected, archived, and used data,and most of the data products were published and thus were available tothe public at affordable prices. the published data sets were also regardedas academic achievements by their peers and funding agencies. this mechanism encouraged some scientists to archive and publish their research data.in the early years of the digital era, however, a number of factors beganto hinder data sharing, some of which have continued to the present. firstof all, data management as a whole became more expensive and neededmore investment. second, digital publishing of research data is not thesame as in the print format and the authorship of digital data products isless clear. third, those scientists who are both data producers and data users(as is true in most cases) have a competitive edge over their peers if they canuse their data exclusively forever. fourth, public funding agencies may notbe able to make data available to other scientists, because even the agenciessometimes have obtained the data according to restrictive contracts. fi30based on a presentation by zhengxing wang, global change information and research center, institute of geography and natural resources research, chinese academy ofsciences.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues59nally, chinaõs scientific community has not been fully aware of the fundamental role that data have played in scientific inquiry. data collection,processing, validation, archiving, and sharing all have not been included inchinaõs òacademic performance appraisal system.ó in a system in whichprint publishing gets nearly all the information funding and digital dataarchiving and sharing get much less, one has little incentive to continueworking in data archiving. therefore, it is critical to develop a more comprehensive and balanced performance evaluation system to foster and sustain digital data archiving and data sharing in china.earth science data and information management inwestern china31over the past few decades, the western regions of china have been thefocus of important earth science research and a lot of earth science data andinformation have been accumulated there. recent studies have focused onthe plateaus, mountains, deserts, vegetation, hydrology, and ecosystems inthat region from the perspective of different fields of study, including ecology, environmental and earth sciences, sociology, and regional development.the historical data and information resources are valuable for such studies.based on the analysis of the distribution of information resources andusers, and on user requirements and the support of data, many functionsneed urgent attention in the national framework of earth science data sharing in china. for example, reproducing single copies of data and information, accelerating the sharing of data and information, meeting the demands of potential users, and promoting the use of information to benefitthe western region of china all require attention.there are several actions that could be taken in this regard. one shouldbe to assist institutions that have not organized and digitized their historical data, and encourage them to provide an index and to become membersof the data sharing system. another is to establish a special managementprogram to reduce the costs of data collection and promote their application. finally, it would be very useful to establish a digitally networked clearinghouse for earth science data and information that involves the relevantorganizations and persons in western china.31based on a presentation by chengquan sun, scientific information center for resources and environment, chinese academy of sciences, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/sunchengquanpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60open access to scientific data in chinadata integration and management:the protein data bank perspective32the protein data bank (pdb) is the worldwide repository for thestructures of biological macromolecules.33 the pdb provides a rich history from which to explore the practices of biological data management,because its data set has many characteristics found in other biological datañdiversity, complexity, and variable quantity and quality of annotation.a database resource is only as good as the data it contains. data representation, acquisition, annotation, and distribution are all essential functions. the data representation (metadata) used by pdb is the macromolecular crystallographic information file (mmcif) standard dictionary.the mmcif dictionary conforms to a subset of encoding rules embodiedin a selfdefining text archival and retrieval (star) syntax. star hasprovisions for defining scope, resting, looping, and other aspects. conforming to star is a dictionary definition language (ddl) that defineshow dictionaries are described. ddl has provisions for fully characterizingthe terms in the domain and is relational in nature; that is, there is thenotion of relations (categories), attributes (specific data names), primaryand secondary keys (mandatory data items), and so on. the data defined bymmcif consist of namevalue pairs where each name must be defined inthe mmcif dictionary. the mmcif dictionary can be characterized ashaving the features of extensible markup language (xml) document typedefinition or schema. although the dictionary was written in the starformat, the ontology and its derivations are independent of star or anyother particular file format. it can be automatically converted to other formats. it provides the foundation of integrated software systems for buildingrobust automated data pipelines. the pdb has been actively involved invarious aspects of automated and accurate data acquisition, annotation,and distribution.biological data management concerns more than just the technical aspects, however. there are sociological and political issues as well. a keyelement for success is good communication among those running the resource, who need to have diverse skill sets, and among every member of theteam and the communities they represent. community feedback must be32based on a presentation by zukang feng, protein data bank, united states, availableat http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/zukangfengpresentation.ppt.33see http://www.wwpdb.org/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.crossdisciplinary issues61treated seriously and lead to a prioritized set of action items to be addressedby the resources available. the technology must take advantage of the mostrecent innovations in hardware and software. these technological developments, however, must be introduced so as to enable and not disrupt theusers of the resource. it is critical to maintain an interactive dialogue withthe user community about desired new functionalities and the feasibility oftheir implementation. beyond all else is the need for good data and a robust data representation that is flexible enough to meet the needs of thechanging science.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.625summaries of presentations onthematic issuesthere were several examples of existing scientific data and informationactivities in china, the united states, and internationally highlighted at theworkshop. these activities can benefit from the policies and managementpractices outlined in the previous chapter. they also provide practiced experience at the working level and models for other similar activities in otherinstitutional, disciplinary, and national contexts. they thus represent a bottomup approach to the evolution of national and international policy andpractice with regard to public scientific data and information resources.the examples summarized below are organized according to three thematicareas that were the focus of the workshop: (1) life sciences and public healthdata; (2) earth sciences, environmental, and natural resources data; and (3)scientific information, journals, and digital libraries.examples of life sciences andpublic health data activitiesthe chinese management and sharing system ofscientific data for medicine1the initiation of the management and sharing system of scientificdata for medicine (the medical data sharing system) was a key project in1based on a presentation by depei liu, chinese academy of medicine and chineseacademy of engineering, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/liudepeipresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues632003 of the china scientific data sharing program (sdsp) under the national basic platform for science and technology in the ministry of science and technology. oversight of this medical data sharing system hasbeen undertaken by the chinese academy of medical sciences, the chinese center for disease prevention and control, the chinese peopleõs liberation army general hospital and graduate medical school, and thechinese academy of traditional chinese medicine.various scientific data resources in medicine are being integrated together by the medical data sharing system. the system covers most fields ofmedicine, including basic and clinical medicine, public health, traditionalchinese medicine, other special areas of medicine, and pharmacology. thesystem also has a database specifically for sars and respiratory diseases.the medical data sharing system has important roles in many respects. it is used to:1.serve medical research and teaching, and improve innovation inmedical sciences and technology;2.improve the overall level of prevention, diagnosis, and treatment ofdiseases;3.enhance the personal health consciousness of people, thus promoting good health in society;4.strengthen chinaõs ability to plan for and respond to sudden incidents in public health; and5.provide an improved basis for government policies, as well as promote the development of the national economy and the medical system.the organizational and management model for this system consists ofa leading group, an expert group, and a working group. the leading groupconsists of the leaders of participating institutions and the professionals incharge of scientific administration who are responsible for the decisionmaking, organization, and coordination of the system. the expert group iscomposed of experts from the chinasdsp and professionals in projectsupported institutions. the expert group is responsible for steering andauthorization of the general design, selection of participating institutions,and inspection of the projectõs progress. the working group consists ofmembers selected from the working group of the chinasdsp and employees of the participating institutions. it is responsible for drafting thefeasibility report, general project design and implementation, and development of the main database.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64open access to scientific data in chinathe medical data sharing system benefits all sectors of society, including the government; medical, scientific, and educational institutions;private enterprises; and the general public. the system promotes a cooperative environment and will be operated on a free and notforprofit basis.international medical scientific data sharing2there are many kinds of medical scientific data that can be sharedinternationally. they include primary data, data products, and related information obtained from the activities of medical clinics, teaching, andresearch. medical data are necessary resources for the development of medical sciences and have characteristics common to other kinds of scientificdata, including reusability and potential longterm value.the human genome project has provided a successful example ofaccess to and sharing of biomedical scientific data. this project used modern informatics techniques in human genomic research and organized topscientists and facilities to cooperate on the same project based on the samestandards. in recent years, similar data sharing projects have been initiatedin other areas of science internationally, such as neurology, human anatomy,and proteomics, all of which are described in the sections that follow. theseprojects have produced large changes in the behavior of medical researcherstoward greater cooperation, but there are many unmet needs for medicalscientific data access and sharing by the research, teaching, and biomedicalindustry communities.several problems can be identified. the lack of data access and sharingis especially acute in developing and leastdeveloped countries. this resultsin redundant research and inefficiencies. medical data resources are separated and many lack quality and uniform international standards and dataexchange protocols. there also is a lack of adequate investment and attention to these problems.the following suggestions are focused on improving the status of international medical scientific data access and sharing:1.it would be helpful to set up an international coordination committee for access to and sharing of medical scientific data, responsible for developing plans for such activities and proposing appropriate guidelines.2based on a presentation by ling yin, peopleõs liberation army general hospital andgraduate medical school, china.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues652.in order to strengthen international cooperation in the establishment of medical scientific databanks it is necessary to establish relevantstandards and uniform criteria for data contributions by the globally distributed scientists and facilities. new databank groups for medical scientific data similar to genbank and the protein data bank need to be established to make the data sharable, extendable, and authoritative.3.to truly implement data access and sharing among the differentmedical specialties, china needs to establish an integrated internationalservice system to break the barriers among basic, clinical, and preventivemedicine, public health, pharmacology, and other areas. this will offer onestop service via index and catalogue inquiries for data services, and a networked environment for therapeutics, prevention, control, and research onspecific diseases.4.china also needs to speed up the recruiting of expert personnel toimplement access to and sharing of medical scientific data, and to offereffective training programs.5.finally, funding needs to be secured from multiple sources to guarantee longterm financial support and to facilitate global access to and sharing of medical scientific data and information.chinaõs contributions to theorganisation for economic cooperation and developmentõsneuroinformatics data sharing initiative3the human brain is the most complex system known. achieving abetter understanding of it is a key scientific challenge for the 21st century.having developed sophisticated methods to investigate the brain in thefinest possible detail, neuroscientists now face the challenge of managingthe enormous amounts of raw data and the many useful inferences drawnfrom them. the neuroinformatics field therefore would benefit greatly fromincreased data sharing. neuroinformatics research already has received billions of u.s. dollars and euros to establish individual databases and platforms and to lay the groundwork for data sharing in the future.3based on a presentation by yiyuan tang, institute of neuroinformatics, dalian university of technology; ling yin, neuroinformatics center, pla general hospital and graduate medical school; and xiaowei tang, neuroinformatics center, zhejiang university, china,available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/yinlingpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66open access to scientific data in chinain 2000, the organisation for economic cooperation and developmentõs (oecd) global science forum approved the international working group on neuroinformatics (wgni), which included 21 membersand observers from oecd countries. their goal was to establish a globalknowledge management system and internet research environment inwhich the data and results from research on the human neurological systemwould be available. such an information initiative would be helpful forimproving public health, scientific research, medical education, and thepharmaceutical industries. the three principal aims of the wgni groupwere to promote: (1) the establishment of databases and the integration ofdata resources; (2) data sharing policies for oecd members and observersand the development of working guidelines and rules for neuroinformaticsdata; and (3) the establishment of international neuroinformatics researchnetworks.the chinese government also began to pay more attention to the human brain project (hbp) and to neuroinformatics research. the xiangshan science conference for hbp and neuroinformatics, held in september 2001, was a major event that included senior chinese government representatives from the national natural science foundation of china andthe ministry of science and technology. the conference participants agreedthat china should start work on the chinese neuroinformatics project assoon as possible. since 2001, the chinese government has awarded severalgrants in the neuroinformatics field and supported the development of aneuroinformatics platform and digital network according to the oecdõswgni standards.in 2003, the wgni requested the establishment of an internationalcoordinating mechanism, the international neuroinformatics coordinating facility (incf). the proposed role of incf was to optimize the accumulation, integration, standardization, exploitation, and sharing of verylarge amounts of highly diverse primary data and of large, structured neuroscience databases that are being generated worldwide by researchers whostudy the brain. the first incf meeting was held in april 2004 at oecdin paris to establish the incf secretariat, initiate substantive activities, anddevelop a proposed funding scheme (the program in internationalneuroinformatics). this new international program is intended to promote international collaboration among researchers whose work will befunded by existing (or possibly new) national programs, eliminate nationaland disciplinary barriers, and provide a more efficient approach to globalcollaborative research and data sharing.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues67in order to accelerate chinese neuroinformatics development, theneuroinformatics project has been suggested to become an important partof the china science data sharing project, especially for promoting international collaboration. consistent with incfõs working plan, the chineseneuroinformatics community will develop tools for manipulating and managing the data and standards and mechanisms for sharing these data amongglobal researchers. the chinese also will design and develop specialpurpose analytical tools and algorithms, and create computational models ofbrain structure and function that can be validated using diverse data. theseactions will advance the understanding of the human brain and may beexpected to lead to breakthroughs in the prevention and cure of nervoussystem disorders and to improvements in the quality of life for humanity.longterm studies of human anatomyusing the digital human and scientific data sharing4human anatomy is a cornerstone of modern medicine. in 1543, vesaliuspublished the seminal anatomy book, on the structure of the human body,which was one of the starting points of modern medicine. digital anatomyand the digital human represent a new revolution in medicine. the u.s.national library of medicine (nlm) began to discuss a longrange plan forthe digital human in 1985. in 1989, the nlm board of regents submitted alongrange plan for the next 10 to 30 years of electronic imaging in biomedical research. the first stage of the plan was the visible human project (vhp).the plan encouraged scientists to conduct research in various fields, including anatomical structure informatics, graphics technologies in biomedicalimaging, basic medical research (e.g., developmental biology, neuroscience,cell and histological science, and molecular structure), clinical applications(e.g., imageguided surgery, actinotheraphy, anaesthesia, radiology, organ system imaging, orthopedics), and the development of related medical equipment using digital technologies.in 1991, the university of colorado signed a vhp contract with nlm.they completed two cryomacrotoming data sets (one male and one female) separately in 1994 and 1995. since that time, the digital anatomycommunity has developed important applications for medical teaching and4based on a presentation by donglie qin, bme college, capital university of medicalsciences, china.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68open access to scientific data in chinaclinical practice, including breakthrough advances in medical imaging, suchas more realistic rendering of threedimensional images.in 2001, the federation of american scientists presented the digitalhuman initiative, which is based on human body digital simulations atthree levels: the microlevel (molecular, gene, cell, and nanoscale), the mesolevel (tissue and organ), and the macrolevel (whole body). since 2001, theemerging grid, internet 2, and other advanced information technologycapabilities and imaging devices have been used in the vhp and similardigital human activities.in addition to the vhp, there are now many other digital humanprojects outside the united states, including the european union, japan,korea, singapore, and china. in china, the proposed draft for a digitalhuman initiative was submitted to the government by scientists in 2001.two experimental wholebody data sets and several highresolution organdata sets (heart, kidney, and liver) have been completed. the next generation digital data sets and applications in medical teaching and clinical practices are expected to occur within the next 5 to 10 years. this brief historyof digital human research underscores the need for implementing scientificdata sharing in support of both research and applications in these digitalhuman initiatives.the protein data bank: a key biological resource5as noted in the previous chapter, the protein data bank (pdb) is thesingle international repository of threedimensional data for biological macromolecules and currently contains over 25,000 entries. the concept of thepdb began to be formed during the late 1960s and early 1970s with community discussions about the need for such a resource. protein crystallography was still in its infancy, but it was apparent to the producers of thesestructures as well as to the potential users that every structure containedvaluable information that needed to be archived and maintained for posterity. in june 1971, key representatives of the two communities attended thecold spring harbor symposium on quantitative biology and agreed thatthe time was right to create the pdb. the pdb was established in octoberof that year at the brookhaven national laboratories as an archive for biological macromolecular crystal structures.5based on a presentation by zukang feng, protein data bank, united states, availableat http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/zukangfengpresentation7.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues69in the 1980s, the number of deposited structures began to increasedramatically. this was primarily due to the improved technology for allaspects of the crystallographic process, the addition of structures determined by nuclear magnetic resonance methods, and the changes in theresearch communityõs views about data sharing. by the early 1990s, themajority of journals required a pdb accession code and government funding agencies adopted the guidelines published by the international unionof crystallography requiring the deposition of data for all protein structures. the archiveõs growth has been accompanied by increases in both datacontent and the structural complexity of individual entries over the years.in october 1998, the management of the pdb became the responsibility of the research collaboratory for structural bioinformatics (rcsb)at rutgers university, together with the university of san diegosupercomputing center and the national institute of standards and technology. the vision of the rcsb is to create a resource based on the mostmodern technology that facilitates the use and analysis of structural dataand thus creates an enabling resource for biological research. its mission isto provide the most accurate, wellannotated data in the most timely andefficient way possible to facilitate new discoveries and advances in science.the challenges that the pdb is addressing include the continuing increase in the number and complexity of structures, the need to develop newmethods for structure determination, satisfying user demands for responseto complex queries and better annotation, integrating pdb data with othergenomic and proteomic information, and serving a growing and more diverse community of users. the pdbõs strategy for meeting these challengesinvolves the adoption of new technologies, creating extensible and portabledata systems, making the archive as uniform as possible, improving communication with the users, and helping to create and enforce communitypolicies and standards.the safeguarding and sharing of traditionalchinese medicine database resources6a big effort to develop traditional chinese medicine database resourcesbegan in the 1980s. since that time, nearly one hundred such databases ofvarious sizes have been constructed by numerous universities, colleges, and6based on a presentation by baoyan liu and meng cui, china academy of traditionalchinese medicine.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70open access to scientific data in chinainstitutes. the digitization of information in traditional chinese medicineinformation has been completed on a preliminary basis, including modernand ancient literature databases, factual and structural databases, and datawarehouses.the main organizations involved in the modern literature and factualdatabases are the traditional chinese medical literature center and branchcenter, which are affiliated with the state administration of traditionalchinese medicine. the national structural databases are being developednow. in 2001, the scientific experiments information database of traditional chinese medicine was initiated using data warehouse technologyand a virtual research center platform, which is now operational. the ancient literature database contains various ebooks.the development of traditional chinese medicine databases alreadyhas made significant achievements and established a basis for the digitization of traditional chinese medical information at the national level. because this scientific and technical literature, and the underlying data andscientific experiments, are the result of fundamental research work for thepublic welfare, it needs the public support and funding of the governmentto guarantee its continuation. if this initiative obtains the support of thegovernment, the main database can be completed quickly and provide asharing mechanism as a public good.open access to scientific data on biological diversity:an urgent need for china7biological diversity (also called biodiversity) is generally divided intothree categories: geneticlevel diversity, specieslevel diversity, and ecosystemlevel diversity. the focus here is on data in the latter two categories inchina.chinaõs specieslevel biodiversity is immense. for example, it containsabout 30,000 different plant species, and nearly 500 mammal species. infact, it has been estimated that the 17 socalled òmegadiverseó countries,which include china, contain 70 percent of the worldõs species of plantsand animals within their borders. china has databases for some of its specieslevel biodiversity. for example, the state environmental protection7based on a presentation by james edwards, global biodiversity information facility,denmark, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/jamesedwardspresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues71agency of china lists 67 databases of plants, animals, and microorganisms.8 however, these are mostly small databases, except for birds andplants, and most do not have georeferenced data or follow internationalstandards. moreover, unlike some of the other megadiverse countriesñforexample costa rica and mexicoñchina has not initiated systematic efforts to develop computerized databases about its biota, or to access thegreat wealth of biodiversity information about china that is contained inthe worldõs natural history collections. as a result, china cannot currentlyuse this considerable body of knowledge for informed decision making.the global biodiversity information facility (gbif) is an international consortium aimed at making the worldõs primary biodiversity datafreely and openly available over the internet to benefit society, science, anda sustainable future. begun in 2001, gbifõs members as of june 2004include 41 countries and 24 international organizations, each of whichagrees to set up a computer node to share primary biodiversity data. control of the data, including the decision on what information to make available, resides with the data providers in each country or organization. gbifõsrole is to aid the data providers in setting up their databases and to providea portal that allows users to search all the databases at once.9 gbif is thus anetwork of participant nodes and other partners that agree to use commonstandards for data and metadata, encourage the generation and contribution of additional data and information for the network, and assure thatdata providers retain control of their own data.as of june 2004, the gbif data portal (initiated only a few monthsearlier) is serving nearly 24 million records containing information aboutspecimens in natural history collections, as well as observational data. theserecords are being served by 63 data providers from around the world. eventhough china is not yet a member of gbif, the portal already containsapproximately 45,000 records of plants and animals, representing morethan 9,000 species that were collected in china.the data being served by gbif can be a valuable resource for manyscientific and societal problems, including tracking invasive species, predicting the spread of emerging infectious diseases, optimal design of protected areas, and making decisions about where to undertake field trials ofgenetically modified crops. other innovative examples of how megadiversecountries have used these data are being compiled by gbif.8see http://www.zhb.gov.cn/english/.9see http://www.gbif.net.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72open access to scientific data in chinachina has been much more successful at developing and archivingecosystemlevel biodiversity data than specieslevel data. the chinese ecosystem research network (cern)10 is a consortium of 33 field researchstations and one synthesis center. cern was established in 1988, and currently provides access to a wide range of ecological and environmental data,including more than 3,000 historical datasets.11 cern has also developeda comprehensive data sharing policy and joined the international longterm ecological research network. china should be encouraged to givesimilar attention to developing and archiving its specieslevel biodiversityinformation.the nih roadmap for medical research12the u.s. national institutes of health (nih) launched the roadmapfor medical research initiative in 2003. it is focused on important publichealth challenges such as acute and chronic medical conditions, an agingpopulation, health disparities in society, emerging diseases, and biodefenseconcerns. the roadmap provides a framework of priorities and a vision fora more efficient, innovative, and productive research system. it also establishes a set of initiatives that are central to improving the quality of healthylife for people in the united states and around the world.one research priority of the nih roadmap is the reengineering of theclinical research enterprise. this reengineering effort has multiple components, including integration of a clinical research network and facilitatingdata mining to advance data sharing goals. examples of health databasesand technologies that are part of this nih focus are the lung image database, a network for translational research for optical imaging, a biomedicalinformatics research network, bioinformatics roadmap centers, and an insight segmentation and registration toolkit in support of the vhp.the national institute of biomedical imaging and bioengineering, acomponent of the nih, is addressing specific issues in the clinical researchnetwork initiative. there are a number of barriers to creating a successful10see òthe data sharing policy of the chinese ecosystem research networkó in chapter 4 of this report.11see http://www.cern.ac.cn:8080/index.jsp.12based on a presentation by belinda seto, national institute of biomedical imagingand bioengineering, u.s. national institutes of health, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/belindasetopresentation7.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues73network, which can include fundamental differences in informatics infrastructure and communication tools used at various research sites. to theextent that interoperability can be implemented and data and tools shared,studies can be initiated more quickly. from the perspective of the institute,there is a need to create imaging databases and repositories where researchers can access such data. however, access to databases and data mining alsorequires userfriendly informatics tools. approaches that combine images,genomic, gene expression, and patient medical records data will ultimatelydeliver patientspecific information at a time and place where clinical decisions are made regarding risk, diagnosis, treatment, and followup.the overall implementation strategy involves the development andstandardized validation of applicationspecific software for integration andknowledge extraction of heterogeneous, clinically relevant data. specificfunctions that need to be addressed include:quantitative data integration, knowledge extraction, and clinicalinterpretation;linking imaging and other databases with software tools;managing software in the scientific and clinical workflow;partnerships between industry and academia for software development and dissemination;database development specifically for software validation and regulatory approval; andstandards related to interoperability of imaging and other databases,and including results of quantitative analysis of metadata.examples of earth sciences, environmental,and natural resources data activitiesprogress in meteorological data sharing in china13meteorological data are a vast resource that applies to many fields.such data are indispensable for economic and social development, scientific and technological innovation, and general human welfare. the collec13based on a presentation by dahe qin, china meteorological administration, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/qindahepresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74open access to scientific data in chination of meteorological data by the china meteorological administration(cma) is supported operationally by polarorbiting and geostationary satellites; a groundbased observation network consisting of various types ofsensors; the synthesized operational transmitting system, which covers theentire world; a supercomputer; and many other facilities and equipment.the total amount of archived data is over 100 terabytes.as a member of the world meteorological organization, the cma hascooperated extensively with the international community in the exchangeof meteorological data products. in december 2001, under the support ofthe ministry of science and technology (most), the cma initiated themeteorological data sharing services program as part of the china sdsp.developments in meteorological data sharing over the past three yearsinclude the integration of data resources, the compilation of technical standards, and the construction of service systems. the project has providedonline and inhouse services for scientific research, education, national constructing projects, and the public. its data services are based on policy,technical standards, an operational data management system, and the classification of data and users. the work and experience of this project can beused as a reference in developing the chinasdsp and its other projects.the next step is for the meteorological data sharing project to take aleading role in the chinasdsp. to accomplish this, it must:increase the capability of its service functions, and provide moreand better services for national economic development and social welfare;build upon the advances in science and technology, improve datasecurity, and provide highquality data products for sharing;optimize the allocation of resources in the climate system and establish a òclimate systemó data sharing platform; anddevelop extensive cooperation with domestic sectors and with international meteorological web sites, institutes, and organizations.the project is expected to increase the sharing of meteorological dataand promote the proper configuration and effective utilization of nationalinformation resources. the project also plans to quicken the implementation of the chinese climate observation system, advance climate systemdata sharing as part of the global climate observation system, and help inthe enactment of the new national data sharing law and policy.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues75the world data center for renewable resources and environment14the world data center (wdc) system was established by icsu in1957. it consists of 52 discipline centers, which are distributed in theunited states, russia, europe, japan, india, australia, and china. chinajoined the wdc system in 1988 and it now has nine discipline centers(astronomy, geology, geophysics, glaciology and geocryology, meteorology, oceanography, renewable resources and environment, seismology,and space sciences).the wdc for renewable resources and environment (wdcrre)is maintained by the global change information and research center atthe institute of geographic sciences and natural resources research in thechinese academy of sciences. the mission of the wdcrre is to cooperate actively with icsu to promote exchange and sharing of data in thefields of natural resources and the environment. the wdcrre attachesgreat importance not only to data collection, but also to data exchange andservices to users. it seeks to play an important role in supporting scientificresearch, public decision making, scientific popularization, personnel training, and international cooperation.the wdcrre is funded by the chinese academy of sciences andmost. the wdcrre carries out its work under the direction of the headof the global change information and research center, and is engaged inthe following activities:researching the present situation regarding renewable resources andenvironmental data inside and outside china;investigating user requirements for such data;working out a metadata standard for wdcs in china;establishing the web site of the wdc for rre;15 andproducing data and providing data services.14based on a presentation by shunbao liao, geosciences and natural resources institute, chinese academy of sciences, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/liaoshunbaopresentation.ppt.15see http://eng.wdc.cn:8080/metadata/index.jsp.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76open access to scientific data in chinainformation system for earth science data of china16the information system for earth science data is a project initiatedin 2002 by the scientific information center for resources and environment (sicre) of the chinese academy of sciences. since that time, sicrehas established regulations and policies for the collection, processing, management, and sharing of earth science data. the draft of the chinesemetadata requirements for this system is compatible with international approaches and is based on a synthesis of the main metadata criteria for earthscience data. the system has begun to provide data and information services online.the chinasdsp will be a great benefit to the researchers and the scientific activities in china. presently, more detailed polices are being establishedand the common understanding of data sharing is developing. one challengeis that the standardization and digitization of earth science data is complicated, and there is a great demand for it.this tension between the supply and demand for these data will bemitigated once the clearinghouse of earth science data is established. theclearinghouse will reproduce and organize the primary data with lowercosts and less time. with such a òtopdownó process, the actualization ofchinaõs scientific data sharing can be realized in all respects. so far, aneffective data management and information catalogue has been completedand the data service function is available for researchers and decision makers. it is with these goals in mind that the clearinghouse of earth sciencedata in china has been launched.present status and future development strategy of chinaõssustainable development information network17chinaõs sustainable development information network (csdin) wascreated by the administrative center for chinaõs agenda 21 and nine academic institutions and scientific organizations in 1997 with the support ofthe chinese most. the main goal of csdin is to provide data and infor16based on a presentation by jiansheng qu, scientific information center for resources and environment, chinese academy of sciences.17based on a presentation by xiaofeng fu, administrative centre for chinaõs agenda21, ministry of science and technology, china and xintong li, state key laboratory ofresources and environment information system, institute of geographical sciences andnatural resources research, chinese academy of sciences.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues77mation for research, management, and decisionmaking related to sustainable development strategies that are being implemented in china. a relatedgoal is to improve the public awareness of sustainable development issuesthrough information dissemination, and to achieve the objectives for longterm development that were established in chinaõs agenda 21 program.the data and information in the csdin system are focused on natural resources, biodiversity, forestry, agriculture, macroeconomics, environmental protection, environmental technology transfer, and natural disasters, which together may be called sustainable development information.csdinõs multidisciplinary data have been integrated and analyzed forimplementing sustainable development strategies implemented in china,such as national or regional sustainable development capacity evaluationmethodologies and experiences. as of june 2004, there were 50 gigabytesof data and 17 databases.the formation process and outcomes of the data sharing policy, and thestandards for promoting information sharing in china are key aspects ofcsdin. the policy regulates csdinõs data access and internet dissemination activities according to data pricing, user status (e.g., government sector,the general public, and private enterprises), and data use. for the data standards, certain metadata and data dictionary standards, a geogrid standard,and a data classification and encoding standard have been proposed. thesestandards will be used in the whole country. these csdin standards provideimportant application experiences for the chinese national egovernmentand scientific data sharing program. other major elements for the development of csdin include the technology for the legacy systemõs reconstruction, the architecture of the data warehouse, the development of a geospatialdatabase, and technologies for geoinformation services.the future development of csdin will focus on geoinformation servicestandards and technical specifications; implementation of a more userfriendlyinterface; enabling interoperable spatial, thematic, and temporal geoinformation services; and building a sustainable development decision support system.progress toward a national spatial data infrastructure in china18as society is becoming more and more information dependent, multiscale digital spatial data are urgently needed by a variety of users for supporting their planning, monitoring, management, and decision making in18based on a presentation by jun chen, national geomatics center, china.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78open access to scientific data in chinaa broad range of applications. in this context, chinaõs national spatial datainfrastructure (nsdi) is providing the digital geospatial framework. it consists of vertically and horizontally integrated geospatial databases and communication networks, as well as necessary institutional arrangements foreffective flow and exchange of geospatial information.there are four main components of chinaõs nsdiñdata sets, theclearinghouse, policy and standards, and institutional arrangements. thereare multiscale fundamental geospatial databases at the national, provincial,and municipal levels. for example, 1:1,000,000 and 1:250,000 scale databases have already been completed, and a 1:50,000 scale database is expected to be developed. finerscale databases are being produced at theprovincial and local levels.several key factors influence the sharing of geospatial data. these include the data resources that are available, the policies that apply to theseactivities, and technical and institutional coordination. user needs also mustbe considered. administrative licensing regulations in 1999 created threepricing categories for data users: government agencies can obtain data freely,notforprofit institutions at 10 percent of full commercial cost, and corporations at full commercial prices. egovernment initiatives are now drivinga variety of applications that require greater data integration.uses of seismic data and the importance of open access tomajor data centers in seismology19earthquakes originate at places where stress levels in the earth have become too high. rocks rupture, and slip occurs on a fault surface in order torelease stress. the resulting seismic waves spread throughout the earthõs interior. eventually they reach the earthõs surface where they may be recorded.every day, there are about one or two hundred earthquakes, largeenough for their seismic signals to be recorded more than 1,000 kilometersfrom the earthquake source. also every day, some earthquakes are largeenough for their signals to be recorded all over the world. the only way tostudy such earthquakes effectively is to work with data recorded by seismographic stations in different countries.19based on a presentation by paul richards, columbia university, united states, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/paulrichardspresentation.pdf.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues79scientists and engineers use seismic signals to make earthquake catalogs and bulletins, which provide basic information for various kinds ofresearch and applications, including the study of earthquake hazards, thephysics of the earthquake sources, and the structure of the earthõs interior.the great progress in seismology in all these fields has been stimulatedprincipally by the availability of improved and improving data.both china and the united states are developing major new networks of seismometers at a cost of hundreds of millions of u.s. dollarsto each country. the experience in the united states indicates that datacenters that do not have open data policies are rarely able to attractresearchers who apply stateoftheart methods of data analysis. suchdata centers consequently find it difficult to maintain highquality operations. the best research is usually associated with centers that maketheir data openly and easily available. for example, users draw attentionto errors that inevitably arise in the data, they find ways to correct thedata, they share information about how to use the data center effectively, and they contribute to new ways to process the data. informationfrom users of the data thus is needed to provide guidance for the management of a data center. from this perspective, it appears that an important part of providing international scientific leadership in seismology is making seismic data easily available to all interested potentialusers.china too has excellent data sets of seismic waveforms, which will yieldnew insights into earthquake physics, tectonics, and the earthõs internalstructure. new methods of locating earthquakes have recently been appliedto limited datasets. they indicate the potential for china to produce one ofthe best bulletins of seismicity in the world, covering a large region (morethan 10,000,000 square km). bulletins are a starting point for hazard management, as well as for scientific projects in the study of the earthõs structure and earthquake physics.presently there are handicaps, however, in that station coordinates arenot made easily available, and waveform data are accessible for only a verylimited number of stations. for many years, china has not allowed eventhe locations of seismographic stations to be known to western scientists,except for a network of 24 stations. a consequence of these restrictions isthat the locations of earthquakes in china are not as well known as theywould be if more data were made generally available.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80open access to scientific data in chinaexisting infrastructure for international exchange of seismic data20as noted in the preceding section, knowledge of earthquake hazards canadvance as a result of unrestricted sharing of seismic data, including seismicstation information, bulletins, and waveforms. the infrastructure to arrangefor and carry out international data exchange has existed and been used successfully for many years. the international association for seismology andthe physics of the earthõs interior (iaspei) includes commissions to discussspecific arrangements and to establish data format standards. the international seismological centre (isc) collects, merges, and redistributes seismicbulletin data. the federation of digital seismic networks (fdsn) helpsbroadband seismic networks to coordinate their activities. the united statesand china help to fund and participate in each of these organizations, butthe amount of data that the chinese have shared lags far behind most othercountries with similarly extensive earthquake monitoring.it is useful to have data from more stations for a number of reasons inaddition to the ones outlined in the preceding section. seismology is advancing beyond computing òformaló estimates of uncertainty that are basedon questionable statistical assumptions. to estimate òabsoluteó locationuncertainty, seismologists must calibrate new techniques using very accurate locations. many seismologists accept a location computed by a localnetwork as absolutely accurate within 5 kilometers only if it is computedfrom arrival times at stations at least one of which is within 30 kilometersof the earthquake; at least ten of which are within 250 kilometers of theearthquake; and with a very good distribution around the earthquake.local networks may be reconfigured frequently to meet new needs, sousing their data depends on detailed knowledge of the network. thus, seismologists recognize that there may be advantages from arranging some exchanges of local network data individually.regional networks cover a broader area but with somewhat moresparsely distributed stations. regional networks usually have a more standardized configuration, so data from them can be used with greater confidence by more seismologists. many seismologists accept a location computed by a regional network as absolutely accurate within 20 kilometers ifit is computed from arrival times at seismic stations that are all within20based on a presentation by raymond j. willemann, gem technologies, unitedstates, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/raymondwillemannpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues811,000 kilometers of the earthquake and have very good distribution aroundthe earthquake.achieving good distribution around an earthquake usually requires atleast ten seismic stations. because china is so large, several hundred stations are needed to obtain a good distribution of regional stations aroundall of the earthquakes in china.two recent changes offer an opportunity to improve the internationalcontributions of seismic data from china. first, iaspei passed at its 2003general assembly in sapporo, japan, a resolution urging all seismic networks to share information about all seismic stations. the resolution states:recognizing the need to accurately locate earthquakes and determineearthquake size, and compile complete earthquake bulletins,urges all operators of seismic stations and networks to deposit unique station codes with the international registry maintained by the internationalseismological centre and by the world data centre for seismology, denver,and to freely share the coordinates of all seismic stations,urges all operators of seismic stations and networks to keep accurate recordof instrument response and performance.china might respond to this iaspei resolution by starting to send theisc a computerreadable bulletin from the china earthquake administration that is complete for a network of several hundred seismic stations inchina. second, the fdsn has broadened the definition of membership toinclude many more regional and local networks of broadband seismic stations. in response, numerous provincial networks in china might join thefdsn. this would provide the networks an opportunity to contributedata from selected stations to the fdsn archive and access to software andother assistance from the fdsn to establish their own data centers to distribute their own data on the internet.digital fujian21the digital earth has the allure of a diamond; people from differentangles all can appreciate its prism and reflection. consistent with the con21based on a presentation by qinmin wang, department of science and technology,fujian province, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/wangqinminpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82open access to scientific data in chinacept of digital earth, thinking globally and acting locally has become theapproach for organizing the regional egovernment information sharingprogram in fujian province. the governor of fujian province formed thedigital fujian program to promote regional modernization during the20012005 time period. the program includes the establishment of aninformation network, the creation of data resources (a data warehouse withmetadata, data processing, modeling, and other related functions), the formation of data standards and a data sharing policy, the training of qualifiedtechnicians, and the funding of an information applications infrastructure.after the three years of development, the digital fujian program hasestablished successfully the egovernment information networking anddata sharing platform between the provincial government and the cityand county government departments. it now includes approximately oneterabyte of standardized data resources among 21 government agencies, 9information application systems, 20 government information applicationprojects, a provincial information technology technician training center,and a set of information sharing standards and regulations. another keytechnical issue of the program is how to extract useful information fromthe huge earth observation satellite databases. therefore, data mining,data analysis, data integration, information extraction, information presentation, and intelligent decision making are also important parts of theprogram.local and regional earth system scienceapplications and associated infrastructure:the midatlantic geospatial information consortium22the midatlantic geospatial information consortium (magic) isa federated consortium of universities in that region of the united states.their mission is to develop a distributed remote sensing, applications,geospatial data and information system, serving a variety of users at thelocal, state, and regional levels. it extends wide usage of national aeronautics and space administration (nasa) data. it focuses on the use ofsuch data for nasa priorities and on the dissemination of such datathrough interoperable information systems that are coupled to nasaõs22based on a presentation by menas kafatos, george mason university, united states,available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/menaskafatospresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues83systems and that promote open solutions and standards. it prototypesapplications for regional effects of climate phenomena and change, landuse, pollution mitigation, agriculture, health, wetlands, and forestry, coupling to nasa priorities.there are many factors related to providing open data access that mustbe considered by magic, including the following:a federated data and information management system. support depends on individual partners and changes are not reflected at all sites.standards. magic uses standards developed by the federal geographic data committee, webgis (geographic information systems), andthe web mapping service.diversity of users. magic serves users at the local, state, regional,and federal levels, and from the private and public sectors. these users havedifferent needs, different expertise, and different infrastructure.large number of data types. there are over 2,000 databases withmany different types of data (e.g., gis, swath, gridded, socioeconomic).these data sources require different tools and metadata to make them useful and interoperable with federal government agencies and across all othermagic sources. help desks are needed for user support.infrastructure. highspeed network access is required, but not allpartners have the same access capabilities.funding. the nasa earth system science applications programprovided initial funding. funding priorities change, however, and the usersare a mix of public and privatesector entities. ultimately, the fundingsources should reflect this diversity of users and include the state government and industry.training. remotesensing and other geospatial data are difficult touse. users therefore frequently require training, including in the application of geographic information systems to remotesensing data.free versus proprietary data. nasa earth system science data arefreely and openly available. other government (e.g., from the u.s. geological survey and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration)data are lowcost and unrestricted. local and state data are not free, andcommercial privatesector data are proprietary. an important question is,how can a federated, webbased system make access free to different users?this key question is still being addressed.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84open access to scientific data in chinathematic issues in scientific information,journals, and digital librariespolicies and mechanisms for literature resource sharingñthe practice of the chinese national scientific andtechnical library23information resource sharing benefits society and the economy by thespread of knowledge at a low cost. intellectual property rights (iprs) stimulate and protect creative innovation, but restrict the public diffusion andapplication of knowledge. they are thus positive on the one hand, butnegative on the other. enhancing the resource sharing requirement maylimit the interests and benefits of the ipr owner, whereas increasing theiprs of the owner may limit the benefits that society could gain from resource sharing. a proper balance between the two needs to be found tomaximize the social benefits. the policy and legal system is facing an increasing challenge in reconciling these opposing effects.information resource sharing is a powerful instrument for reducing thedigital divide, but the threshold for doing it is quite high due to the price ofliterature. at the same time, the strengthening of iprs is the current trendin international law and trade. this is related with the fact that the mainexporters of knowledge and information products are in developed countries. for developing economies, the level of ipr protection should be synchronized with the level of development of the economic and legal system.setting the protection standards too high can be harmful. there are choicesand tradeoffs in enacting these policies.if the rigorous application of copyright law requires payment for everydrop of knowledge, then the capacity of public libraries will be very limited bythe shortage of funds. the urgent problem is: how to observe internationalipr regulations while at the same time improving the scientific informationresource capacity building and meeting the demands of social progress?the practice of the chinese national scientific and technical library ofchinathe national scientific and technical library (nstl) of china is avirtual scientific literature service center initiated in june 2000 by the most23based on a keynote presentation by qiheng hu, vice president, chinese associationfor science and technology, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/huqihengpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues85and the ministry of finance in cooperation with five other ministries, andapproved by the state council. the nstl is composed of seven memberlibraries: the center for literature and information of the chinese academy of sciences, the china s&t information institute, the machineryindustry information institute, the metallurgy industry information standard institute, the chemical industry information center, the literaturecenter of the chinese academy for agricultural science, and the information center of the chinese academy for medical science. the nstl officeis in charge of coordinating and managing the services.the principles for operation of the nstl are: òunified purchasing,normalized processing, combined networking, and resource sharing.ó themain goals are to:build and share the scientific literature and information resourcesamong all members through a convenient network so that this virtual library can provide better service to the research community in the areas ofbasic science, engineering, agriculture, and medicine;develop a highlevel scientific literature collection and service center;demonstrate effective applications of information technologies inscientific literature and information services;become a pivotal force in cooperation with the broader chineselibrary system and the leader in the scientific library system of china;play a major role in exchanges with the international library community; andestablish the information resource base for research, training, andthe popularization of scientific education.the responsibilities of nstl are diverse, consistent with its main goals.these responsibilities include: planning and funding of comparatively complete literature resource acquisitions; coordination of the literature collection to avoid unnecessary redundancies; formulation of standards, norms,and formats for the unified database; providing service to users throughoutthe country with the nstl network service platform; development andapplication of indepth resources; and domestic and international exchangesand collaborations.the responsibilities of the nstl are directed by a 19member council, which is the decisionmaking and leading body, and also representsnstl members and users. the nstl director is appointed by the council. the director general is in charge of operations and hires the officestaff. the council and the director are advised by two advisory groups, thestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86open access to scientific data in chinaexpert advisory committee for literature resource construction and theexpert advisory committee on computernetwork construction.the nstl has made significant progress in several areas, three of whichare highlighted here. first, it has increased the total number and variety ofthe scientific literature resources in china. the investments in scientificliterature have been used more effectively since the nstl member librariesstopped the counterproductive duplication and competition in purchasinginternational scientific periodicals as a result of nstl planning. prior to2000, there were only about 3,000 englishlanguage scientific journals andperiodicals in the nstl member libraries. the nstl increased the totalnumber to 10,653 in 2000. by 2003, the nstl holdings of journals andperiodicals in english numbered approximately 13,500 with an additional5,000 conference proceedings and handbooks in english. also in englishare 15 kinds of network edition periodicals and 65 kinds (physics and chemistry) of network edition subscriptions with access controls. the nstl alsohas a rich variety of literature in the chinese language, including more than4,000 kinds of journals and periodicals, over 22,000 conference proceedings, and 470,000 theses for masters and phd degrees.second, nstl has constructed a 1 gigabit/second broadband networklinking the nstlõs seven member libraries, thereby making the separatelibraries a united library with digitized resources in the networked environment. the nstl service network is also linked with the national library,the china education and research network, and the china scientific andtechnical network via 100 megabit/second connections.the third major area of nstlõs progress is in developing the rapidgrowth of online digitized resources and related services. in 2000, beforethe launch of the nstl network, there were 1.7 million information itemsof online data. this increased to 27 million items in 39 databases by december 2003. the nstl provides many services including: literaturesearches, fulltext provision, periodicals cataloging, common directoryquery, fulltext database access for the networkedition literature, literaturedirectory database searching, expert consulting and information services,online resources search engine, preprints system in chinese, and a portalfor preprints in english. services that are provided to users via the internetinclude free literature searching and online payment for services (around44 percent of payable services are paid online). requests for fulltext provision are processed within two working days.all users can access and download for free the 15 networkedition periodicals in english for which nstl buys access. the other 65 kinds ofstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues87periodicals on physics and chemistry are available for 80 universities andresearch institutes according to the subscription license, based on accesscontrols. over 99 percent of the periodicals in english are accessed eachyear.despite these accomplishments, the nstl, like all public libraries,continues to face a serious problem. the benefit of using information technology to decrease the costs of knowledge sharing is greatly counteractedby the rising costs of the imported information resources. from the experience of the nstl, the network editionõs cost is typically very high and isproportionate to the scale of information sharing. there may be no otherchoice than to go back to printed editions for such highcost importedinformation. does this sound like progress in the age of digital networks?perspectives on the future of the library and on theeconomics of open access24the big question facing the circulation of scientific information is:what is going to become of the emerging openaccess movement? thereare growing numbers of arguments in support of increasing access to research through a variety of openaccess models. the case for increasingaccess has components that can be roughly categorized as epistemological,historical, developmental, political, and publicñas well as economic andlegal, which are discussed elsewhereñand is directed primarily toward faculty members, students, librarians, policy makers, and the public.the epistemological argument for open access, for example, has to dowith how dependent a knowledge claim is on being fully open to reviewand critique. anything that unduly restricts the circulation of knowledge,especially among òlegitimateó participants in its construction, reduces thatbody of knowledgeõs claims to validity and reliability. if the current subscription publishing model can be shown to contribute to suboptimal levels of access, then those models are not what we might call epistemologically conducive to the development of knowledge.the concern with exploring new publishing models leads to the historical argument, which draws on precedents from an earlier era of publishing innovation, using isaac newton as a leading instance. newton is wellknown for being a highly secretive scientist and a reluctant author. neverthe24based on a presentation by john willinsky, university of british columbia, canada.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88open access to scientific data in chinaless, after he had tracked for only a few years the birth and emergence of thescientific periodical, with the launching of philosophical transactions in 1655,he understood that this publicly circulated, relatively inexpensive 16pagejournal represented something important to science. he allowed one of hisletters, on optics, to be published in that journal. it was a move he came toregret and did not do again, but this early experience in open access went along way in shaping what became the norms of the scientific article.the developmental (or developing countries) argument for increasingaccess has everything to do with the parallel development in china of botheconomic growth and scientific papers published, with an increase by afactor of 10 since the 1980s. developing countries are suffering a knowledge gap, even as their university population grows. the universities in thewest are contributing to that gap, as their work becomes increasingly expensive to access (with some generous exceptions negotiated with publishers by the international network for the availability of scientific publications and some other organizations).the political and public arguments for open access to research areabout peopleõs basic right to know, especially in matters of publicly fundedresearch and scholarship. the value of exercising that right is affirmed bythe health revolution brought about by public access to medical information. public access to research also speaks to greater accountability demanded of professionals (e.g., physicians, educators, lawyers) and the increasing role of interest groups in selectively presenting information to thepublic, against which full access to the research would act as a safeguard.an openaccess future25the openaccess movement has gained momentum over the past several years, with increased visibility and recognition from the various stakeholder communities, including research and publishing communities. sincethe budapest open access initiative26 began collecting signatures in february 2002, more than 3,500 individuals and organizations have signed onwith their support for free access to information. the directory of openaccess journals27 at lund university, which contained over 1,100 journals25based on a presentation by helen doyle, public library of science, united states.26see http://www.soros.org/openaccess/.27see http://www.doaj.org/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues89as of june 2004, has announced the launch of its second phase, allowingsophisticated searching of the full text of the directoryõs articles. the u.k.based openaccess publisher biomedcentral now publishes over 100 openaccess journals. since its launch in october 2003, plos biology28ñthe firstpeerreviewed, openaccess journal of the public library of science(plos)ñis demonstrating remarkable strength as a competitive new journal: submissions are increasing; readership, measured as visits to the siteand as downloads of individual articles, is growing; and plos biologyõs reputation as a highquality, peerreviewed journal is improving among scientists, publishers, librarians, and other stakeholder groups.in addition to a transformation of the economics of scientific publishing, openaccess publishing also represents a modernization of traditionalcopyright laws that are based on an outdated printbased economic model.in the openaccess definitions used in both the bethesda principles29 andthe berlin declaration,30 an openaccess article can be reused and redistributed freely and without permission from the publisher, for any responsible purpose. authors retain their copyright. in the case of plos journals,the copyright license is the creative commons31 òattribution license,ówhich preserves the authorõs right to be acknowledged for the original work.many journals that are labeled open access are in fact free access, meaning that the restrictions on use and distribution are the same as for manysubscriptionbased journals. it is worth noting that researchers themselvesvirtually never benefit financially from publication of their peerreviewedarticles. several recent policies that may appear to be a liberalization ofsubscription policies are in fact small concessions to the growing demandfor greater access from the scientific community that produces the articles,concessions made at little economic risk to the publishers.the sharing of data, reagents, and ideas is fundamental to the scientificprocess itself. openaccess publishing, including both the unfettered distribution and searching afforded by online free access and the unlimited creative reuses permitted by less restrictive copyright licenses, will facilitate theadvance of science and medicine.28see http://biology.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=indexhtml&issn=15457885/.29see http://www.biomedcentral.com/openaccess/bethesda/.30see http://www.zim.mpg.de/openaccessberlin/berlindeclaration.html.31see http://creativecommons.org/.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90open access to scientific data in chinaother opportunities in the changing information environment32it has been recognized that research and access to research results play avital role in the development of all countries, and that transitional anddeveloping countries often cannot obtain and make use of research thatwould benefit them. in response to this òinformation divide,ó the international network for the availability of scientific publications (inasp) wasestablished in 1992 as a program of icsu to provide support to networking and partnerships with the aim of bridging the increasing informationdivide between the developed and developing world. it now operates arange of programs to support access to information for researchers, healthworkers, and rural development experts. access to research information isfacilitated through its programme for the enhancement of research information (peri). this program not only provides access to internationalresearch, but facilitates activities to support national publications to increase their visibility and longterm sustainability. research information isprovided in many different forms (e.g., datasets, publications), but thescholarly journal remains one of the prime vehicles for accrediting and disseminating research information. of course, both national and international information is of importance to research. peri provides support for(1) access to global information, (2) increased visibility for local publications, (3) training in the use and management of online information, (4)support for publishers and editors, and (5) research and networking support. inasp negotiates access to as many required resources as possiblewith content owners and publishers. the exact cost of each resource isrelated to the gdp of the country, and although many of the resources areavailable without cost as part of peri, others are obtainable at up to 98percent discount on the normal subscription rates. nearly all of the resources are available on a countrywide license basis, meaning that anyonein an educational, research, or nonprofit environment is eligible to accessthem.the journals online (jol) project supports a methodology to enablenational publications to have an online presence, to increase their visibility,and to promote communication with readers and authors. it has been particularly successful in africa with the african journals online (ajol) ser32based on a presentation by pippa smart, international network for the availabilityof scientific publications, united kingdom, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/pippasmartpresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues91vice that now includes 184 journals, and also supports fulltext, onlinepublishing. this service has been operational since 1998 and was recentlyrelaunched on a new platform. the new software enables individual publishers to load, edit, and correct their own content to further support development and use of online communication. the jol methodology andsoftware are available for other countries and regions to adopt for their ownpublications.of course, there continue to be many challenges for information access,and inasp is continually updating its activities to respond to requests frompartners and to increase its capabilities to develop sustainable methodologies.scientific information and digital libraries: can developingcountries become key players in the information society?33in most developing countries, politics rather than markets drive knowledge diffusion. whether new technology is adopted or not by a country islargely determined by political will, its patterns of power and influence,and resourceallocation policies. politics are thus a decisive variable drivingthe transition of developing countries to the information society.in addition to the political hurdles in most developing countries, thereare many other factors working against preservation of and open access toscientific information in developing countries. these factors may be characterized as institutional, economic, and social, although many of themintersect and are difficult to separate out.generally speaking, the institutional culture creates barriers to the creation and diffusion of knowledge. for example, government officials tendto believe that access to knowledge is automatic once connectivity to digitalnetworks is ensured. there is no institutional framework for data preservation mechanisms (e.g., the demise of the south african data archive).moreover, there is no legislative mandate that obliges researchers that arepublicly funded to make available research findings publicly accessible. thelack of comprehensive strategies and policies for data management are amajor barrier to open access in developing countries.from an economic standpoint, a large percentage of the population in33based on a presentation by lulama makhubela, national development agency,south africa, available at http://www7.nationalacademies.org/usnccodata/lulamapresentation.ppt.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92open access to scientific data in chinadeveloping countries currently falls below the poverty line. income distribution remains highly unequal, and poverty and inequality continue toexhibit strong geographic and racial biases. public funding for the development and connectivity of information and communication technologies(icts)ñfrom both national and global sourcesñcontinues to be inadequate. the resulting lack of access to icts further restricts the potentialuse of even the information that is otherwise openly accessible online.the social barriers are no less daunting. human resources in the scientific and technical domains are not adequately developed. moreover, thereis a òbrain drainó of highly trained scientists and professionals from thedeveloping to the more developed countries. the organizational complexity of scientific communities and the esoteric language of scholarly journalscreate further roadblocks to the broad transfer of knowledge. within thebroader society, the reading environment is poorly developed. only a smallpercentage of the population uses library facilities, and most rural areas donot have libraries. educational gaps mean that access to information doesnot necessarily result in access to knowledge. the simple availability ofinformation technologies has shown to be insufficient to guarantee properdiffusion of scientific knowledge across society. achieving mastery of technological change in the economy and society remains elusive.some actions that may be considered to help ameliorate the barriersoutlined above include the following:there must be a greater effort to develop human resources in research, especially in national tertiary education programs, and to connectresearch more effectively with productive sectors and the specific needs ofsociety. the curricula for research professionals should include digital dataand information management principles and techniques.the adoption of rigorous and more collaborative approaches in addressing the lack of leadership and professional management, which hasresulted in the poor implementation of data preservation in many areas, isvital. this needs to be coupled with a greater effort on developing a betterunderstanding of the value of data and information preservation for futureaccess among working scientists.a strategic approach is also needed to leverage resources and maximize effectiveness by increased collaboration among developing countries,and to document and disseminate best practices. this goal can be promoted by forming data archiving groups at different geographic levels toovercome the isolation of individual data archivists and promote beneficialstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.thematic issues93exchanges. this will help harness the human intellectual capacity with collective expertise in issues of data preservation and open access. cooperationshould be encouraged for richer quality and more impact, rather thanmerely for the sake of cooperation.at the broader social level it is important to promote the use ofscientific knowledge and of information technologies among all population strata, as well as to reach out to the literate poor. investments in technological innovations deserve high priority because in some cases they canovercome the constraints of low incomes and weak institutions.in conclusion, the discourse on scientific data and information resources and on digital libraries needs to be understood in the political,economic, and social context of developing countries. the future globalinformation society may be one of widespread and beneficial internationalcollaboration, or one of highly stratified access to knowledge. in order forthe first scenario to prevail, the external barriers to access to knowledgeneed to be reduced, and the perverse internal dynamics preventing manydeveloping countries from joining the global scientific community as activeparticipants must be changed. a search for effective strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific information in developing countrieswill remain utopian unless those countries themselves become actively integrated in the broader information society.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.97ainternational workshop on strategies forpreservation of and open access toscientific datainternational conference roomcentury golden resources hotelbeijing, chinajune 2224, 2004agenda*tuesday, 22 junesession 1: opening remarkscochairs:¥zhang xianõen, director general, department of basicresearch, ministry of science and technology of china¥shuichi iwata, president, codata and professor,university of tokyo, japan9:00welcoming remarks by workshop cochairscheng jinpei, vice president, ministry of science andtechnology of chinaroberta balstad miller, chair, u.s. national committeefor codata and director, center for international earthscience information network (ciesin), columbia university,united states*the workshop agenda presented chinese names with family names first and in capitalletters, and given names second.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98appendix a9:15workshop objectiveswilliam anderson, principal, praxis101 and cochair,codata task group on preservation of and access to s&tdata in developing countries9:30keynote addressñstrategies of china scientific data sharingcheng jinpei, vice president, ministry of science and technologyof chinarapporteurs:¥fu xiaofeng, director, information division, administrativecenter for chinaõs agenda 21 and member, codata taskgroup on preservation of and access to s&t data in developing countries¥steve rossouw, member, codata executive committee10:00 break and picturessession 2: overview of thematic areas in chinacochairs:¥cheng jinpei, vice minister, ministry of science andtechnology of china¥michael clegg, foreign secretary, national academy ofsciences, united states10:30the chinese national committee for codata: its mission andfuturexu zhihong, representative of the chinese national committee forcodata10:50chinaõs scientific data sharing program (chinasdsp)zhang xianõen, director general of department of basic research,ministry of science and technology of china11:20progress and perspectives of climate data sharing of chinaqin dahe, president, china meteorological administrationstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a9911:45the management and sharing system for scientific data inmedicineliu depei, president, chinese academy of medicine, and vicepresident, chinese academy of engineering12:10the mechanism for and management of the national s&tlibrary of chinahu qiheng, vice president, chinese association of science andtechnology of chinarapporteurs:¥xu feng, national information center of china¥john willinsky, professor, university of british columbia,canada12:10lunchsession 3: international perspectives on preservation of and openaccess to public scientific informationcochairs:¥sun honglie, vice president of codata, chinese academyof sciences¥roberta balstad miller, chair, u.s. nationalcommittee for codata and director, ciesin,columbia university, united states13:30trends in development of international scientific data andinformationyasuyuki aoshima, director, beijing office, united nationsscientific, educational, and cultural organization (unesco)13:45towards international guidelines for access to research datafrom public fundingpeter schr–der, ministry of education, culture, and science,the netherlands14:00international perspectives on data and information for sciencestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100appendix acarthage smith, deputy executive director, international councilfor science (icsu)14:15initiatives on promoting access to scientific informationmichael clegg, interacademy panel (iap) member and foreignsecretary, national academy of sciences, united states14:30general discussion15:00breakrapporteurs:¥wang zhengxing, deputy director, global changeinformation and research center, institute of geography andnatural resources, chinese academy of sciences¥pippa smart, head of publications, publishing initiatives,and publishing training, international network for theavailability of scientific information (inasp), unitedkingdomsession 4: policy and managementcochairs:¥sun shu, director, department of earth sciences anddirector, expert committee of china scientific data sharingproject, chinese academy of sciences¥theodore carl bergstrom, professor, university ofcalifornia at santa barbara, united statespolicy and legal issues15:20borders in cyberspace: maximizing social and economic benefitfrom public investment in datapeter weiss, j.d., u.s. national weather service15:45reflections on the legislation for national scientific data sharingzhang jingõan, director general, department of policy,regulation, and reform, ministry of science and technology of chinastrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a101institutional and management issues16:00managing the impacts of change on archiving research dataraymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory, united stateslocal and regional issues16:20local and regional earth system science applications andassociated infrastructure: the midatlantic geospatialinformation consortiummenas kafatos, professor, george mason university, united states16:40digital fujianwang qinmin, vice chairman, fujian political consultative anddirector, department of science and technology, fujian province,china17:00the role of the codata task group on preservation of andaccess to s&t data in developing countriesliu chuang, cochair, codata task group on preservation ofand access to of s&t data in developing countriesrapporteurs:¥yin ling, the pla general hospital, china¥carthage smith, deputy director, icsu17:20preparation for day two and announcements17:30adjourn18:10reception and dinnerwednesday, 23 june8:3012:15individual presentations and panel discussionsstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102appendix asession 5: breakout panel discussions on crossdisciplinary issues51: policy and legal issuescochairs:¥chen jun, director, basic geographical information centerof china¥peter schr–der, ministry of education, culture, andscience, the netherlandspanelists:maximizing social and economic benefit from public investment in datapeter weiss, j.d., u.s. national weather serviceprogress and policy issues on geospatial framework of digital chinachen jun, director, basic geographical information center ofchinaglobal trends to restrict access to data from governmentfundedresearchjerome reichman, duke law school, united states, and pauluhlir, u.s. national academiesdata sharing policy of chinese ecosystem research networkchen panqin, huang tieqing, deputy director, department ofnatural resources and environment management, chinese academyof scienceson government information resources sharingzeng lan, li jun, national macro economic research institutebalancing the general public interests and copyright in scientificinformation managementjohn willinsky, university of british columbia, canadacomparative study on strategy and policy for open access to scientificdata among the united states, european union, and chinaliu chuang, professor, institute of geography and natural resources,chinese academy of sciencesstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a103rapporteur¥paul uhlir, j.d., u.s. national academies12:25lunch52: institutional and economic issuescochairs:¥xiao yun, secretary general, chinese national committeefor codata¥dora ann canhos, centro de refer’ncia en informa“‰oambiental (cria), campinas, brazil and member, codataarchiving task grouppanelists:data sharing policy of the national institutes of healthbelinda seto, deputy director, national institute of biomedical imagingand bioengineering, national institutes of health, united statesdata sharing in scientific databases of the chinese academy of sciencesxiao yun, secretary general, chinese national committee for codataoperating a twentyfirstcentury data centerroberta balstad miller, director, ciesin, columbia university,united stateswdc for renewable resources and environmentliao shunbao, associate professor, global change information and researchcenter, institute of geography and natural resources, chinese academy ofsciencesthe peculiar economics of scientific informationtheodore carl bergstrom, professor, university of california at santabarbara, united statesrapporteur:¥henda van der berg, national research foundation, southafricastrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104appendix a53: management and technical issuescochairs:¥li yixue, director of shanghai biomedical center¥lulama makhubela, research & developmentdirectorate, national development agency, south africapanelists:information infrastructure for life science studies in shanghaili yixue, director, shanghai biomedical centermanaging the impacts of programmatic scale and enhancing incentivesfor data archivingraymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory, united statesinvolving the private sector in the environmental enterpriseanne linn, director, committee on geophysical and environmental data,u.s. national academiesearth science data and information management in western chinasun chengquan, director, information center for natural resources andenvironment, chinese academy of sciencesdata integration and management: a pdb perspectivefeng zukang, protein data bank, united stateslaunching a new openaccess journalhelen doyle, director, development & strategic alliances, public libraryof science, united statesrapporteur:¥william anderson, praxis101, united statessession 6: summaries of crossdisciplinary issues and discussioncochairs:¥guo huadong, associate secretary general and director,department of international cooperation, chinese academyof sciencesstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a105¥khudulmur sodov, director, information and computercenter, national remote sensing center, mongolia13:30crossdisciplinary rapporteur reportspolicy and legal issuespaul uhlir, j.d., u.s. national academiesinstitutional and economic issuesxiao yun, secretary general, chinese national committee for codatamanagement and technical issuesli yixue, director, shanghai biomedical center, china14:15general discussion of crossdisciplinary issues15:00break15:30the future role of codataprof. shuichi iwata, university of tokyo, and president, codata16:00open journal systems: a live demonstration of opensourcejournal management softwarejohn willinsky, university of british columbia, canada16:45summary remarkssun honglie, vice president, codatarapporteurs:¥li zengyuan, deputy director, institute of natural resourcesinformation, chinese academy of forestry¥julie esanu, office of international s&t informationprogram, u.s. national academies16:55preparation for day three and announcements17:00adjournstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106appendix athursday, 24 junesession 7: breakout panel discussions on thematic issues9:0012:00individual presentations and panel discussions at separatelocations71: life sciences and public health datalocation:chinese pla general hospitalcochairs:¥yin ling, director, neuroinformatics center, chinese plageneral hospital¥vishwas chavan, national chemical laboratory, india9:00a contractually reconstructed research commons for scientificdata in a highly protectionist intellectual property environmentjerome reichman, duke law school, united states and pauluhlir, u.s. national academies9:20international medical scientific data sharingyin ling, chinese pla general hospital9:40the nih roadmap for medical researchbelinda seto, deputy director, national institute of biomedicalimaging and bioengineering, national institutes of health, unitedstates10:00oecdgsfni (neuroinformatics) data sharingtang yiyuan, dalian polytech university, china10:20the safeguarding and sharing of traditional chinese medicinaldatabase resourcesliu baoyan, chinese academy of medicine10:40breakstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a10710:55protein data bank: a key biological resourcefeng zukang, protein data bank, united states11:15longterm study for digital human and scientific data sharingqin donglie, the capital hospital university, china11:35open access to scientific data on biological diversity:an urgent need for chinajames edwards, global biodiversity information facility,denmark11:55discussionrapporteurs:¥huang funan, chinese pla general hospital¥paul uhlir, j.d., u.s. national academies12:10adjourn72: earth sciences, environmental and natural resources datalocation:institute of geography and natural resources, chinese academy ofsciencescochairs:¥liu chuang, institute of geography and natural resources,chinese academy of sciences¥dora ann canhos, cria, brazil and member,codata archiving task group9:00international policy and cooperation in digital earthguo huadong, associate secretary general and director,department of international cooperation, chinese academy ofsciences9:15the present status and future development strategy of chinaõssustainable development information networkfu xiaofeng, the administrative center for chinaõs agenda 21strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108appendix a9:30environmental database development in mongoliakhudulmur sodov, director, information and computer center,national remote sensing center, mongolia9:45data archiving for longterm preservation in the satelliteground station of the chinese academy of sciencesliu dingsheng, satellite ground station, chinese academy ofsciences10:00special considerations for archiving data from fieldobservationsraymond mccord, oak ridge national laboratory, united states10:15the information system for earth science data sharing of chinaqu jiansheng, information center for natural resources andenvironment, chinese academy of sciences10:30towards a balanced performance appraisal system in the digitalera for data archiving and sharing in chinawang zhengxing, global change information and research center,institute of geography and natural resources, chinese academy ofsciences10:45break11:00uses of seismic data and the importance of open access tomajor data centers in seismologypaul richards, columbia university, united states11:15existing infrastructure for international exchange of seismic dataraymond willemann, gem technologies, united states11:30seismic data sharing in chinayang dake, china earthquake administration11:45discussionstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a109rapporteurs:¥zhu xiaohua, global change information and researchcenter, institute of geography and natural resources, chineseacademy of sciences¥roberta balstad miller, director, ciesin,columbia university, united states and chair, u.s. nationalcommittee for codata12:10adjourn73: scientific information, journals and digital librarieslocation: library of sciences, chinese academy of sciencescochairs:¥zhang xiaoling, director, library of sciences, chineseacademy of sciences¥steve rossouw, cape technicon university, south africa9:05an openaccess futurehelen doyle, director, development & strategic alliances, publiclibrary of science, united states9:25developing an open digital library: the practice of the chinesenational science digital library (csdl)zhang xiaolin, director of science library, chinese academy ofsciences9:45are economic journals becoming obsolete?theodore carl bergstrom, university of california at santabarbara, united states10:05arguments on the future of the library and economics of openaccessjohn willinsky, university of british columbia, canadastrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110appendix a10:25information, journals, and digital libraries: can developingcountries become key players in the information society?lulama makhubela, research & development directorate,national development agency, south africa10:45break11:10arguments on open access to scientific informationmeng liansheng, chinese academy of sciences11:20the international network for the availability of scientificpublications (inasp)ñopportunities in a changing informationenvironmentpippa smart, head of publications, publishing initiatives andpublishing training, inasp, united kingdom11:40discussionrapporteur:¥julie esanu, office of international s&t informationprograms, u.s. national academies12:10end of meetingstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.111bbiographical summaries ofworkshop speakers andsteering committee memberswilliam l. anderson is a cofounder of praxis101, where his consultingpractice focuses on usercentered information systems architecture, participatory design, software engineering practice innovation, and organizationallearning. before founding praxis101 he worked for xerox corporation indistributed system architecture, technology strategy, and advanced productdevelopment. he pioneered codevelopment and customer collaborationon one of the first digital libraries, a joint project between cornell university and xerox. he has published papers on digital library product development, participatory design of product prototypes, and software development practices and tools. prior to xerox, dr. anderson worked in thetelecom, image management, and pharmaceutical industries. dr. andersonholds a ph.d. in theoretical chemistry from rensselaer polytechnic institute. he is a member of the u.s. national committee for the committeeon data for science and technology (codata) and cochair of thecodata preservation of and access to scientific and technical data indeveloping countries.yasuyuki aoshima is director and representative of unesco officebeijing. he has an academic background in engineering sciences witha doctorate of engineering from the university of tokyo in 1977. from1970 to 1975 he worked as a teaching and research assistant at the swissfederal institute of technology in lausanne. from january 1976 to february 1982 he worked as an engineer at the nippon kokan (steel making,strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112appendix bshipbuilding, and construction company), tokyo. he joined unescoin february 1982 as senior purchasing officer until 1988 when he becamethe chief of budgetary control and monitoring at the section of fellowships and equipment division. in 1993 he became chief of the fellowshipsection of unesco for a few months before being transferred to thenatural science sector as senior programme specialist at the engineeringand technology division responsible for the universityindustrysciencepartnership programme assisting also the world solar programme. fromoctober 1997 to september 2001 he worked as a senior programme specialist in the science, technology and informatics division in the jakartafield office. in september 2001 he was transferred to the beijing office asthe director and representative of unesco to the peopleõs republic ofchina, mongolia, the republic of korea, japan, and the democraticpeopleõs republic of korea.peter arzberger is currently director, life sciences initiatives at the university of california, san diego, and director of the national biomedicalcomputation resource. dr. arzberger received his ph.d. in mathematicsfrom purdue university. in 1988 he moved to the national science foundation (nsf) and was program director for statistics and probability, andlater the first program director for the computational biology activitiesprogram. he also served as deputy high performance computing andcommunications coordinator at nsf. in 1995 he moved to the san diegosupercomputer center as executive director, and helped lead the development of the national partnership for advanced computational infrastructure and served as its first executive director. his interests focus on theinterface between computing, information technology, and mathematicswith the broad spectrum of biomedical research and biology from the molecular through to ecological to biodiversity scales. in addition he is interested in policy issues relating to international data sharing. he is the principal investigator on the nsf award to support the pacific rim applicationand grid middleware assembly.roberta balstad is senior research scientist at columbia university anddirector of the center for international earth science information network. dr. balstad has published extensively on science policy, informationtechnology and scientific research, remote sensing applications and policy,and the role of the social sciences in understanding global environmentalchange. dr. balstad received her ph.d. from the university of minnesotastrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b113in 1974. she was appointed senior fellow at oxford university in 19911992 and a guest scholar at the woodrow wilson international center forscholars in 1994. she was previously the director of the division of socialand economic sciences at the nsf, the founder and first executive director ofthe consortium of social science associations, and president/ceo ofciesin prior to its joining columbia university. she has lectured widely,both in the united states and abroad. from 1992 to 1994, she was vicepresident of the international social science council and has also served aschair of the nrc steering committee on space applications and commercialization, the nato advisory panel on advanced scientific workshops/advanced research institutes, the aaas committee on science, engineering and public policy, and the advisory committee of the luxembourg income study. she currently serves on the board of directors of the opengisconsortium and the advisory board of the stellenbosch institute of advanced studies (south africa).ted bergstrom holds the raznick chair in economics at the university ofcalifornia, santa barbara (ucsb). a native of minnesota, he has an undergraduate degree in mathematics from carleton college, and a ph.d. ineconomics from stanford university. his first employment was in the economics department at washington university in st. louis, missouri. in1975 he moved to the university of michigan, where he was a professor ofeconomics until 1997, when he moved to ucsb. professor bergstromõsinterests within economics range widely over pure and applied microeconomic theory. topics which have been central to his recent research include biology and economics, theory of public economics, and the economics of scholarly information.dora ann lange canhos is the project director of the centro dereferencia em informacio ambiental (cria; reference center on environmental information, www.cria.org.br). she has been working with databases and online information systems since 1985. she has been involvedwith biodiversity information networks since 1992, as a member of bin21(biodiversity information networkñagenda 21) and responsible for itsweb site, and serving as technical coordinator of the project binbr(biodiversity information networkñbrazil) for the ministry of the environment from may 1997 to april 2001. she is also member of the clearinghouse mechanism informal advisory committee (http://www.biodiv.org/) and of the liaison working group of the biosafety clearingstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114appendix bhouse (http://bch.biodiv.org/), both of the convention on biological diversity. currently at cria, dr. canhos is a member of the developingteam of the specieslink network (http://splink.cria.org.br/).vishwas chavan works at the national chemical laboratory (ncl), pune,india, in the field of biodiversity informatics developing tools and standards to improve infrastructure and capacity building in collection, collation, analysis, prediction, and dissemination of knowledge. mr. chavanhas been using information and communication technologies to createcollaboratory environment, for biologists and ecologists ensuring that rateof exchange and sharing of information on biotic resources improves. onesignificant and impactmaking activity that vishwas is leading is development of the electronic catalogue of known indian fauna (indfauna),which aims to collates baseline information about 90,000 known faunalspecies in india. prior to joining ncl, vishwas was employed at the centre for cellular and molecular biology hyderabad facilitating the activitiesof the bioinformatics centre and preparing a master plan for bioinformaticsactivities. he has published more than 60 research and review papers, anddeveloped a dozen databases and program packages that have been employed in the service of the scientific community. vishwas received afulbright professional fellowship in information sciences & technology(20002001), during which he was closely associated with the u.s. national biological information infrastructure. he is also a member of thecodata preservation of and access to scientific and technical data indeveloping countries, and cochair of the information management committee of global invasive species program. vishwas received a b.s. in zoology from n. wadia college, after which he joined the school of environmental sciences, university of pune, and received an m.s. degree inenvironmental sciences in june 1990.jun chen is president of the national geomatics center of china(ngcc). after obtaining his m.sc. at wuhan technical university of surveying and mapping (wtusm) in 1983, he worked as a lecturer, associateprofessor, and professor at wtusm from 19831995. he was the executive director of the national laboratory for information engineering insurveying and mapping from 19901995. he joined ngcc in the end of1995. from 1999 to 2003, he was president of the chinese association forgeographical information systems, the corresponding member of the international eurasian academy of sciences.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b115panqin chen is deputy director of the bureau of resources and environmental sciences and technology at the chinese academy of sciences. he isvicechair of the science committee of the chinese ecosystem researchnetwork.robert chen is ciesinõs deputy director and a senior research scientist. he manages the socioeconomic data and applications center, a datacenter in nasaõs earth observing system data and information system.he is currently secretarygeneral of codata of the international council for science (icsu). he is an ex officio member on both the u.s. national committee for codata of the u.s. national research counciland the task group on data and scenario support for impacts and climate analysis of the intergovernmental panel on climate change (ipcc).dr. chen serves as ciesinõs technical representative to the opengeospatial consortium and participates in the u.s. federal geographicdata committee historical data committee. he is also a member of thescientific advisory council of the meadowlands environmental researchinstitute of the new jersey meadowlands commission. dr. chen has alsocoordinated ciesinõs spatial analysis and mapping support to the millennium development project led by ei director jeffrey sachs and overseesother projects on poverty mapping, sustainability indicators, and publichealth applications of earth science data. he received his ph.d. in geography from the university of north carolina at chapel hill and holds masters and bachelors degrees from the massachusetts institute of technology.jinpei cheng is vice minister of the ministry of science and technologyof china and vicechairman of the central committee of the china zhigong party. he attended nankai university and northwestern universityin the united states, where he obtained a doctorate. cheng previouslyserved as an academician at the chinese academy of sciences and the thirdworld academy of science. he serves as viceminister of the ministry ofscience and technology.michael t. clegg received his b.s. and ph.d. degrees in agricultural genetics and genetics, respectively, at the university of california, davis. in 1972he joined the faculty of brown university, moving from there to the university of georgia in 1976. in 1984, he assumed his present position asprofessor of genetics at the university of california, riverside. he also servedas dean of the college of natural and agricultural sciences from 1994 tostrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116appendix b2000 and he is founding director of the genomics institute and at the university of california, riverside. professor cleggõs research specialty is population genetics and molecular evolution. his early work in population geneticsfocused on the dynamical behavior of linked systems of genes in plant anddrosophila populations. during this period, he also contributed to the theoretical study of multilocus systems employing computer simulations togetherwith the analysis of mathematical models. later he helped pioneer the comparative analysis of cholorplast dna variation as a tool for the reconstructionof plant phylogenies. his current work is concerned with the comparativegenomics of plant gene families, the molecular evolution of genes in theflavonoid biosynthetic pathway, the use of coalescent models to study cropplant domestication, and the application of molecular markers to avocadoimprovement. professor clegg was elected to membership in the u.s. national academy of sciences in 1990 and he was elected a fellow of the american academy of arts and sciences in 1992. he was elected foreign secretaryof the u.s. national academy of sciences in 2002. he has also served aspresident of the american genetic association (1987) and the internationalsociety for molecular biology & evolution (2002), and chair of the sectionon agriculture, food and natural resources of the american association forthe advancement of science (2003).helen j. doyle is the director of development and strategic alliances forthe public library of science. as former director of the science program atthe david and lucile packard foundation, helen j. doyle developed andmanaged grantmaking programs in basic and interdisciplinary academicresearch, higher education and diversity, science and technology for international development, and science education. helen spent nearly ten yearsin new york city, where she majored in biochemistry at barnard collegeand received her ph.d. in biological sciences from columbia university forher work on drosophila developmental genetics. she then spent two yearsas a postdoctoral fellow at the max planck institute for developmentalbiology in tubingen, germany. returning to her native california, helencontinued her research on early development and cell communication withj. michael bishop at the university of california, san francisco (ucsf).while a postdoc at ucsf, helen developed a strong interest in public understanding of science and science education reform issues. she joineducsfõs science & health education partnership as an academic coordinator, working with san francisco public schools and the university to improve science, math, and health education. she has also taught at variousstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b117institutions, including uc berkeley, mills college, and the california academy of sciences.james edwards is the executive secretary of the global biodiversity information facility (gbif), an intergovernmental organization devoted to making biodiversity data freely and openly available via the internet. he is alsothe director of the gbif secretariat in copenhagen, denmark. he receivedhis b.s. (1967) and ph.d. (1976) degrees from the university of californiaat berkeley. his research interests are the systematics and functional morphology of amphibians and fishes, and biodiversity informatics. from 19741976, dr. edwards was an instructor in the biology department at queenscollege of the city university of new york, and from 19761982 he wasan assistant and associate professor in the zoology department at michigan state university. in 1982, he took a position in the directorate forbiological sciences at the nsf, which funds the vast majority of nonmedical biological research at u.s. colleges and universities. while at the nsf,he served successively as program director for several programs (systematicbiology, biological research resources, field stations and marine laboratories, and biotic surveys and inventories), as deputy division director forbiotic systems and resources, and as deputy assistant director for biological sciences. in the latter capacity, he was the secondincommand of ayearly budget of approximately $500 million. dr. edwards served on several federal task forces, and was the chair of an interagency steering committee on biological and ecological informatics. he also chaired a workinggroup on biological informatics of the megascience forum of theorganisation for economic cooperation and development, which in1999 recommended the formation of the gbif. dr. edwards then chairedthe interim steering committee that developed the memorandum of understanding for the organization and recruited the requisite number of governmental members and funding to allow it to come into existence in march2001. currently, he is on a fiveyear leave of absence from nsf in order toserve as the executive secretary of gbif.julie m. esanu is a program officer for the office of international scientific and technical information programs (istip) at the u.s. nationalacademies. her emphasis is policy and management issues related to digital scientific and technical data and information, primarily through thesupport of the u.s. national committee for codata. julie is the coeditor of two recent and related national academies reports, includingstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118appendix bopen access and the public domain in digital data for science: proceedingsof a symposium (national academies press [nap], forthcoming) and therole of scientific and technical data and information in the public domain:proceedings of a symposium (nap, 2003). she has provided program andresearch support to other national academiesõ projects examining the roleof remotesensing research and applications; reviewing c4i planning forthe department of defense; assessing the research programs at the armyresearch laboratory; and examining the allocation of federal research anddevelopment funds. julie received her b.a. in political science and international affairs from george washington university.zukang feng received a ph.d. in biophysics at shanghai institute of biochemistry, academia sinica, china, in 1991. in 1994, he was awarded thelise meitner postdoctoral research fellowship from the austrian sciencefoundation and completed postdoctoral research at the university ofsalzburg, austria. in 1996, dr. feng joined the nucleic acid database(ndb) project at the laboratory of professor helen berman of rutgersuniversity. in this position he developed the first package of programs thatvalidate nucleic acid structural data and automate data processing systems.in 1998 he joined the protein data bank (pdb) project. dr. feng is presently the leader of software development for both pdb and ndb projectsand is responsible for the curation and annotation of the data that arereceived and distributed worldwide.xiaofeng fu is professor and director of the information division of theadministrative center for chinaõs agenda 21, which is a part of the ministry of science and technology. he also serves as deputy team leader of thenational science data sharing project workshop, deputy director of thescience data sharing project office, and member of the codata preservation of and access to scientific and technical data in developing countries. dr. fu is also in charge of the construction and administration of thechina sustainable development information network. previously, dr. fuworked as assistant research fellow for the institute of geographic sciences & natural resources research of the chinese academy of sciences.he received a doctor of science from nanjing university in 1997 and alsoholds a postdoctorate degree.huadong guo is deputy secretarygeneral of the chinese academy ofsciences. he graduated from nanjing university in 1977, received astrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b119masterõs degree from the graduate school of the chinese academy of sciences in 1981, and studied at oregon state university from 1984 to 1985.guo spent his formative research years with the institute of remote sensing application at the chinese academy of sciences. he served as a research fellow at the institute as well as an executive deputy director. in1988, he ascended to the instituteõs directorship. guo later became directorof the key lab of remotesensing information science at the academy. amember of the national 863 program information acquisition and processtechnology theme expert team, guo has served as executive deputy editorinchief of the remote sensing journal and is a member of the editorialboard of six chinese and foreign magazines. he is the directorgeneral ofthe environment remotesensing division of the china geography society.beginning in the late 1970s, guo has studied remotesensing informationscience, notably radartoground observations. he has supervised more than20 domestic and international research projects and published more than140 theses. guo is the winner of numerous first, second, and third prizes ofscientific and technological progress from the academy as well as a prominent contribution prize about the national 863 program.jianguo han is director of the international cooperation bureau of thenational natural science foundation of china.qiheng hu graduated from the moscow institute for chemistry mechanics with a specialization in industrial automation in 1959 and obtained aph.d. in 1963. from 1980 to 1982, she visited case western reserve university of the united states as a research professor. from 1983 to 1989 shewas director of the institute of automation in the chinese academy ofsciences; in 1986 she led the construction of the 1st national laboratoryon pattern recognition in china. from 1988 to 1996 she served as vicepresident of the chinese academy of sciences. she is a past president of thechina computer federation and the china association for automation.she was elected member of the chinese academy of engineering in 1994.she currently serves as vicepresident of the china association for scienceand technology, president of the internet society of china, and a memberof the working group for ethics in research training of unesco. she isenthusiastic in promoting international exchanges and collaborations forthe chinese scientific community. since 1994 she has devoted great effortsfor the introduction and development of the internet into china. she is astrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120appendix bmember of the state advisory committee on information, and has beenactive in icsu activities on the ethics for science from 1996 to 2002.dingcheng huang is a professor of the chinese academy of sciences,president of the china engineering geology commission, and director ofthe expert committee of the china scientific data sharing program.funan huang graduated from the first military medical university in1990 with a major in medicine, and obtained his doctorõs degree fromchinese pla general hospital and graduate medical school in 1998 witha specialization in geriatric neurology and neurobiology. from 2000 to2003, he worked at the parkinson research unit in thomas jefferson university, philadelphia. dr. huangõs main clinic and research work was in thefields of clinic neurodiagnostics and neurodegenerative diseases and cerebral vascular diseases. dr. huang has published 20 papers in nationwideand international academic journals.tieqing huang works in the department of natural resources and environment management of the chinese academy of sciences.shuichi iwata is professor of data science and environmental engineeringat the university of tokyo and president of codata, a term he holdsuntil 2006. dr. iwata received his doctorate in nuclear engineering fromthe university of tokyo in 1975. he has served in various capacities at theuniversity of tokyo, including lecturer, associate professor, and head of themetallurgical division (19781981) of the engineering research institute;associate professor of nuclear fuels and materials (19811991); professor ofmaterials design (19911992), department of nuclear engineering; professor of design science (19922002), director (19972000), and professorof life cycle engineering (20022003) at the race (research into artifacts,center for engineering) center; and professor of design science of materials (20032004), quantum engineering and systems science, school ofengineering. he served as a guest researcher in fizkarlsruhe, germany,from october 1985 to october 1986. his work includes researches ondesign science of materials and engineering products, nuclear fuels andmaterials and materials databases. he has also served as project leader andcoordinator in the fields of materials databases and materials design. dr.iwata serves as chairman of jsps 122 committee and member of scj liaison committee. he is a member of the academic societies for the japanstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b121institute of metals, the iron and steel institute of japan, japan society ofenergy and resources, the physical society of japan, information processing society of japan, and the atomic energy society of japan. he receivedthe promotion of science and technology information award from jst in1998, a paper award from the japan institute of metals in 1999, and thegiw best paper award in 2003.heather joseph is president and chief operating officer of bioone, awebbased aggregation of research in the biological, ecological, and environmental sciences. in this position, ms. joseph leads the nonprofit startup enterpriseõs business, operational, administrative, and strategic development. ms. joseph has worked on a variety of innovative electronicpublishing projects during the past decade. as director of publishing forthe american society for cell biology (ascb), she managed the growth ofmolecular biology of the cell, the first journal to partner with the nationalinstitutes of healthõs pubmed central initiative. she also created a systemto peer review and publish multimedia content in the journal. beforeascb, joseph held publishing positions with the society for neuroscience,where she managed the transition of the journal of neuroscience from printto web publication, and at elsevier science. she began her work in scientific publishing at the american astronomical society, where she collaborated in the creation of one of the first fully electronic journals, the electronic astrophysical journal letters, with funding from the nsf. ms. josephalso participates in several professional societies, currently serving as a member of the board of directors for the society for scholarly publishing, andas a member of the program committee for the upcoming meeting of thecouncil of science editors.menas kafatos is dean of the school of computational sciences at georgemason university. the school is an interdisciplinary academic unit thatprovides graduate, stateoftheart education and training in the biologicaland physical sciences, with an emphasis on the computational and dataanalysis techniques and methodologies. he also directs the center for earthobserving and space research, a center that focuses on both earth andspace sciences research and applications. kafatos has broad interests in astrophysics, cosmology, earth systems science, data systems, foundations ofquantum theory, and neuroscience. author or editor of 12 books, and morethan 180 articles, he is the recipient of sizable grants in a variety of areas.he is the principal investigator of the vaccess/midatlantic geospatial instrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122appendix bformation consortium funded by nasa, which provides access to remotesensing and other data and information products to a variety of state andlocal agencies.jun li works for the academy of macroeconomic research of the chinesenational development and reform commission, spending most of histime working for the office for national geospatial information coordination committee, which focuses on an egovernment basin database fornatural resources and geospatial basic information database. li previouslyworked for the resources and environment data center that is housed in theinstitute of geographic sciences and natural resources research of thechinese academy of sciences. from 1998 to 2000, he designed and builtthe geographical information system for landslide research for landsliderisk assessment and landslide information exchange. he received his ph.d.in cartography and geographical information sciences from the institute ofgeography of the chinese academy of sciences.shunbao liao is an associate professor in the global change informationand research center of the institute of geographic sciences and naturalresources research of the chinese academy of sciences. dr. liao has aph.d. in the application of remote sensing and gis. dr. liaoõs interestsinclude the analysis and design of information systems and the development and sharing of geoscientific data.anne m. linn is a senior program officer with the board on earth sciencesand resources of the national academies. she has been with the boardsince 1993, directing the usa world data center coordination officeand staffing a wide variety of geophysical and data policy studies. in addition, she is the secretary of icsuõs panel on world data centers, and amember of the icsu ad hoc committee on data. prior to joining thestaff of the national academies, dr. linn was a visiting scientist at thecarnegie institution of washington and a postdoctoral geochemist at theuniversity of california, berkeley. she received a ph.d. in geology fromthe university of california, los angeles.chuang liu is professor and director of the global change informationand research center in the institute of geography and natural resourcesat the chinese academy of sciences. she currently serves on the chinesecodata as cochair of the task group on preservation of and access tostrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b123scientific and technical data in developing countries and committee ofearth observation satellites (ceos) as the user cochair of the workinggroup of information systems and services. she is chair of the spatialdata committee of chinese associate of geographical information systems and secretariat general of the working group of remote sensingand data information systems, china national committee for igbp. dr.liu is active in research on the broad issues regarding strategy, technology,and capacity building of open access to environmental data. she is chair ofthe expert group on international cooperation for the national facilitiesand information infrastructure for science and technology program, member of the working group of china scientific data sharing program, andicsu priority area assessment panel on scientific data and information.dr. liu received her ph.d. in geography from peking university in 1989.she was visiting professor at the university of british columbia, canada,from 19921993, postdoctor fellow and then information scientist, aswell as the china project leader in ciesin, usa from 19941998. shealso served undp/fao and asia development bank as the gis consultant and technical assistant.depei liu is vice president of the chinese academy of engineering, president of the chinese academy of medical sciences, and president of thepeking union medical college. dr. liu holds a ph.d. in molecular biologyand has studied at the institute of basic medical sciences of the chineseacademy of medical sciences, the peking union medical college, and theuniversity of california, san francisco. dr. liuõs research interests includemedical molecular biology; gene regulation of expression, gene transfer,and gene therapy; and transgenic animals and disease models. dr. liu haspublished more than 100 academic papers. dr. liu is a member of thechinese society of biochemistry and molecular biology, the american society of hematology, the society of chinese bioscientists in america, thechinese academy of engineering, and the chinese medical association.lulama makhubela has more than 20 years of professional activism as exprofessor in information science in various universities, including the university of the western cape, south africa. she has consulted in library andinformation services with a specific focus on collection development policies, information literacy and icts in teaching. she served as a board member in several national bodies and is currently a member of national committees in research and development, information, and datarelated matters.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124appendix bdr. makhubela is currently head of the research and development directorate at the national development agency (nda) a position that shetook in october 2003. nda is an agency of the south african government tasked with eradicating poverty in poor communities. she is taskedwith a challenge of developing the south african poverty data center. dr.makhubela is a member of the codata preservation of and access toscientific and technical data in developing countries.raymond a. mccord is an environmental information manager in theenvironmental sciences division at oak ridge national laboratory(ornl). dr. mccord has been a staff member at ornl for 18 years.during this time, he managed the development and operation of threemajor environmental information systems supporting environmental research, restoration, compliance, and assessment. dr. mccord was also responsible for establishing a geographic information system (gis) centerwithin the division. currently, dr. mccord is manager of the data archivefor the atmospheric radiation measurements (arm) program. thisarchive contains more than 6,000,000 data files (~30 tb of storage) ofinformation about meteorology, atmospheric physics, and cloud formation.the arm program is a major component of the department of energyõsglobal climate change research program. prior to working at ornl, dr.mccord was employed as an information analyst at scinece applicationsinternational corporation (saic) in oak ridge. dr. mccord received hisph.d. in ecology from the university of tennessee in 1980.dahe qin is an internationally recognized scientist in glacier (includingantarctic ice sheet) and ice core studies relating to paleoclimate andpaleoenvironment. he has committed himself to cryosphere and climatechange research since 1970 and has done field work in antarctica and tibet. he presently focuses on environmental and climatic variation; climaticand environmental evaluation; and glacier change relating to global change.previously, he served as chief scientist of the projects supported by the chinese national natural sciences foundation, the basic research project ofthe ministry of science and technology, and the key innovation projectsof the chinese academy of sciences, as well as of related bilateral cooperation programs between china and the united states, australia, and france.he also oversees the scientific assessment on climate, ecology and environment of western china. he was voted academician of the chineseacademy of sciences in 2003 for his research on the cryosphere. dr. qin isstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b125currently the administrator of the china meteorological administration aswell as director of the china national climate committee, permanentrepresentative of china with wmo, cochair of the working group i ofipcc, and vicechair of the china national committee of igbp andinternational commission of science and snow and ice.jerome reichman is bunyan s. womble professor of law at duke lawschool. he has written and lectured widely on diverse aspects of intellectual property law, including comparative and international intellectualproperty law and the connections between intellectual property and international trade law. his articles in this area have particularly addressed theproblems that developing countries face in implementing the world tradeorganizationõs agreement on traderelated aspects of intellectual property rights (trips agreement). other recent writings have focused onintellectual property rights in data; the appropriate contractual regime foronline delivery of computer programs and other information goods; andon the use of liability rules to stimulate investment in innovation withoutimpoverishing the public domain. his most recent articles are òthe globalization of private knowledge goods and the privatization of global public goodsó (coauthored with keith maskus), 7 journal of internationaleconomic law no. 2 (forthcoming, 2004), and òa contractually reconstructed research commons for scientific data in a highly protectionistintellectual property environmentó (coauthored with paul uhlir), 66 lawand contemporary problems 315462 (2003). professor reichman serves asspecial advisor to the u.s. national academy of sciences, the nationalacademy of engineering, and icsu on the subject of legal protection fordatabases. he is an academic advisor to the american committee forinteroperable systems (acis); a consultant to the technology program ofthe united nations conference on trade and development (unctad);and a member of the board of editors, journal of international economiclaw.paul g. richards was born in the united kingdom and obtained abachelorõs degree in mathematics at the university of cambridge beforecoming to the united states in 1965, where he obtained his ph.d. in seismology at the california institute of technology. richards has been a professor at columbia university since 1971, teaching and doing research inall aspects of seismology. he has coauthored a major seismology textbook(translated into chinese), and for the last five years has specialized in pracstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126appendix btical methods to obtain accurate locations for the thousands of earthquakesthat occur each year in east asia. he has received fellowships from thesloan, guggenheim, and macarthur foundations, and is a member of thecouncil on foreign relations.steve rossouw graduated from the universities of pretoria, cape town,and stellenbosch with a dphil in information science. professor rossouwwas the executive director of the information center, medical researchcouncil from 19751992. he is presently a professor of information studies at cape technikon, a position he has held since 1992.peter schrıder studied sociology (mental health and epidemiology as minors) at the university of amsterdam. he worked as a journalist and rockcritic before joining the ministry of education and science as policy advisor for educational support systems. after a stay at utrecht university managing the multidisciplinary urban networks research program, he rejoinedthe ministryõs directorate of research and science policy as policy advisoron social sciences and information policies. focusing on issues of access todata and information for research he acted as secretary of the auditorgeneralõs committee advising on privacy protection in scientific researchthat led to the establishment of the scientific statistical agency in thenetherlands. as coordinator for information policy he is involved in escience programs for cultural heritage and humanities. peter schrıder wascochair of the cstp/oecd group that published the report promotingaccess to public research data for scientific, economic and social development (march 2003, see http://dataaccess.ucsd.edu and see also science, vol.303, 17771778, 19 march 2004) and secretary to the oecd group thatframed the draft guidelines on access to research data from public fundingin the declaration endorsed by oecd science ministers at their meetingon 30 january 2004 in paris (see http://www.oecd.org/document/15/0,2340,en264934487259987991111,00.html ).belinda seto joined the national institute of biomedical imaging andbioengineering (nibib) as its deputy director in december 2003. thenibib, a component of the national institutes of health (nih), improveshuman health by leading the development and accelerating the applicationof biomedical technologies. the institute is committed to integrating thephysical and engineering sciences with the life sciences to advance basicresearch and medical care. in her position, dr. seto oversees nibibõs prostrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b127grams, priorities, resources, policies, and research dissemination efforts.prior to joining the nibib, dr. seto served as the acting deputy directorfor extramural research, nih, as well as the director of the office of extramural research (oer). oer serves as the focal point for policies andguidelines for extramural research grants administration. prior to joiningoer, dr. seto held positions in other components of the nih, as well asin the office of the assistant secretary for health, department of healthand human services (dhhs). she earned her ph.d. in biochemistry atpurdue university in 1974. following postdoctoral training in the nationalheart, lung and blood institute, dr. seto joined the food and drug administration where she conducted research in virology for nearly 10 years.she is the recipient of numerous awards for her research, including thedhhs secretaryõs award for exceptional achievement, inventorõs awards,nih directorõs awards, and she is listed in the american men and womenof science. dr. seto has served on numerous nih and interagency committees, and is a member of several professional societies including theamerican society for biochemistry and molecular biology.pippa smart has worked in academic publishing for over 17 years in boththe commercial and noncommercial sectors. she has experience in printand electronic production, business and publishing development, and, inher current role for inasp, works in an advisory role with publishers in lessdeveloped countries. she is also the chair of the professional developmentcommittee of the association of learned, professional and society publishers, and sits on its council.carthage smith is deputy executive director of icsu, which is an international nongovernmental organization, whose membership includes national science bodies and international scientific unions. icsuõs mission isto strengthen international science for the benefit of society. it achieves thisby: (1) planning and coordinating international science programs and (2)representing the science community in international policy fora. carthagehas been at icsu since 2001 and his activities have included leading icsuõsrepresentation at the world summit on the information society (geneva,december 2003). prior to joining icsu, he was head of the internationalsection at the medical research council in the united kingdom. originally trained as a biochemist, his ph.d. and research background are inneuroscience.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128appendix bkhudulmur sodov is the director of the information and computer center and director of the national remote sensing center of the ministry ofnature and environment in mongolia. khudulmurõs educational background is mathematics and computer science. he has participated in avariety of projects on such topics as mongolian biodiversity, natural resource management using gis, landcover mapping, grasslands, and gisin cadastral mapping.chengquan sun is director of the scientific information center for resources and the environment of the chinese academy of sciences. he isalso a professor in the department of geography at unibonn as well as aprofessor at lanzhou university. dr. sun is engaged in the analysis andmanagement of information.xiaowei tang is a professor at zhejiang university. his research interestsinclude nuclear and highenergy experiments, the application of nucleustechnology, and neuroinformatics. tang is a member of the chinese academy of sciences.yiyuan tang is a professor and director of the institute of neuroinformaticsand director of the laboratory for brain and mind at the dalian university of technology. tang also serves as the government representative of theoecdgsfni working group, associate director of the national communication group of neuroinformatics, guest professor in the laboratoryfor mental health of the chinese academy of sciences, and senior visitingprofessor at the institute of psychology & institute of biophysics. his research interests include neuroimaging, chinese cognition, psychosomaticmedicine, and bodymind interaction. he has published in the journal ofintegrative neuroscience, neuroinformatics, neuroimage, neurocomputing,human brain mapping, the chinese science bulletin, and the chinese medical journal.paul f. uhlir, j.d., is director of the istip office at the u.s. nationalacademies in washington, d.c., where he has worked in various seniorprofessional capacities since 1984. paulõs area of emphasis is on issues at theinterface of science, technology, and law, with primary focus on digitalinformation policy and management. he is currently organizing a series ofprojects on policy issues concerning open access to public scientific information at both the national and international levels, as well as a series ofstrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b129workshops on data management and policy issues in developing countries.he also has been the national academiesõ coordinator on intellectual propertyrelated activities. paul has published 23 reports through the nationalacademies, and over 50 articles. prior to joining the national academies,he worked as a foreign affairs officer at the u.s. national oceanic andatmospheric administration on international remotesensing law andpolicy issues. additional information about paulõs activities may be foundat: http://www7.nationalacademies.org/biso/istip.html.henda van der berg is with the national research foundation in southafrica where she is responsible for the content resources function (information and data) within the information strategy and advice unit. shequalified with honours in library and information science in 1976 from theuniversity of south africa. she has extensive experience in metadata descriptions and international standards from 1971 until 1991. from 1993,ms. van der berg worked in the field of database management and databasedevelopment. she is a developer of the nexus database system portal anddatabases. she is a member of the steering committee for the south african data centre for oceanography and of an expert advisory group thatserved as a reference group for the institutional research informationsystem tasked with the data specification project of the southern africanresearch & innovation management association. her professional memberships include the library and information association for south africaand sa online user group. ms. van der berg has published a number ofpublications in the field of current research information systems, especiallythe analysis of data for the evaluation of user interfaces.peter n. weiss began work with the strategic planning and policy officeof the national oceanographic and atmospheric administration, nationalweather service, in march 2000. his responsibilities include domestic andinternational data policy issues, with a view towards fostering a healthypublic/private partnership. mr. weiss was a senior policy analyst/attorneyin the office of information and regulatory affairs, office of management and budget (omb), since 1991. mr. weiss analyzed policy and legalissues involving information resources and information technology management, with particular emphasis on electronic data interchange and electronic commerce. he is primary author of the information policy sectionsof omb circular no. a130, òmanagement of federal information resources,ó and was a member of the administrationõs electronic commercestrategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130appendix bworking group. (see òa framework for global electronic commerce.ó)from 19901991, mr. weiss was deputy associate administrator for procurement law, office federal procurement policy. in this position, he analyzed legal and policy issues affecting the procurement process. majorprojects included examination of legal and regulatory issues involving procurement automation, policies and far revisions to facilitate edi, as wellas adp procurement legal and policy issues. from 1985 to 1990, mr. weisswas the assistant chief counsel for procurement and regulatory policy, office of advocacy, u.s. small business administration. from 1981 to 1985,mr. weiss was in private practice in washington, d.c. mr. weiss holds ab.a. from columbia university and a j.d. from the catholic university ofamerica, columbus school of law. recent publications include òinternational information policy in conflict: open and unrestricted access versusgovernment commercialization,ó in borders in cyberspace, kahin andnesson, eds., mit press 1997; òborders in cyberspace: conflicting publicsector information policies and their economic impacts,ó in georgaichholzer/herbert burkert (eds.); and òpublic sector information in thedigital age: between markets, public management and citizensõ rights,ócheltenham: edward elgar publishing (2004).raymond j. willemann is a senior technical advisor for gem technologyin washington, d.c. from 1998 to 2003, dr. willemann was director ofthe international seismological centre (isc), a nongovernmental organization that collects, reanalyzes, and redistributes parametric informationon earthquakes from more than 100 seismic networks around the world. atthe isc, dr. willemann led a modernization effort that greatly increasedthe volume of data collected, improved the timeliness of data distribution,and offered new avenues for accessing data. before joining the isc, he wasa senior scientist with saic, where he played a key role at the internationaldata center for gsett3, an experiment in nearrealtime internationalexchange of seismic data. dr. willemann is a member of the internationalassociation for seismoloyg and the physics of the earthõs interior (iaspei)commission on seismic observation and interpretation and the iaspeiresolutions committee, which formulated a resolution on sharing information on seismic station locations in 2003. he earned his ph.d. in geophysics from cornell university in 1986. he is a fellow of the royal astronomical society and a member of the american geophysical union andthe seismological society of america.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b131john willinsky is currently the pacific press professor of literacy and technology and distinguished university scholar in the department of language and literacy education at the university of british columbia (ubc).he is a fellow of the royal society of canada and a member of the u.s.national academy of education, as well as author of a number of books,including technologies of knowing and if only we knew: increasing the public value of social science research. examples of his recent work, includingopensource software developed to improve the access and quality of research, are available at the public knowledge project (http://pkp.ubc.ca),which he directs at ubc.strategies for preservation of and open access to scientific data in china: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.