detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11738improving business statistics through interagency datasharing: summary of a workshop156 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309382427 | doi 10.17226/11738caryn kuebler and christopher mackie, rapporteurs; steering committee for theworkshop on the benefits of interagency business data sharing; committee onnational statistics; division of behavioral and social sciences and education;national research councilimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.caryn kuebler and christopher mackie, rapporteurssteering committee for the workshop on the benefits ofinteragency business data sharingcommittee on national statisticsdivision of behavioral and social sciences and educationimproving business statistics through interagency data sharingsummary of a workshopimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, nw washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn fromthe councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsiblefor the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study is supported by a contract between the national academy of sciencesand the national science foundation (number sbr0112521). the work of thecommittee on national statistics is also provided by a consortium of federal agencies through the same grant from the national science foundation. any opinions,findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are thoseof the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations oragencies that provided support for the project.library of congress cataloginginpublication dataimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing : summary of aworkshop / caryn kuebler and christopher mackie, rapporteurs. p. cm. includes bibliographical references. isbn 0309102618 (pbk.) ñ isbn 0309662826 (pdfs) 1. united statesñstatistical servicesñcongresses. 2. united statesñcommerceñstatisticsñcongresses. 3. commercial statisticsñunited statesñcongresses. i. kuebler,caryn. ii. mackie, christopher d. iii. national research council (u.s.).committee on national statistics.ha37.u55i47 2006650.072õ7ñdc22 2006023359international standard book number139780309102612additional copies of this report are available from the national academies press,500 fifth street, nw, lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202)3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area); internet, http://www.nap.eduprinted in the united states of americacopyright 2006 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.suggested citation: national research council. (2006). improving business statisticsthrough interagency data sharing: summary of a workshop. caryn kuebler and christopher mackie, rapporteurs. steering committee for the workshop on the benefits of interagency business data sharing. committee on national statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: thenational academies press.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprofit, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the generalwelfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863,the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government onscientific and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the nationalacademy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charterof the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstandingengineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsorsengineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education andresearch, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. wm. a. wulfis president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy ofsciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions inthe examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by itscongressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon itsown initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr.harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology withthe academyõs purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the nationalacademy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute ofmedicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. wm. a. wulf are chair and vice chair,respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.steering committee for the workshop on thebenefits of interagency business data sharingcharles l. schultze (chair), the brookings institution,washington, dcdaniel r. feenberg, national bureau of economic research,cambridge, majohn haltiwanger, department of economics, university ofmarylandralph a. rector, the heritage foundation, washington, dcchristopher mackie, study directorcaryn kuebler, research associatemichael siri, senior program assistantvimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on national statistics20052006william f. eddy (chair), department of statistics, carnegie mellonuniversitykatharine abraham, department of economics, university ofmaryland, and joint program in survey methodologyrobert bell, at&t research laboratories, florham park, njrobert m. groves, survey research center, institute for socialresearch, university of michigan, and joint program in surveymethodologyjohn haltiwanger, department of economics, university ofmarylandpaul w. holland, educational testing service, princeton, njjoel l. horowitz, department of economics, northwesternuniversitydouglas massey, department of sociology, princeton universityvijay nair, department of statistics and department of industrial andoperations engineering, university of michigandaryl pregibon, google, inc., new yorksamuel h. preston, department of sociology, university ofpennsylvaniakenneth prewitt, school of international and public affairs,columbia universitylouise ryan, department of biostatistics, harvard universitynora cate schaeffer, department of sociology, university ofwisconsinmadisonconstance f. citro, directorviimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the workshop summarized in this report was convened by the committee on national statistics (cnstat) on behalf of the bureau of economic analysis (bea) to discuss interagency business data sharing. recent legislation, particularly the 2002 confidential information protectionand statistical efficiency act (cipsea), has created new opportunities forsharing among bea, the census bureau, and the bureau of labor statistics (bls) and has also stirred debate on data sharing, access, and confidentiality issues. the purpose of this workshop was to present strategiesfor enhancing the ability of statistical agencies to efficiently share administrative and statistical data on businesses, while still protecting respondent confidentiality. more effective interagency data sharing is essential ifthe statistical agencies are to have access to the most accurate informationavailable and, in turn, continue to improve the quality of data and statistics in a costeffective and minimally burdensome manner.the workshop focused on the benefits of data sharing to two groupsof stakeholdersñthe statistical agencies themselves and downstream datausers, such as researchers and policy makers. presenters represented fourkey agencies involved in business data sharingñbea, the census bureau,bls, and the internal revenue service (irs)ñas well as the federal reserve board, the congressional budget office, and academia. this reportprovides a summary of the presentations and the discussions that tookplace. the workshop was not designed to produce recommendations;however, participants persuasively presented arguments in favor of expanding data sharingñemphasizing increased efficiency, reduced respondent burden, and more accurate information for policy makersñand sugprefaceviiimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiiprefacegestions on ways to work within (and to change, if necessary) currentcodes and regulation to make it happen. workshop presenters and participants also recognized the importance of maintaining high standardsfor protecting data confidentiality. steven landefeld, director of bea, suggested implementing incremental changes to datasharing arrangements,including streamlining administrative procedures under cipsea; expediting access to research data centers; and modifying irs procedures,through legislative or regulatory changes, to promote effective use of administrative data for statistical uses.on behalf of cnstat, i thank all of the workshop participants, particularly those who prepared detailed presentations, which provided forengaging and productive discussion. we also thank the workshop participants for their insightful comments and fruitful exchange of ideas, as wellas for their input as staff drafted this report. we especially thank members of the workshop steering committeeñdaniel feenberg of the national bureau of economic research, john haltiwanger of the universityof maryland, and ralph rector of the heritage foundationñfor theirhelpful guidance and leadership in planning and moderating the workshop. robert parker provided important consultation to the staff and thecommittee. we thank him, along with dennis fixler, steven landefeld,nick greenia, mark mazur, and george plesko, for contributing important background papers for the workshop and this volume.we are grateful for beaõs sponsorship of the workshop and thanksteven landefeld and dennis fixler, in particular, for offering guidanceto staff and the workshop steering committee in development of theagenda and in identifying the workshop goals. we would also like tothank the kauffman foundation, which is sponsoring a cnstat studyon improving business data and statistics, whose members provided additional guidance for the development of the workshop program.christopher mackie, the staff study director for the workshop, was instrumental in every aspect of the workshop process. he stewarded theplanning of the workshop, worked closely with the steering committeeand participants, and, in collaboration with caryn kuebler, research associate, prepared and revised the report on the basis of comments fromreviewers and workshop participants. we thank michael siri for expertlymanaging all the administrative details and workshop arrangements andfor his work on the report itself. christine mcshaneõs technical editingsubstantially improved the reportõs readability. connie citro, director ofcnstat, provided guidance and support throughout the project. kirstensampson snyder guided this report through the review process.this report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen fortheir diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the report review committee of the national reimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.prefaceixsearch council. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that assist the institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meetsinstitutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to thestudy charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their participation inthe review of this report: katharine g. abraham, joint program in surveymethodology, university of maryland; daniel r. feenberg, informationand research systems, national bureau of economic research, cambridge, ma; and sanders korenman, school of public affairs, baruch college of the city university of new york.the review of this report was overseen by julia lane, national opinion research center and the university of chicago. although the individuals listed above have provided constructive comments and suggestions, responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely withthe national academies.charles schultze, chairsteering committee for the workshop on thebenefits of interagency business data sharingimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part iworkshop summary1introduction32the benefits of data sharing to the statistical agencies133research and policy perspectives on the benefits of businessdata sharing274key points from the presentations: directions for the future39references43appendixesaworkshop agenda and attendees45brecent legislation governing data sharing andaccess to federal tax data50contentsxiimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part iibackground papers5datasharing history and legislation: background notes55robert p. parker6irs data, data users, and data sharing79nick greenia and mark mazur7the importance of data sharing to consistent macroeconomicstatistics91dennis fixler and j. steven landefeld8using tax return data to improve estimates ofcorporate profits133george a. pleskoxiicontentsimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part iworkshop summaryimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.31introductionbackgroundu.s. business data are used broadly, providing the building blocks forkey nationalñas well as regional and localñstatistics measuring aggregate income and output, employment, investment, prices, and productivity. beyond aggregate statistics, individual and firmlevel data are usedfor a wide range of microanalyses by academic researchers and by policymakers. in the united states, data collection and production efforts areconducted by a decentralized system of statistical agencies.1 this apparatus yields an extensive array of data that, particularly when made available in the form of microdata, provides an unparalleled resource for policyanalysis and research on social issues and for the production of economicstatistics. however, the decentralized nature of the statistical system alsocreates challenges to efficient data collection, to containment of respondent burden, and to maintaining consistency of terms and units of measurement. it is these challenges that raise to paramount importance thepractice of effective data sharing among the statistical agencies.during the workshopõs introductory session, steven landefeldñdirector of the bureau of economic analysis (bea), the workshopõs sponsoring agencyñprovided an overview of the goals motivating the event.he reflected on issues that arise in a decentralized statistical system, noting that its data products excel in detail, timeliness, and relevance but1see norwood (1995) for an account of this historical development.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4improving business statistics through interagency data sharingoften lag behind in consistency. these inconsistencies create problemsfor bea in producing the national income and product accounts, as theymust draw from numerous data sources and make adjustments for differences in collection timing, as well as in concepts and definitions. thequality of data produced by the statistical agencies, in turn, affects thework of users, including other agencies, such as those responsible forbudget projections and planning, the allocation of funds, and state andlocal decision making. landefeld pointed out that, while data sharinghas already improved and facilitated the work of bea, current arrangements are limited in key ways. for example, the codes and regulations ofthe internal revenue service (irs) allow the census bureau to share dataon large multiestablishment businesses but, for reasons discussed below,not on smaller and singleestablishment businesses, which account forabout 40 percent of receipts nationwide. as a result, critical data omissions persist as bea and the bureau of labor statistics (bls) go about thebusiness of producing statistical information on various dimensions ofthe u.s. economy.the stated purpose of the workshop, described in this summary report, was to present ideas for easing constraints limiting the ability ofstatistical agencies to efficiently share administrative and statistical dataon businesses. in order to produce the highest quality data sets and statistics at the lowest possible costñand with minimal respondent burdenñstatistical agencies must be able to access the best information available,systemwide.with this as the backdrop, bea asked the committee on nationalstatistics of the national academies to convene a workshop to discussinteragency business data sharing. the workshop was held october 21,2005. recent legislation, most notably the 2002 confidential informationprotection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea), has served to revivedebate on datasharing, access, and confidentiality issues. although u.s.statistical agencies have a long history of data sharing and of efforts toimprove those arrangements, cipsea has created new opportunities toexpand interagency sharing of business data among bea, the census bureau, and bls.2the cipsea legislation embodies two core goals: to establish uniformcrossagency confidentiality protections and to promote efficiency in theproduction of the nationõs statistics by authorizing limited sharing of busi2chapter 5 provides a detailed description of the history of data sharing and datasharinglegislation. in addition, appendix b provides brief summaries of relevant datasharinglegislation.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction5ness data for statistical purposes. the objectives behind the datasharingcomponent of the legislation are threefold. first, it was hoped that permitting the three agencies to share information would improve the comparability and accuracy of federal statistics by allowing more timely updatingof sample frames, development of consistent classifications of establishments and industries, and exploitation of administrative data. second,more integrated use of data should reduce the paperwork burden for surveyed businesses. finally, through these mechanisms, it was hoped thatthe sharing of data would lead to improved understanding of the u.s.economy, especially for key industry and regional statistics.one example of cipseaõs potential is reflected in the recently authorized ability of the census bureau and bea to link survey data to produce new statistics on domestic and international u.s. research and development activity. as katherine wallman, the chief statistician of theoffice of management and budget (omb), pointed out, input from thecensus bureau, bea, and bls is essential if cipsea implementation andguidance are to successfully build on experiences from earlier data sharing to make future arrangements more effective. wallman noted that atleast some additional access to tax information will be needed in order torealize the full benefit of the umbrella legislation for data sharing amongthe three statistical agencies.tax data have always been an essential, but highly restricted, sourceof information for measuring aspects of the economy in general and forconstruction of the national income and product accounts in particular.since long before cipsea, bea has been able to utilize, in a limited manner, valuable business tax and revenue data from the irs. for example,provisions in section 6103 of the irs code authorize bea to access corporate income tax return information so that published irs corporate profitsdata can be converted to accounting concepts appropriate for use in measuring gross domestic product. for its regional economic accounts program, bea has been authorized under other provisions of section 6103 toreview individual tax return records in order to produce tabulations ofnonfarm proprietorsõ income (which are reviewed by the irs to ensuretaxpayer confidentiality); these estimates are used, in turn, to distributebeaõs national totals by state and county.3the above uses notwithstanding, bea access to federal tax information is still extremely limited relative to that afforded to the census bureau. the current tax code allows the irs to supply enough information(e.g., names and addresses) from businessesõ tax returns so that the cen3for more examples of data sharing, see chapter 5.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6improving business statistics through interagency data sharingsus bureau can construct its business register and sampling frames; however, òcommingledó census bureauirs data cannot be shared with either bea or bls. because of the lack of specific legislative authority, title13 and irs code (title 26) guidelines vary with regard to whether or notthe data collected by the census bureau directly from taxpayers (usingthe irsbased sampling frame) are fully under their authority or whetherthe irs should maintain some control. tax data issues received considerable attention at the workshop and are reported on more fully below.before moving on to describe the workshop proceedings, it is usefulto clarify a few terms that are used throughout this summary:4¥data sharing is the exchange of information collected from businesses and individuals or reported to the irs in identifiable form for statistical purposes.¥business data include operating, financial, and related informationabout businesses, tax exempt organizations, and government entities(cipsea).¥identifiable form means information that permits the identity of therespondent to whom the information applies to be reasonably inferred byeither direct or indirect means.¥statistical purposes involve the description, estimation, or analysisof the characteristics of groups, without identifying the individuals or organizations that comprise such groups. the designation also includesmethods and procedures related to the collection, compilation, processing, or analysis of data about these groups and the development of relatedmeasurement methods, models, statistical classifications, or samplingframes.box 11 lists acronyms and abbreviations related to interagency business data sharing.workshop contentthe workshop focused on the benefits of data sharing to two groupsof stakeholders: the statistical agencies themselves and downstream datausers. presenters were asked to highlight untapped opportunities for productive data sharing that cannot yet be exploited because of regulatoryor legislative constraints. the most prominently discussed example wasthat of tax data needed to reconcile the two primary business lists used4these definitions are expanded upon in chapter 5.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction7box 11abbreviations and acronyms related tointeragency business data sharingbeabureau of economic analysisblsbureau of labor statisticsbrbusiness registercbocongressional budget officecbpcounty business patternscescurrent employment statisticscipseaconfidential information protection and statisticalefficiency act (2002)coscompany organization surveycpscurrent population surveyeinemployer identification numberfasbfinancial accounting standards boardfrbfederal reserve boardftifederal tax informationgaapgenerally accepted accounting principlesgaogovernment accountability officegdigross domestic incomegdpgross domestic productircinternal revenue codeirsinternal revenue servicejctjoint committee on taxationmwrmultiple worksite reportnaicsnorth american industry classification systemnabenational association for business economicsomboffice of management and budgetpeoprofessional employer organizationqcewquarterly census of employment and wagesrdcresearch data centersbosurvey of business ownershipsicstandard industrial classificationsirdsurvey of industrial research and developmentsoistatistics of incomessasocial security administrationssnsocial security numbersssspecial sworn statustintaxpayer identification numberusdanassu.s. department of agriculturenational agriculturalstatistics serviceimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8improving business statistics through interagency data sharingbox 12why should bls and the census bureau work toward areconciled sampling frame?the argument for the business list case goes beyond simply reducingredundancy and, possibly, administrative expenses. as noted by several ofthe workshopõs presenters, some widely used macro statistics are derivedfrom combinations of the census bureau and bls data. for example, productivity is calculated as the ratio of a census bureau figure (output) and abls figure (labor input). if output and input measures were estimated fromthe same survey, then the presence or absence of any particular firm fromthe sample would likely have a very small effect on the ratio, because boththe numerator and the denominator would change in the same direction.with separate samples, however, even a relatively common occurrence,such as a discrepancy in the industry code of a firm, could have visibleeffects on aggregate industry productivity growth in two industries. this isbecause the change in output of the firm is attributed to one industry whilethe change in inputs is attributed to another. there are important researchand policy incentives for moving toward the use of a common samplingframe.by the statistical agencies. both bls and the census bureau compile business establishment listsñthe business establishment list and thebusiness register, respectivelyñmainly from administrative data, butalso with supplemental survey data. each covers about 8 million business establishments with employees, and they are used for similar purposes: to create sampling frames for a wide variety of surveys by thecensus bureau and by other statistical agencies, for benchmarking survey data, for publishing employment and wage data, and for generatingaggregates used by other agencies, most notably many of the inputs tothe national income and product accounts (box 12).in addition to leading to discrepancies of coverage, the redundancy ofeffort creates inefficiencies in maintaining uptodate frames and samples,and it may contribute to difficulties in achieving adequate response ratesto various surveys. combining information from both sources could generate a more accurate, consistent business list that, for bea, could improve its estimates in a number of areas (e.g., trade in services, corporateprofits and industry employment, and wages by location). inconsistencies, particularly in the assignment of establishments to industries and therange of entities covered, carry direct implications for the reliability ofkey statisticsñfrom gross domestic product, to employment, to producimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction9tivity and industrial productionñderived from business lists or subsequent surveybased data. streamlining the business registers and surveyprograms is also likely to reduce respondent burden for businesses. in itspresentation, bea cited these and other improvements that could beachieved through more extensive integration of data across statisticalagencies. however, it is important to note that there are advantages tohaving separate lists, as it allows each agency to tailor the characteristicsof its list specifically to the purpose it serves.jim spletzer and paul hanczaryk (presenting for bls and the censusbureau, respectively) noted that interagency data sharing is an obviousand lowcost prerequisite for improving the business lists. while list comparison work is well under way, the idea of a business list reconciliationproject is still very much at the discussion stage. the legalities and procedures necessary to begin this kind of work (specifically, the restrictionsresulting from the federal tax information that the census bureau receives from the irs) are not trivial. if sharing among the three cipseadesignated agencies is to be fully exploited, either irs regulations or code(or both) must be changed. it was known at the time of its passage that,in order for the census business register to be shared, companion legislation to cipsea would be needed to modify section 6103 of the irs taxcode or to change interpretation of that code. the joint committee ontaxation has not yet taken action to address this specific datasharingneed. the 2004 statistical programs of the united states government report(office of management and budget, 2004) indicated that the proposal forcompanion legislation, which would make complementary changes tothe provisions in the òstatistical useó section of the irs code, was endorsed by the treasury department and submitted to congress; however, it expired with the 107th congress.during the workshopõs morning session, representatives from bls,the census bureau, the irs, and bea addressed current datasharing arrangements and the role that data sharing plays in producing federalstatistics. the census bureau and bls provided information on their ongoing business list comparison project, which is intended to comprehensively document the comparability of the lists. mark mazur and nickgreenia of the irs research, analysis, and statistics division providedan overview of current datasharing arrangements and interpretation ofrelevant regulations and legislation. they expressed a clear understanding of the importance of data sharing for purposes of improving businesslists and indicated a willingness to work carefully and incrementally toward this goal within the legal guidelines. they further suggested that, ifcompanion legislation to cipsea is to have a real chance of moving forward, the expansion of tax data sharing should be narrow in scope andclearly tied to purpose. for example, for the purpose of reconciling busiimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10improving business statistics through interagency data sharingness lists, perhaps only a few basic variablesñe.g., name, address(or geocode), employer identification number, employment, payroll,industryñwould need to be shared.during the afternoon session, which highlighted the perspectives ofdownstream data users, presenters from the federal reserve board (frb),the congressional budget office, and academia discussed the benefits ofbusiness data sharing as it relates to productivity and real output measurement, informing monetary policy, estimating business profits, andbudget forecasting. federal reserve policy models incorporate productivity statistics that are derived from industrylevel output and employment data. dennis fixler of bea and carol corrado of frb described howthe maintenance of two establishment lists creates timeconsuming complications. for example, for calculating industry productivity statistics,inconsistencies arise because source data are drawn using different methods and from nonidentical sets of business entities. output figures (thenumerator) originate from the census bureau data, while input figures(the denominator) are derived from bls data.several participants touched on the distinction between informativedata discrepancies and those leading to statistical inconsistencies that arecostly in terms of user communitiesõ time and resources. for example,although household and payrollbased estimates of employment differsignificantly at times, the two sources can illuminate slightly different aspects of the labor market picture. and, although bea would certainly liketo minimize the statistical discrepancy between income and expenditureside measures of gross domestic product (particularly for a few problematic industries), employer and household surveys each generate valuableinformation, both independently and in combination. in contrast, reconciliation of the two business lists involves mainly definitional and classification issues which, workshop presenters seemed to agree, should be asconsistent as possible.carol corrado, chief of the industrial output section in the frb division of research and statistics, noted that discrepancies between thecensus bureau and bls employment by industry figures lessen her confidence in beaõs industry accounts and, in turn, the accuracy of productivity change measures. she added that it is likely that the sectors of theeconomy experiencing large changes in productivity may also be thoseassociated with problematic data inconsistencies. corrado argued further that the statistical agencies could use resources more efficiently ifthey did not have to maintain two business lists. steering committeemember john haltiwanger noted that, given the different uses of the business lists, it would not make sense to choose one over another; insteadthe weaknesses and strengths of each should be recognized and exploited. corrado expressed the hope that, in the very near future, a sysimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction11tem would be in place that is capable of reconciling differences in employment by industry.dale jorgenson of harvard university touched on similar themes inhis presentation, observing that policy makers are hamstrung by the factthat the data system exhibits inconsistencies that arise because of the absence of statutory authority to share data among agencies. he expressedthe view that resolving these uncertainties is essential and suggested beginning at the most fundamental level. one goal of jorgensonõs work on aònew architectureó for the national income and product accounts is tohave common registers of firms, establishments, families, and individualsand to collect the data in a way that is internally consistent at the microlevel (jorgenson, landefeld, and nordhaus, 2006).several presenters suggested that an effective approach to advancingthe dialogue between policy makers and statistical agencies is to begin byrecognizing the potential, not just for increased efficiency and more accurate information for policy, but also for reducing respondent burden. thelogic behind the change must include compelling datadriven cases forwhich the payoff is clear across datasharing agencies and between respondents and the agencies. in that spirit, workshop participants citednumerous examples in which more effective sharing would improve data,and for which the associated benefits more than warrant action to buildon the successful data sharing authorized by cipsea.finally, the confidentiality side of cipsea was not neglected. participants from the agencies stated the need to continue to take this responsibility very seriously as a matter of principle and as a means tobuttress public confidence in the agencies. as outlined in the summarythat follows, many presenters argued that the uniform confidentialityprovisions created under cipsea provide sufficient coverage to expanddatasharing arrangements while still ensuring that the privacy and confidentiality of records will be maintained. at the time of the workshop,however, the confidentiality provisions under cipsea did not have ombguidelines, and agencies continued to interpret the requirements differently. the point was made that, given the confidentiality requirementsenacted through cipsea, the agencies are now in a better position thanever before to protect the data collected for statistical purposes under apledge of confidentiality. landefeld noted the importance of continuingto do a good job of protecting the confidentiality of data, while suggesting incremental changes in datasharing arrangements, including:¥streamlining administrative procedures under cipsea;¥expediting access to research data centers (keeping statistical usesas top priority); andimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12improving business statistics through interagency data sharing¥modifying irs procedures to promote effective use of administrative data for statistical uses, either through legislation or changesin the regulations.landefeld expressed a hope that participants at the workshop wouldemerge with a renewed sense of the importance of moving forward toresponsibly expand interagency datasharing arrangements.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132the benefits of data sharing to thestatistical agenciesrepresentatives from the bureau of labor statistics (bls), the censusbureau, the internal revenue service (irs), and the bureau of economicanalysis (bea) gave presentations on the benefits of data sharing to statistical agencies and on the prospects of enhancing current arrangements.throughout the session, discussion about the data underlying the blsand census bureau business lists was prominent. bls and the censusbureau are currently jointly engaged in a business list comparison project;jim spletzer and paul hanczaryk presented preliminary results and recommended next steps. mark mazur and nick greenia provided an explanation of current datasharing arrangements and legal constraints fromthe irs perspective. they also commented on the value of tax informationto the statistical agencies and discussed the viability of various strategiesfor dealing with current datasharing restrictions. dennis fixler deliveredthe morningõs final presentation, an overview of the current role and future potential of data sharing to serve beaõs national income and productaccounts work.business list comparison and reconciliationboth bls and the census bureau compile business establishmentlistsñthe business establishment list (bel) and the business register(br), respectivelyñmainly from administrative records, but also supplemented with survey data. each òregisteró covers about 8 million businessemployer establishments, and they are used for similar purposes: to create sampling frames, to benchmark survey data, to publish employmentimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14improving business statistics through interagency data sharingand wage data, and to provide aggregate measures to other agencies.products of the bel and the br include the quarterly census of employment and wages (qcew) and the county business patterns (cbp), respectively. within each agencyõs business list programs, there are numerous tasks for which data sharing could be helpful. for example, both thecensus bureau and bls require establishmentlevel data for multiunitfirms. the census bureau requests that these firms break out employment and payroll numbers by establishment in its company organization survey (cos); for bls, the unemployment insurance programõsmultiple worksite report (mwr) is used. because the timeliness and comprehensiveness of the cos and the mwr are not the same, combiningresults could enhance the measurement of employment, payroll, and establishment birth and death trends for multiunit firms.spletzer described the collaborative project ongoing at bls and thecensus bureau to compare, improve, and (perhaps eventually) reconcilethe two lists. the goals of the comparison project are twofold: to understand the differences in the lists and to identify the strengths and weaknesses of each. contributors to the project at bls and the census bureauare ultimately motivated by the prospect of identifying opportunities toimprove the value of the lists in the context of the uses that they serve.improving the comparability and accuracy of the census bureau and blsbusiness lists not only would provide benefits to the statistical agenciesand to downstream users, but also could reduce reporting burden on thebusiness community and possibly reduce costs to the agencies in the longrun. preliminary comparisons have found that heterogeneity betweenlists increases at finer levels of industry and geography detail; thusspletzer and hanczaryk suggest the need for greater sharing of microlevel data. additionally, they noted the work the agencies plan to do toresolve the different methods used to determine single versus multiestablishment status.one of the purposes of the confidential information protection andstatistical efficiency act of 2002 (cipsea) is òto improve the comparability and accuracy of federal economic statistics by allowing the bureau ofthe census, the bureau of economic analysis, and the bureau of laborstatistics to update sample frames, develop consistent classifications ofestablishments and companies into industries, improve coverage, and reconcile significant differences in data produced by the three agenciesó(public law 107ð347, subtitle bñstatistical efficiency, sec. 521, findingsand purposes). the main hurdle to business list coordination work thatarises involves the statutory restrictions on federal tax information. thebulk of the data underlying the census bureau register originates fromirs tax records and is shared under title 26; however, title 26 does notauthorize bls or bea to access these records or, for that matter, the cenimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the benefits of data sharing to the statistical agencies15sus bureau data commingled with them. therefore, change in the tax codeis required before microdata from irs sources can be shared for programmatic purposes.to inform the business list comparison project, bls and census bureau analysts first evaluated and compared the published aggregate statistics. in order to make a comparison, adjustments were made to takeinto account differences in the scope and coverage of the br and theqcew, most notably to account for the fact that the former includes largesegments of the selfemployed business population that the latter doesnot.1 bls privatesector data needed filtering to remove certain industries that the census bureau does not cover, such as crop and animal production, rail transportation, postal services, and private households. several other industries, such as employment in government hospitals andemployment in government liquor stores, had to be added.one of the most striking discoveries of the business list comparisonproject relates to the aggregate employment numbers. as shown in table21, the overall employment count in 2001 is 5.5 percent higher for thecbp than it is for the qcew. these findings were reported in foster et al.(2005), which also concluded that industry and geographic coverage matter a good deal and that the heterogeneity of results increases at finerlevels of industry and geography. one purpose in cataloging the differences in published statistics was to help guide the microlevel analysis,which, given the 8 million establishment records, needed to focus first onthe industries and states showing the greatest discrepancies.different methods were used to compare data from singleestablishment units and multiestablishment units. singleestablishmentbusinesses were examined on an exact match basis; that is, for a givenestablishment, the lists had to show the same number of employees to1a full explanation of the methods used in this comparison project can be found in fosteret al. (2005).table 21comparison of published statisticscountyquarterly censusbusinessof employment2001 datapatternsand wages% differenceestablishments7,095,3027,213,611ð1.7employment115,061,184108,916,7105.5payroll (millions)3,989,0863,972,6050.4note: figures are adjusted for differences in industry coverage.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16improving business statistics through interagency data sharingcount as a match. for multiestablishment businesses, the analysts used aònear matchó band of 5 percent (± 2.5 percent). the percentage of cases inwhich the bls and census bureau lists disagreed on single versus multiunit status was not available at the time of the october presentation.in table 22, the first row of figures shows the difference in aggregateemployment for singleestablishment businesses. the employment numbers are reasonably similar, but analysis of the microdata reveals important differences. about 30 percent of the employment and payroll estimates for the matched singleestablishment businesses do not matchexactly. considering that the majority of employer identification numbers (eins) are for singleestablishment businesses, these differences, bothin number of establishments and the employment counts, are noteworthyand should be further explored.in the case of multiestablishment businesses, using the nearmatchconcept, the employment and payroll estimates match only 39 and 51 percent of the time, respectively. again, this shows that significant microlevel heterogeneity underlies the comparatively similar macrolevel statistics. the comparison project will document and further explore thesesimilarities and microlevel disparities. in addition, the project will examine inconsistencies between the census bureau and bls classifications ofsingle versus multiestablishment businesses. as table 22 indicates, thereare approximately 309,000 cases (found by summing 197,000 and 112, 000,the bottom two rows of column two) in which the census bureau and blsdisagree over single versus multiunit status, and these businesses accountfor about 2122 million employees. the project will examine a number ofother topicsñthe role of nonemployers, the data quality for professionalemployer organizations and helpsupply services, overlap and duplication in the cos and the mwr, and the role of firm identifiersñthat factorinto the inconsistencies found in the two business lists.ascertaining the sources of the nonmatched data will take time, asnonmatches are complicated with technical issues of scope and coverageand the cooperation of the states. only 47 states authorized bls to sharetheir data for this project, and the relationship between the states thatopted out and the nonmatches is still being explored.hanczaryk acknowledged that sharing between bls and the censusbureau would likely lead to improvements in both lists. bls industry coding, physical location addresses, multiunit data from the mwr, and employment data for single units are recognized as being very thorough,and this detail would benefit the census bureau. the census bureau isparticularly interested in the data for multiunit companies within states,as well as in bls data for the client businesses of professional employerorganizations (peos). peos (or employee leasing) firms typically supplyhuman resource management services (e.g., payroll accounting or benimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.17table 22 business list comparisonblscensus bureau2001 microdataeinemploymentemploymentmatch onmatch onfor 47 states(in millions)(in millions)(in millions)payrollemploymentmatched singleestablishment eins4.1353871% (exact)69% (exact)matchedmultiestablishment eins.112494851 (neara)39 (neara)matched eins,bls multiestablishment,census bureau single.1971515establishmentmatched eins,bls singleestablishment,census bureau.11267multiestablishmentnotes: ein = employer identification number, bls = bureau of labor statistics.anear match within ± 2.5%.source: workshop presentations by jim spletzer (bls) and paul hanczaryk (census bureau).based on microdata comparisonimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18improving business statistics through interagency data sharingefits administration) to their clients. the census bureauõs tax recordbaseddata do not accurately indicate the geographic location and industry ofleased employees working at client sites; rather, they indicate the industry and location of the peo itself.bls will benefit from an evaluation of firm information that is collected as part of the census bureauõs cos. access to the census bureaudata could potentially add consistency to bls industry codes, giving theagency the ability to analyze microdata on nonemployer businesses (18.6million on which the census bureau publishes data).hanczaryk provided an overview of the current limited data sharingbetween the agencies. the census bureau provides bls with approximately 1.2 million eins every quarter, which bls then matches to theirfiles to provide industry codes and physical location addresses. from thisprocess, for 2004, 3.4 million bls industry codes were returned to thecensus bureau. sharing these eins and codes reduced costs and respondent burden and provided greater uniformity of the two agenciesõ economic data and, in the process, produced evidence that this type of datasharing works.the comparison project currently under way will provide some indication to the agencies of what areas will provide the biggest payoff frommore extensive sharing. since, under the current agreement, the data canbe shared for research purposes onlyñbut not to update either of theregistriesñan important aspect of the project is to guide programmaticopportunities. the comparison would provide key input for any futurereconciliation of data, should that become an option. for example, thecos and the mwr are now overlapping mailout surveys to multiunitcompanies. by combining these two surveys, the agencies could reduceresponse burden on businesses, one of the twin goals outlined in cipsea.in order to move forward on business list improvement and data sharing, the agencies must overcome important analytical and legal hurdles.first, the agencies need to better understand the magnitude of the differences and the reasons for them. however, comparing multiunit companies is complicated by the fact that there are no numerical identifiers thatprovide a onetoone comparison of establishments. second, without companion legislation, bls is not authorized, under title 26, to receive thecensus bureau microdata that include federal tax information. finally,bls, which has an explicit relationship with state unemployment insurance programs, would like to increase consistency in survey processesand economic data development, but this goal is hampered by the factthat the states cannot access key census bureau microdata.hanczaryk concluded that the potential of data sharing to improvebusiness lists and other programs in the u.s. statistical system that wouldbenefit users should provide bls, the census bureau, and bea withample motivation to move forward.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the benefits of data sharing to the statistical agencies19an overview of tax data andirs datasharing arrangementsthe availability of federal tax information, especially confidentialmicrodata, was a recurring theme of the workshop. the irs houses dataon tax returns from a variety of entities, including individuals, estates andgifts, taxexempt organizations, and businesses and corporations (trackedby ein, not establishment). the irs presentersñmark mazur and nickgreenia from the office of research, analysis, and statisticsñidentifiedconstraints to using data processed from these returns, most notably theneed for an authorized purpose as defined by the internal revenue code(irc). their paper (see chapter 6) discusses the legislative history andlays out limitations, lessons learned, possible means to expand data sharing under current constraints, and steps that might be taken to change thelegislation. their presentation touched on three specific topics related toexpanded accessñthe need for statutory change, regulatory change, andpolicy agreements; the importance of linking any expanded access to aspecific research or statistical purpose; and the need to make the benefitsto the treasury department and other agencies clear to policy makers.there are three major authorized uses of federal tax information: taxadministration (which is the concern that overrides all others from theirs perspective), tax policy analysis, and research and statistical uses.tax data are subject to strong presumptions of confidentiality, and section 6103(j) of the statute authorizing access for outside statistical usepermits recipients to access only the minimum amount of data necessaryto accomplish a stated purpose. the penalties for unauthorized disclosure or inspection of tax data are strong and clearly defined in the statute. in addition, data recipients are subject to regular safeguard reviewsof physical and computer security, need and use, and other factors inorder to ensure that they are in compliance with irs requirements toprotect taxpayer confidentiality.an increasingly difficult problem in releasing data is to ensure thatthey remain anonymous. everadvancing technologyñimproving datalinkage programs, faster and cheaper computer processing, and increasing amounts of administrative data available on the internetñhas made iteasier to match an individual or company to a specific record. for example, if a record includes an industry code, address, and revenue figurethat could identify a particular business, anonymity would be breachedand the law broken. in turn, protecting the confidentiality of tax data becomes increasingly more difficult.the irs considers all tax data sensitive, meaning that no distinction ismade between information that is publicly available elsewhere, such asan address found in a phone book, and information that may not be, suchas a firmõs income and profit entries. in addition, no statute of limitationsimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20improving business statistics through interagency data sharingexists for tax data, which means that they must be protected in perpetuity.various levels of security have been implemented to protect data fromunauthorized use. the irs maintains an audit trail for those who haveaccess to the data, conducts background checks on users, and requiresusers of tax data to have a computer system that is separated from othertypes of data uses. these safeguards and constraints increase the cost ofproviding data and ultimately limit access.both irs presenters emphasized the point that voluntary complianceis a cornerstone for accomplishing the central irs mission of administering tax collection, and it is dependent on the protection, both real andperceived, of taxpayer confidentiality. due to the sensitive nature of theinformation reported by taxpayers, ensuring and demonstrating the protection of confidentiality in the irs process are vital aspects of promotingcompliance. an ongoing concern at the irs is that expansion of data access could increase the risk of a confidentiality breach and, along with it,a public perception that tax information is shared carelessly throughoutthe federal government. this in turn could weaken the voluntary selfassessment system. mazur noted that a 1percentage point change in theoverall voluntary compliance rate translates into tens of billions of dollars in tax revenues collected. thus, there are two important goals inmanaging tax data: protecting them to maintain as high a compliancerate as possible, and exploiting them effectively and efficiently for otherauthorized purposes, including statistical uses.the characteristics of tax data are unique. the size of the populationcovered (over 20 million organizations and over 125 million individualtaxpayers) and the scope of return data (covering information on everything from mortgage interest deductions to corporate net profits) create acomplex respondent universe and a wealth of detailed data. because ofdisincentives dissuading false or late reporting, nonresponse is thought tobe low relative to most survey alternatives. however, the irs capturesneither all data for all types of returns nor data on taxpayers who fail tofile; as such, there are wellknown and systematic inaccuracies in the datareported to tax authorities. nonetheless, given that the data are used fortax administration purposes, including enforcement and internal researchand analysis at the irs, there is reason to believe that many componentsof the data are accurate (again, relative to surveysourced data).the federal executive and legislative branches conduct tax policyanalysis with the data, while four agencies covered in section 6103(j) ofthe ircñbea, the census bureau, the department of agricultureõs national agricultural statistics service, and the congressional budget office (cbo)ñcan use the data for statistical purposes, although the extentof access for specific purposes varies widely by agency. data innonidentifiable form, including public use files, have been used moreimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the benefits of data sharing to the statistical agencies21broadly by decision makers in the federal government, businesses, policythink tanks, academic researchers, and state governments.statistical agencies are charged with using existing data systems, suchas administrative records, to the maximum extent possible to reduce costsand counter concerns about respondent burden. the irs, by contrast, mustprotect federal tax information by providing it only for authorized purposes and to the minimum extent required for each purpose. these twodirectives create tensions, some of which have been partially relieved byagreements that stipulate clearly delineated uses of tax data and the conditions under which they may be used. generally speaking, however, theirs does not view either burden or cost reduction alone as reason enoughto grant access. recognizing the great demand for access to federal taxinformation, greenia and mazur offered guidance about what kinds ofsharing arrangements were most feasible.as outlined in the greeniamazur paper (see chapter 6), three methods are available to expand access to data: statutory change, regulatorychange, and policy agreement. greenia clarified the differences betweenstatutory and regulatory change: the former requires the passage of a lawthrough congress and the signature of the president, while the latter requires treasury department approval.in order to add new statistical users, or to expand the access of thosecurrently authorized to access federal tax information, section 6103(j)must be amended. this statute stipulates who may use the data and forwhat purpose, as well as what data fields may be accessedñfor examplecorporate tax items. the presenters suggested that limiting the specificdata items to those actually needed for a specific purpose (e.g., basic information needed to construct a business list sampling frame), clearlytying requests to intended use, and specifying them in an amended statute might improve the chances of passing a proposed legislative change.the idea is to conform to the òminimum needó requirement by boundingthe item content in the statute. data sharing among authorized recipientsis enabled elsewhere in statuteñby section 6103(p)(2) and the associatedregulation (b).on the regulatory side, the treasury department requires a compelling, datadriven business case in order to grant access to additional dataitems. regulatory changes have been used in the past to both add andremove data field access. a change in regulation can supplement statutesand adjust for changes in user needs. for example, if the census bureauneeded to access additional corporate tax data fields to accomplish a mandate under title 13, chapter 5, a change in regulation would be requiredto enable such an expansion in access. for purposes of business list comparison and reconciliation projects, greenia discussed freezing item content in the statute to basic sampling frame informationñagain to be reimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22improving business statistics through interagency data sharingsponsive to the minimum need requirement. he suggested, further, thatlimiting requests in this way would ease potential concerns by legislatorsand their staffs that additional items might be added in the future withonly the approval of treasuryõs assistant secretary of tax policy.the third mechanism for expanding access is a policy agreement,which is intended to supplement the statutes and regulations. the censusbureauirs criteria agreement, which emerged in response to concernsover access to tax data facilitated by the development of the census bureau research data centers (rdcs), is an example. the crux of this agreement is that the work must have a predominant title 13, chapter 5, purpose, which essentially means it must improve census bureau programs.the census bureau is responsible for evaluating proposals based on scientific merit and predominant purpose, and the irs documents the request and either authorizes or denies it after determining whether it complies with their regulations. external researchers apply for special swornstatus (sss), go through an fbi clearance, swear to an oath to abide bytitle 13, and then, after clearing these hurdles, are certified to access title13 and title 26 data in the same manner as census bureau employees.the joint committee on taxation publishes an annual report that liststhe volume of tax data records disclosed by the irs, classified by statuteand including statistical purposes. disclosures under section 6103(n), suchas contract work with bea or the federal reserve board, are not includedin this report. this report shows that the number of disclosures for federalstatistical uses, most of which involve demographic data requested by thecensus bureau, is second only to those needed for state tax administration. greenia noted that policyoriented research and statistical analysesare important considerations for tax data administration. when askedabout the effect that outside researcher access has on public perceptionsof confidentiality and privacy, mazur suggested that it is likely minimal,as long as the number of analysts is small, access is at armõs length, andresearchers are subject to the same enforcement rules as others with dataaccess.during the open discussion, steering committee member johnhaltiwanger inquired about possible models for new data sharing. onesuggestion was to allow a third party, such as the office of tax analysisin the treasury department, to access the data specifically for tax policyuse and, second, to generate simulated synthetic data as public use data.under this scenario, researchers from the office of tax analysis wouldaccess data as sss agents and follow the same rules as other external researchers working under the census bureauirs criteria agreement. thepresenters recognized the potential importance of synthetic data as a toolfor expanding access to microdata, citing several projects already underway at the census bureau. while the irs is supportive of the census buimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the benefits of data sharing to the statistical agencies23reau work developing synthetic data, the quality and utility of the datasets are still largely unknown. mazur noted that, while further development of synthetic data is necessary, past efforts have not generated datasets known to provide inferencevalid results, especially for complex modeling applications.in the context of moving forward on data sharing, the presenters offered a list of lessons learned (see chapter 6 for a full discussion of theselessons). first, strong leadership and support from the highest levels ofgovernment are needed. the office of management and budget (omb),the council of economic advisers, and congressional staff are good placesto enlist support for a companion bill to cipsea. the effort needs activecongressional support, from both staff of taxwriting committees and frommembers of the house and the senate. it also requires clear communication to policy makers and the public of the potential benefits from interagency data sharing, such as increased efficiency, more accurate statistics,and reduced respondent burden.second, mazur suggested that the myth of a zerosum game, in whichexpanding access in one area requires reduced access elsewhere, must beaddressed. in addition, he argued, discrete and incremental steps may bebetter than bold leaps as statutory or regulatory changes are pursued.finally, there should be some interagency coordination of confidentialityprotection procedures, and the benefits of proposed changes to the treasury department need to be clear. (in 2002, staffers from the ways andmeans committee and the senate finance committee asked what was inthe companion bill for treasury.) by leading the treasury departmenteffort to advocate for cipsea in congress, the irs demonstrated that itcan play a major role in the development and passage of datasharinglegislation. the more agencies that are behind the legislation, and thestronger the argument for widely distributed benefits, the more likely it isto receive congressional support.data sharing and bea productionof economic statisticsthe extent to which agencies are able to share data for statistical purposes carries direct ramifications for national income accounting. as background for their presentation, dennis fixler and steven landefeld of thebea contributed a paper on this topic, which appears as chapter 7 of thisvolume.in his presentation, fixler specifically outlined how disparate sourcesof data can lead to inconsistencies in the construction of economic statistics. a prominent example is the fact that gross domestic income (gdi),gross domestic product (gdp), and state personal income have all, atimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtimes, displayed different rates of growthñdifferences that can presentproblems for policy makers. for example, gdp estimates are used foromb and cbo budget forecasts, and the federal reserve incorporates theoutput growth information in monetary policy decisions. chapter 7 provides details and further examples of why understanding these statisticaldiscrepancies matters.gdi and gdp are the two aggregate measures of domestic output.the product or expenditure side (gdp) is calculated primarily from thecensus bureau data, while the income side (gdi) is calculated mostlyfrom bls data. conceptually, the two series should be equal, but becausethe data come from different sources, typically there is a statistical discrepancy. historically, more weight has been given to gdp; however, asthe statistical discrepancy increased during the latter half of the 1990s,analysts (e.g., those studying productivity trends or forecasting tax revenues) began paying more attention to the income side. wage and salarygrowth for the period 19952001, as measured using the census bureaudata, has been greater than that shown by bls data.fixler and landefeld suggest that one possible source of the gdpgdi discrepancy may be tied to the way that stock options, bonuses, andfringe benefits are recorded in the bls and census bureau payroll figures. table 78 (see chapter 7) breaks down differences in payroll growthto an annual basis, revealing that the census bureau figures are frequentlybut not always greater than those of bls. to gain a clearer picture of measured wage trend differences, it is helpful to explore the data at the industry level. for example, between 1998 and 2002, the census bureau datashow a faster growth rate than bls data for the information sector; theopposite is true for construction. calculating real valueadded growth ina few selected sectors using census bureau rather than bls data showsthat the absolute differences can be substantial. the growth rate for computer and electronic products in 2002 illustrates this difference, as thecensus bureau measure of currentdollar valueadded is roughly doublethe bls count. the higher census bureau number supports an alteredview of that sector, and of trends in manufacturing generally, suggestinga different recovery story for the period. more complete data sharingamong the agencies would allow researchers to investigate these data discrepancies in a systematic manner.data sources used by bea to compute gross output per workerñindicators of productivityñalso show substantial differences. two examples, shown in table 23, are oil and gas extraction and petroleum andcoal products, in which the percentage differences are 13.9 and 12.8, respectively, between the cbp and qcew measures of gross output perworker. these differences are linked to those discussed in the presentation by spletzer and hanczaryk on the bls and census bureau businessimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the benefits of data sharing to the statistical agencies25list comparisons, and they show exactly why bea has an interest in thisproject.another area for further exploration relates to title 26 data. bea, thenational science foundation, and the census bureau worked together ona project begun in 2003 looking at research and development expenditures. the project was designed to use title 13 and bea data, avoidingfederal tax information. as table 710 reveals (see chapter 7), in somecases the expenditures of u.s. parent companies, a subset of all u.s. firms,exceeded all u.s. expenditures. this inconsistency between expendituremeasures could potentially be solved by using title 26 data. estimation ofstate income taxes provides another example of how multiple sources ofdata can lead to inconsistencies in accounting. chapter 7 includes estimates of the extent to which the difference between the bls and censusbureau payroll figures can affect projected state and local income taxes.the benefits of data sharing can be viewed from either a systemwideperspective or, more narrowly, from the perspective of specific agencies.the systemwide benefits include improved sampling frames, more consistent industry and region classifications, and an increased capacity toresolve anomalies in responsesñall without increased respondent burden. finally, there are important analytical policy questions that can beaddressed at the micro level through data matching. prime examples arepolicies involving foreign direct investment and offshoring.from the national accounts perspective, fixler argued that data sharing offers a number of benefits. data sharing would aid in resolving thestatistical discrepancies underlying source data, such as those underlyingtable 23gross output per worker (in dollars)2002naicscensuspercentcodeselected industriesbureaublsdifference211oil and gas extraction991,595853,547ð13.9324petroleum and coal products2,062,6171,798,598ð12.8486pipeline transportation761,076660,673ð13.2515517broadcasting and telecommunications296,694342,73915.552535finance, insurance, real estate,392,955434,75310.6rental, and leasingnaics: north american industry classification system.2002 output per employeeimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26improving business statistics through interagency data sharingthe income and product sides of the national accounts and the payroll andemployment estimates. preliminary employment figures, indicators, andextrapolators, which are used in beaõs early estimates, as well as its models and projections, may be improved through data sharing and fulleraccess to data that capture accounting and other business changes. theextent to which sharing would help overcome problems of data disruptions, such as from natural disasters like hurricane katrina, is unclear,but allowing agencies to compare notes could help fill the gaps.during open discussion, carol corrado noted that some discrepancies are informative. she pointed out that analysts at the federal reserveboard look at differences across data series to piece together analyticalinsights. identifying sources of discrepancies requires access to data todetermine if there is a difference in exporting between the census bureauand the bls forms, a difference in the interpretation of language, or something else. fixler noted that, under current constraints, this capability islimited, as restrictions on federal tax information typically do not allowfor adequate analysis below the aggregate levels. fixler stressed that datasharing cannot solve all discrepancies, but it will allow analysts to betterunderstand the source of the differences and provide policy makers witha clearer picture of what is happening in the economy.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.273research and policy perspectives on thebenefits of business data sharingbusiness data from the u.s. statistical system and various privatesector sources form the countryõs economic informational infrastructure,on which millions of policy and business decisions, including costofliving adjustments, monetary policy, and wage and investing decisions,are based. shortcomings or inconsistencies in measures of economic activity can hinder decision making in a multitude of ways. steering committee chair charles schultze introduced the afternoon session by takingup this topic, noting that a lack of data sharing and coordination can contribute to problems of discrepant data. one notable example is the aggregate employment statistics, specifically, the (perhaps cyclical) pattern ofdifferences in employment changes as measured by the current employment statistics (ces) and the current population survey (cps). schultzecited the widely held view that, in the short to medium run, the ces payroll series is the best measure for judging cyclical strength or weakness ofthe economy, but he suggested that policy makers and analysts shouldpay attention to the employment estimates in the cps household surveyas well and support efforts to reconcile the two series.the discrepancy in employment data has recently received a gooddeal of attention. schultze cited a paper by george perry (2005) evaluating the ces and the cps (adjusted for conceptual comparability) in termsof their usefulness for measuring the shortrun employment behavior ofthe overall economy. he also cited the work of john schmitt and deanbaker (2006), economists at the center for economic and policy research,which found that the cps may be overstating the share of working americans by 1.4 percentage points (roughly 3 million people).improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28improving business statistics through interagency data sharingthe choice of how much reliance to place on either of the two employment series affects measured growth of unit labor costs and productivity, which carries important policy implications. for example, thehigher unit labor costs derived from the cps (relative to the ces) wouldsupport a stronger case for increasing interest rates. schultze agreed withthe position that both data series contribute relevant information, but headded that the reasons underlying the inconsistencies need to be morefully understood. if it were possible to integrate census bureau data onthe selfemployed and nonemployers with employment statistics fromthe bureau of labor statistics (bls), one element of the discrepancy inestablishment and householdbased employment statistics could bestudied more carefully.the afternoon session featured the perspectives of data users outsidethe statistical agencies. carol corrado opened the discussion of user needsand concerns related to data sharing with a presentation on monetarypolicy and research at the federal reserve board (frb). dale jorgensonand george plesko provided additional researcher perspectives with presentations on productivity and real output measurement and on tax dataneeds for estimating corporate profits, respectively. the session concludedwith a presentation on the use of data and the potential value of datasharing for budget forecasting by douglas holtzeakin, former director ofthe congressional budget office (cbo).monetary policy and researchat the federal reservecarol corrado spoke from the perspective of the frbñperhaps themost important policy consumer of economic statisticsñabout the valueof accurate data and how improved coordination among the statisticalagencies might enhance that value. her comments focused on how business list reconciliation would provide a more consistent source of datafor use in the analysis and forecasting of productivityñparticularly multifactor productivity. realtime economic statistics, imperfect by nature,play an important role in the federal reserveõs assessment of underlyingtrends in gross domestic product (gdp) and gross domestic income(gdi), payroll and householdbased estimates of employment, industryproductivity, and business inventories. corrado cited these and severalother examples as cases in which alternative data sources do not typically align. sometimes one source is more revealing than another; forexample, data from the income side of the national accounts captured the1990s acceleration in productivity considerably sooner than did data fromthe product side.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research and policy perspectives29in some cases, alternative measurement instruments reveal differentelements of a phenomenon, thereby allowing richer analyses; in othercases, they do not. payroll and household employment statistics, whichfrequently diverge, are useful in revealing different aspects of the laborpicture. however, corrado argued, maintaining two business establishment lists is not a good example of complementary data sources. she emphasized the point that there is a distinction between data consistencyand data integration and the way each relates to statistical discrepancies.consistency has to do with definitions and classification, which is whatthe reconciliation of the two lists should aim to achieve. she suggestedthat the methods by which the bureau of economic analysis (bea) reconciles its industry accounts with the expenditure side of gdp is an exampleof integration eliminating informative discrepancies. fixler noted that,from a national income accounting perspective, bea analysts need to beable to draw as much information from one account toward the other aspossible. if the differences were fully understood between the inputs, thedecision to integrate or distribute discrepancies between accounts wouldbe unnecessary, as the differences would be small and relatively manageable. corrado suggested there may be problems with the way discrepancies get redistributed in the national income and product accounts, andthat noise in the data needs to be eliminated before they can be used todetect changes in productivity at the industry level.corrado used the striking productivity measurement case to illustrateproblems that arise from maintaining two business lists. at the frb, aggregate productivity is directly linked to monetary policy decisions because productivity affects inflation trends. conventional industrybasedproductivity studies rely on output data from the census bureau and input measures from the bls. corrado pointed out that a calculation inwhich the numerator and the denominator are derived from the samesurvey or survey frame would have obvious statistical advantages.one example of the importance of industrylevel information for assessing prospects for aggregate productivity surfaced during the late1990s. initially, in late 1996, the frbõs view of productivity was based onanalyses of sectoral and industry trends captured using beaõs data ongdp by industry. these analyses, along with other academic and agencyresearch, suggested that prices in some industries were mismeasured. asthe role of changes occurring in the hightechnology industries becameclear, a strong case emerged for improving industrylevel data. still later,evidence grew that the stepup in multifactor productivity was fairlybroadly based by industry. although these developments are now apparent in retrospect, at the time these new trends were emerging, when thefrb needed to examine what was happening in productivity in real time,improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30improving business statistics through interagency data sharingmuch of the available evidence of the changes in multifactor productivitywas anecdotal.when measuring productivity, most macroeconomists do not spenda lot of time with the census bureau employment data, mainly becausethose figures are not comprehensive (even in census years). macroeconomists more typically rely on bls industrylevel employment measures, which at times diverge significantly from census bureaubasedmeasures. for example, in 1997, 2.6 million persons were categorized asworking in the management of companies (north american industryclassification system, or naics, code 55) according to the census bureau, but only 1.7 million persons worked in the occupation according tobls. a reconciliation of the census bureau and bls business lists has thepotential to create more uniform and comparable measures of output, employment, and, in turn, productivity. although anecdotal information willalways be used to some extent, corrado argued that a system that includes a consistent historical time series is vital to research and policy atthe frb.corrado commented on additional data hurdles that inhibit analysisat the federal reserve, citing lags in data, the impact of the switch tonaics on productivity analysis (particularly for the services industries),and bea changes in its industry accounting methods. she noted that thefrb is engaged in a project to review disaggregate productivity measurement using industry data from bea, as well as aggregate measures for sixsectors believed to illuminate key trends. inconsistencies in employmentby naicsdefined industries have limited what the project is able to do interms of studying trends in multifactor productivity. project researchersbuilt a standard industrial classification (sic)tonaics concordance inan effort to bridge some gaps and, in corradoõs view, fully reconciling thebusiness lists would advance the goal of creating time series of consistenthistorical industry productivity data. once current employment data discrepancies are addressed, she would like to see a historical revision ofindustry output and productivity data.corrado concluded her presentation by stating that the statisticalagencies should reorient their programs to avoid duplicative effort required to maintain two systems, which ultimately makes detecting trendsin the economy more difficult. during the open discussion, johnhaltiwanger noted that it would be difficult to choose (or to get bls andthe census bureau to agree) on one list over another, and he urged thatthe strengths and weaknesses of each would need to be captured to construct an ideal downstream reconciliation of the two. historical estimatescould continue to rely on the census bureau employment data becausethey conform to the census bureau output data but, looking ahead, thelist would benefit from the timeliness of bls data. agreeing that thisimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research and policy perspectives31would be an appropriate strategy, corrado expressed the hope that, in thenear future, there would be a system going forward that has reconciledthe differences in employment by industry.productivity and real output measurementdale jorgenson presented his views on the role of data sharing in themeasurement of productivity and real output and on data integration issues related to the ònew architectureó he helped design for the u.s. national accounts. a goal of the new architecture is to provide an internallyconsistent and comprehensive set of national accounts to measure thelarge, complex u.s. economy with a statistical system that is highly decentralized. he argued that an accurate set of accounts depends on a consistent set of data. one goal of the new architecture program is to have aunified register of firms and establishments, collecting data in a way thatreflects the common records that are maintained for these units; some ofthis can be accomplished through more effective data sharing by the statistical agencies. such a system would work to achieve greater internalconsistency of data at the micro level, helping to identify the sources ofdiscrepancies.the new architecture framework has seven main accounts: production, domestic receipts and expenditures, foreign transaction current account, domestic capital account, foreign transaction capital account, domestic balance sheet, and u.s. international position (see figure 31 for1. productiongross domestic product equalsgross domestic factor outlay2. domestic receipts and expendituresdomestic receipts equaldomestic expenditure3. foreign transaction current accountreceipts from rest of world equalpayments to rest of world andbalance on current account4. domestic capital accountgross domestic capital formation equalsgross domestic savings5. foreign transaction capital accountbalance on current account equalspayments to rest of the world and net lending or borrowing6. domestic balance sheetdomestic wealth equalsdomestic tangible assets andu.s. net international position7. u.s. international positionu.s.owned assets abroad equalforeignowned assets in u.s. and u.s. net international positionfigure 31blueprint for an expanded and integrated set of accounts for theunited states.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32improving business statistics through interagency data sharingdetail on components of each account). the majority of jorgensonõs presentation focused on the production account, which sets gdp equal togross domestic factor outlay or income (gdi).the production account consists of output, input, and productivity,in which output and input shares add up to one (1.0) in the gdp. consumption and investment outputs make up the output shares, and whenone rises, the other falls. gdi reveals how individuals divide their moneyamong resources for consumption (which includes immediate consumption goods) and savings (which includes housing and financial assets).gdp and gdi should agree, but in order for those to match, the sourcedata must be internally consistent. when these are consistent, they can beused to measure the effects of events like hurricane katrina on theeconomy. however, when the components of the accounts do not agree,errors within the accounts and among the seven accounts occur. for example, consumption expenditures show up as part of the national product. an error in the product account leads to an error in expenditures andincome, which in turn creates an error in production. in addition, discrepancies in the measurement of the savings rate cause problems in thecapital formation and wealth area. thus, error propagates error.bea is responsible for the production accounts at both aggregate andindustry levels. input shares to productivity include capital and labor inputs. the estimates of labor inputs are based on bls data from the quarterly census of employment and wages and have remained fairly constant. if the census bureau figures were used rather than bls numbers,the result would be a share of labor about 5 percent lower and the share ofcapital would increase. this would affect the estimate of economic growthon the input side and, in turn, the productivity number. in terms of contributions to growth, capital investments are primary sources of economicgrowth, because labor growth has been slow relative to capital and investment growth since 1995 (see figure 32). if adjusted to census bureaudata, where the labor share is even smaller and the capital share larger,over time productivity estimates would decrease. jorgenson providedthese examples to illustrate how data choice (in this case, the census bureau versus bls data on shares of labor and growth measures) affects theinternal consistency of the accounts and the ability to obtain accurate macroeconomic measures.additionally, the output data produced from different data sourcesby bls and bea are not comparable, and it is important to be able toreconcile these differences. one way to do that is to go to the registers ofindividual firms and establishments and make sure the data are collectedfrom common sources. jorgenson reiterated that accurate measurementof output, productivity, and saving requires extending datasharing arrangements. he argued that it is necessary to work toward a unified regimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research and policy perspectives33ister so that the national accounts can rest on a firm foundation of a common set of data sources. he added that having a centralized statisticalsystem, such as statistics canada, is not necessary, if the problem of internal consistency is addressed. in order to have a common register that isused across the government and to share data among agencies, the statutory authority to do so must exist.jorgenson stated that data sharing is not an academic problem or anissue for the statistical agencies alone. it is a problem for the policy makers and the politicians who rely on the agencies for information. he speculated that policy makers are hamstrung by the fact that the data systeminvolves inconsistencies that arise through the lack of data sharing andthrough the absence of statutory authority to share data among the statistical agencies. jorgenson stated that it is absolutely essential that theseuncertainties be resolved, and he suggested starting at the most fundamental levels.for monetary and economic policy purposes, understanding the current state and future outlook for the american economy depends on getting the numbers right. one of the most important factors in determiningthe economic outlook is the contribution of information technology andother industries to pastñand futureñgrowth and productivity. to illustrate, jorgenson calculated differences in productivity growth implied bythe census bureau and bls data. differences at the industry level aretypically much higher than the 5 percent that he found in the aggregate0.00.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.519481973197319891989199519952004laborcapitaltfpshare of contributioinlabor, capital, and total factor productivity contributions to total economic growthfigure 32the production accountñoutput, input, and productivity.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34improving business statistics through interagency data sharingestimate. for manufacturing as a whole, the share of labor calculated using the census bureau data is 15 percent lower than the statistic calculated using bls data. for some industries, such as oil and gas extraction,the census bureau figure is 50 percent lower than the bls figure.at the industry level, one of the most dramatic differences betweenvalueadded growth, as estimated using the census bureau data ratherthan bls data on wages and salaries, is for the computer and office equipment industry. estimates provided by landefeld and fixler indicate significant differences in the growth rate and level of activity in this industryand the broader information technology industry, depending on whetherthe bls or census bureau data are used (see table 72 in chapter 7).during the open discussion, haltiwanger made the point that thereseems to be a clear distinction between informative discrepancies and inherent, nonmeaningful inconsistencies that are costly in terms of time andresources. he suggested that the sectors of the economy experiencing largeamounts of change might also be the most problematic. in consideringwhether the agencies are performing their statutory duty to provide themost accurate statistics possible, jorgensonõs two biggest concerns arewith measuring output at the industry level and measuring the incomeside. he concluded with a clarification of an important discrepancy: if themacro number and the number calculated by adding up the industries donot match, that is an important indicator of discrepancies in the industrylevel data across sources. in order to understand the future of theeconomy, he argued, the macro picture will not suffice, and the industrydata from the frb, bls, and bea are vital. finally, he noted that, whilenot all of the issues can be solved by data sharing, such arrangements areessential to improving economic data and statistics.tax data needs for improving estimates ofcorporate profitsgeorge plesko of the university of connecticut discussed the availability and role of various kinds of corporate profit information for research and analysis. he focused on discrepancies and measurement differences between financial reporting profits and cash reported profits, aswell as how each relates to the other. his paper (chapter 8) discusses howtax return data can be used to improve estimates of corporate profits. corporate income can be measured in two ways, through financial (morecommonly called òbookó) reporting and through tax reporting. book reporting provides income measures and other information for investors,creditors, and other users; however, such information is available only forpublicly traded companies. tax reporting provides a measure of incomefor tax collection, and it is generally characterized as providing less disimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research and policy perspectives35cretion to management regarding the choice and application of accounting rules. fuller data sharing might allow researchers to examine the relationship between tax and book data and the viability of using the latter intaxestimate modeling.taxbased and bookbased calculations of corporate income are different for two primary reasonsñone causing a temporary difference andone a permanent difference. tax depreciation is typically faster than bookdepreciation, leading to less income in the short term, but more in laterperiodsñthus creating a temporary difference in the measurement concepts. second, taxexempt interest is not included as part of taxable income but is considered income for financial reporting purposes, whichcreates a permanent difference in measurement. these differences areimportant to outside investors, creditors, and policy analysts for understanding the operations of a firm. recent research (u.s. department of thetreasury, 1999) has also identified large and increasing differences in bookversus tax income as supporting evidence of increased tax sheltering activities (see table 81). the book and tax reports attempt to measure thesame thing but the methods are conceptually different, and each addssomething to what outside analysts can learn about a firm.financial statements provide an opportunity for analysts to augmentinformation about a firmõs operation that is not required to be disclosedthrough tax reporting. the information from each is useful to investors,and ideally these two sources would be complementary. however, theinformation is not useful for inferring income and payments. when examining pretax book income and the amount of income subject to tax fromthe two sources, plesko found that, over time, the two diverge. in terms ofnonpublicly traded firms, tax return information may be the only sourceof financial information.the timeliness of book reporting is important to note, as informationprovided through this type of financial reporting is filed publicly bymarch 30 for the preceding year. tax return information from statisticsof income (soi) tabulations lags behind by nearly three years when taking into consideration extensions and audits. given the earlier access tobook statements, if the relationship between a firmõs tax returns andthe book financial statements is clear, then the latter should enable analysts to begin modeling a year or two ahead of the release of soi figures.a problem arising from using financial statements is that more than one,and possibly several hundred, matching tax returns may exist. the newirs schedule m3, which replaced schedule m1, allows fuller reconciliation of book income with tax net income. the form delineates differencesbetween book and tax income as temporary or permanent, allowing every tax return to be identified with the appropriate accounting parent.when combined, financial and tax return information provides a moreimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36improving business statistics through interagency data sharingcomplete picture of a businessõs operations. access to multiple datasources also allows for more timely estimation of economic events because various sources become available on different schedules. the ablityto reconcile book and tax income at the back end creates benefits as well.for example, financial statement data are useful in augmenting tax filingsby providing information on firmsõ operations that are not captured in thetax reporting system.the new irs schedule, the m3 (see http://www.irs.gov/pub/irsutl/2005f1120sm3.pdf), is coming online beginning with tax year 2004for firms that have assets of $10 million and more. benefits of the schedule m3 include reconciliation of income from the worldwide consolidated financial statement and from the income statement of includiblecorporations; reconciliation of book income of includible corporationswith tax net income; and delineation of differences between book and taxincome as temporary or permanent. the new form should help the irs,treasury, and bea better understand how financial reporting can informtax administration.plesko cited the national accounts as an example of how the new datathat incorporates both financial and tax return information will be useful.the detail captured by the m3 will provide more data on the contemporaneous finances and the operations and organization of firms, includingspecific decisions related to tax planning. plesko argued that the improvedfinancial data that can be generated from the m3 will be helpful in measuring the effects of tax policy, as well as for constructing preliminarynational income estimates of corporate profit (see chapter 8 for furtherexamples). during the open discussion, steering group member danielfeenberg suggested that bea and the census bureau think about cooperating on a reconciled form that would allow bea to ask respondents toreconcile their answers with those provided to the census bureau.the importance of accurate data and data sharingfor budget forecastingthe cbo is charged with providing congress with the information itneeds to address budgetary and economic policies. cbo produces approximately 900 cost estimates per year, on tight time schedules and fordifficult and disparate questions. cbo gathers data from agencies, including administrative data, and it relies on confidentially supplied privatesector data. it is often difficult to reconcile the different pictures of aprogramõs performance portrayed by administrative data from the agencies and by data based on the current population survey or other surveys. cbo has indirectly experimented with data sharing in the sense thatimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.research and policy perspectives37it has made attempts to reconcile confidential privatesector data withdata from other agency sources.cbo uses data in a number of ways: for monitoring the state of theeconomy at both the macro and micro levels; for nearterm forecasting (18to 24 months) of overall movement and composition of output and income; and for mediumterm forecasting for the economy over the next 10years. cbo also engages in longterm modeling to produce estimates ofthe future path of various programs, such as social security and medicare, analyzing changes in program finances and their impact on the federal unified budget deficit and the path of the u.s. economy.in his presentation, douglas holtzeakin began by asserting that, ofcourse, cbo would be better served if it had more accurate and timelydata, and he suggested that an important consideration in evaluating thestrength and accuracy of data is the underlying expertise in its production. to the extent that it is possible to enlarge the effective sample sizesthrough sharing of existing resources, budget analysts might be able toanticipate and answer questions before they arise. holtzeakin suggestedthat timeliness of input data improves budget forecasting in an importantway: when budget forecasts can be based on timely data, fewer revisionsare required, leading to more consistent histories.revisions of historical information impede forecasting efforts. to theextent that revisions can be minimized through better accumulation ofdata, holtzeakin suggested that the entire process will be improved, because attention will focus on the judgments that were actually made indoing the forecasts rather than the accuracy of the information going intothem. if the data are revised less often, cbo and others will have moreconfidence in the forecast estimates they pass on to congress.the question for the workshop concerns the extent to which data integration permits better forecasting. of course, there is a tradeoff at somelevel between getting things quickly and getting them reliably. the issueis how much cbo can move away from human intelligence and heavydependence on anecdotal evidence, particularly in the policy world, todata that are more reliably gathered. landefeld noted that bea strives toproduce better early estimates that hold up over time. the question thenshifts from more timely data to producing more accurate early estimatesin order to make the tradeoff between timeliness and accuracy less stark.holtzeakin noted that, recently, federal fiscal policy has been reactive. if better data were provided for monitoring the economy in real time,some activities in the federal government would see tremendous benefits.this might allow analysts to sharpen near and mediumterm economicforecasts. for example, realtime economic data would help to better elucidate shifts in productivity, inflation, core consumer prices, income andreceipts, corporate profitability, bonuses and options, the composition ofimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38improving business statistics through interagency data sharingemployee compensation, and labor force participation. simply knowing,on a timely basis, when money comes into the treasuryñand whether itis income tax or payroll taxñwould allow for better understanding ofwage and salary movements.holtzeakin noted the importance of providing access to data used bycbo in order to improve the transparency of the processes, since the ability to explain how forecasting is done is just as important as doing it. forexample, allowing outside analysts to produce a parallel set of estimatesfacilitates two important kinds of comparisons: comparisons that areòprickly and uncomfortableó but that provide information from the mistakes, and ones that provide transparency to the policy process. moreimportant than the numbers themselves is the need to inspire confidencethat they are constructed fairly, distributed in a timely fashion, and usedin a manner that allows the policy process to evolve smoothly.in holtzeakinõs view, it is not enough to give the people makingeconomic and budget estimates carte blanche access. no one would knowhow to assess the relative merit of competing estimates unless the processof constructing those estimates is transparent. he suggested the need topush hard for the private sector to have access to data, not only for theirown use, but also as a way to support work of the government.in response to a comment that extending data sharing is not politically popular, a participant asked if members of congress had an interestin this topic. holtzeakin responded that a number of members of congress do have an understanding of the sources of difficulty in makingbudget projections, and that they, in fact, were sympathetic. he addedthat there was political interest in improving data but conceded that confidentiality is a major concern. he suggested that the argument for accessshould be framed so that the benefits (such as improving the ability toaccurately decompose sources of economic activity) are clear and expressed in a practical way.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.394key points from the presentations:directions for the futurethe workshop concluded with a summary presentation by robertparker, former chief statistician at the government accountability officeand the bureau of economic analysis (bea), in which he highlightedsome of the key points made during the workshop. he also posed a fewquestions and offered suggestions to the agencies for going forward.kathleen utgoff, commissioner of the bureau of labor statistics (bls),howard hogan, associate director for demographic programs at the census bureau, and rosemary marcuss, deputy director of bea, providedconcluding remarks.in a paper written for this workshop (see chapter 5), parker summarized the history of datasharing legislation and various reports on thetopic. among his points were the following (the first three are from hispaper and the last two from his presentation):1.prior to the 2002 confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea), there was a significant amount of interagency business data sharing. mostcensus bureau and bea access totax return data was granted under internal revenue code title 26, section 6103; more modest data sharing among bea, the census bureau,and bls was authorized by the international investment and trade inservices act of 1990. for data sharing related to use in the economic censuses, the internal revenue service (irs) facilitated the success of thisprogram by adding questions to selected tax returns solely for the purpose of the censuses.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40improving business statistics through interagency data sharing2.since the passage of cipsea, additional datasharing programshave been undertaken and, based on the agency presentations at the workshop, others are in the planning stages.3.the administration has not actually submitted its version of the“companion legislation.” according to agency representatives, the jointcommittee on taxation has attempted to develop its own version, but ithas not met agency needs (there also seem to be different opinions as towhether the treasury department supports the legislation).4.to expand the use of data sharing in the absence of passage of companion legislation, there should be a comprehensive review of irs publication 1075, which sets the rules that determine the extent of data sharingunder section 6103 by the irs and the cipseadesignated agencies. thisreview could result in changes in the rules that might further facilitatedata sharing within the provisions of section 6103 (current rules were notdeveloped in conjunction with the agencies, and there is no public recordof the underlying legal interpretations).5.discussions have taken place between the census bureau and blsabout developing a single business register for employer firms (for whichboth agencies have data), perhaps in time for the 2007 economic censuses.although the current business comparison project will yield a substantialamount of information about current differences, bls and the censusbureau presented no plans on how this information might be used to develop a unified business register (because of problems with various statelaws, it may be necessary for bls to maintain a separate national registeras the sample frame for its establishment surveys).following up on the fourth point, parker suggested that irs and thestatistical agencies could work to clarify the rules governing what thecensus bureau is permitted to do with data, such as those indicating business names and addresses, which, at the time they are received, are considered federal tax information. the census bureau must reenter the information on another form and send it to businesses for verification tobecome sharable data under cipsea. because the irs has never publishedlegal interpretations explaining how they went from section 6103 to theseregulations, parker suggested that the agencies and the irs might collaborate to see whether or not current regulations are appropriate or necessary and provide input on what can be done to make it easier to converttax information into title 13 information.parker also reflected on carol corrado’s presentation, particularly herpoint that maintaining two different establishment lists is unnecessaryand counterproductive. parker noted that the comparison project has aseemingly infinite research agenda, but that nothing concrete was presented by the bls and census bureau presenters about producing a singleimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.key points from the presentations: directions for the future41list. he argued that users would ultimately gain little from that particulardatasharing opportunity unless there were plans for some implementation of a single list.kathleen utgoff, howard hogan, and rosemary marcuss respondedto parker’s remarks as well as to the workshop presentations in general.utgoff and hogan both discussed the various datasharing projects andagreements that are planned or already taking place and the players indata sharing outside the irs. they specified the various programs thatwould benefit from data sharing, reiterating the advantages of a singlebusiness list, and discussing the short and longterm effects of cipseaon resources and on the work of the agencies. marcuss suggested that theagencies seek advice on best practices from important data users and worktoward increased access in the long term.utgoff responded to the call for a single business establishment list,acknowledging the potential value, but also noting that this is just onereason for extending data sharing. she discussed other aspects of blswork that may be enhanced by data sharing, including improved unemployment and income measurement and development of better surveysample frames. she also noted the potential of data sharing to improve thecapacity of state governments to forecast revenues and for underpinningeconomic development plans.utgoff reported that both bea and bls are motivated to improvedata sharing and highlighted other datasharing projects among bls,bea, and the census bureau. two such agreements exist between blsand bea—one to share consumer price index data and another to sharecompany and revenue data (collected under the international investmenttrade and services survey act). sharing the price index data will allowbea to determine the feasibility of developing interarea price indexes,which could be used to adjust personal income estimates for price differences across geographic areas. new price indexes to measure royaltiesand license fees in international transactions could also be created fromrevenue data shared by bea. the agreements between bls and the census bureau authorize sharing of the bls quarterly census of employment and wages data for use by the census bureau longitudinal employerhousehold dynamics program, as well as use of the censusbureau business register by the bls producer price index program tofacilitate more efficient sampling.in order to fully realize the benefits of cipsea, these interagencyprojects require a dedicated commitment of resources and support fromthe datauser and policymaking communities. one aspect of the overallbenefit of these projects is the opportunity to reduce costs and respondentburden. workshop participants paid particular attention to the datasharing component of the cipsea legislation, but utgoff acknowledgedimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42improving business statistics through interagency data sharingthe importance of subpart a, establishing uniform statutory confidentiality protections, which bls has long needed as part of their effort to maintain survey response rates.hogan began his remarks with the point that conducting the researchand development on data sharing marked the first real use of cipsea, aspeople learned about such things as the documentation required, the approvals needed, and the mechanics of applying it. beyond irs data, hogannoted opportunities for data sharing in diverse areas, such as product lineand price index information.on the business list topic, hogan stated that shortterm goals can beaccomplished while proceeding with longrange plans. for example, research can begin on the differences in the lists at the aggregate level. thecensus bureau has already seen benefits from list comparison work—forexample, 10 percent more firms have been added to the research anddevelopment sampling frame, and costs and respondent burden havebeen reduced. before a single list is possible, hogan observed, tax datasharing and the role of the states (which provide and share data with blsbut not with the census bureau) must be addressed. overall, there are anumber of benefits to the census bureau made possible by data sharing,and he expressed excitement on behalf of the agency over the cooperative opportunities.adding to the comments of fixler and landefeld, marcuss reiteratedthe bea goal of bringing analytical energy to the task of demystifyingdata inconsistencies and making data from diverse sources fit. bea willcontinue to adjust its methods and pursue new approaches to more fullyexploit the currently sharable and available data. in addition, bea seeksadvice from the agencies and the irs on the best, least intrusive, procedural changes in datasharing practices that can improve estimates ofgross domestic product. she added that the agency would quickly utilizeinformation on the sources of differences between the census bureau andbls data from any comparison work—for example, from a partial comparison of the business registers, even short of movement to a single list. marcuss added that advice from important data users—particularlypolicy makers in the administration and congress, and businesses—onwhere the greatest weaknesses exist would continue to serve as valuableinput. as a longterm goal, she hoped for increased data access for statistical purposes, confirming that bea has already taken steps forward andis ready to participate in and use the information gained from the datasharing projects. her comments echoed those of the workshop in general.overall, the agency representatives, workshop presenters, and other participants were supportive of extending data sharing to the extent that sucharrangements can be safely implemented to increase the efficiency, accuracy, and consistency of the nation’s economic statistics.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.43referencesfoster, l., j. elvery, r. becker, c. krizan, s. nguyen, and d. talan2005a comparison for the business registers used by the bureau of labor statistics and theu.s. census bureau. paper presented at the joint statistical meetings, august 7,minneapolis, mn.jorgenson, d., s. landefeld, and w. nordhaus2006a new architecture for the u.s. national accounts. chicago: university of chicagopress.norwood, j.l.1995organizing to count: change in the federal statistical system. washington, dc: urban institute press.office of management and budget2004statistical programs of the united states government, fiscal year 2004. available:http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/inforeg/04statprog.pdf [accessed may 2006].perry, g.l.2005gauging employment: is the professional wisdom wrong? brookings papers on economic activity 2:285321.schmitt, j., and d. baker2006missing inaction: evidence of undercounting of nonworkers in the current populationsurvey. washington, dc: center for economic and policy research.u.s. census bureau2002north american industry classification systemñunited states 2002. washington, dc:u.s. department of commerce.u.s. congress2002confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002. (hr 4528).available: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oss/cipsea.pdf [accessed may 2006].u.s. department of the treasury1999the problem of corporate tax shelters. discussion, analysis, and legislative proposals.(white paper, july.) washington, dc: u.s. department of the treasury.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.45appendix aworkshop agenda and attendeesworkshop on the benefits of interagency business data sharingoctober 21, 2005the keck center of the national academiesroom 100500 fifth street, nwwashington, dcwelcome and introductory comments9:00 ambackground, workshop goals, and agendacharles schultze, workshop chair (brookings institution)9:10welcome from the sponsorsteven landefeld, dennis fixler (bea)benefits of data sharing to the statistical agencies9:15improving business lists: the business register comparisonand reconciliation projectsjim spletzer (bls); paul hanczaryk(census bureau)9:45open discussion10:15an overview of irs data: datasharing arrangements, anddata needs of primary customers and researchersmark mazur, nick greenia (irs)10:45open discussionimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46appendix a11:15an overview of the role of data sharing in the production offederal statisticssteven landefeld, dennis fixler (bea)11:45open discussion12:00 pmlunch and discussionrecent developments in datasharing regulations andlegislationkatherine wallman (omb)research and policy perspectives on the benefits of data sharing1:00introduction to the sessioncharles shultze1:15monetary policy and research at the federal reservecarol corrado (federal reserve board)1:45open discussion2:00productivity and real output measurementdale jorgenson (harvard university)2:30open discussion2:45break3:00tax data needs for improving estimates of corporate profitsgeorge plesko (university of connecticut)3:30open discussion3:45the importance of accurate data and data sharing for budgetforecastingdouglas holtzeakin (cbo)4:15open discussionimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a47conclusions: data sharing, data quality, and informed policy4:30key points from the presentations: directions for the futurerobert parker (federal statistics consultant)concluding remarks from the statistical agencieskathleen utgoff (bls); howard hogan (census bureau);rosemary marcuss (bea)5:30adjournattendees(* indicates a presenter)thomas anderson, bureau of economic analysisstephen andrews, bureau of economic analysisanthony apostolides, bureau of transportation statisticslisa blumerman, census bureauruth bramblett, bureau of economic analysisstephanie brown, census bureaucarolyn carroll, stat tech, inc.chris chapman, bureau of labor statisticsconstance citro, national research councilcarol corrado, federal reserve board*ruth detlefsen, census bureauchris ellis, rti internationaljoel elvery, bureau of labor statisticsvincent fang, macrosys research and technologydaniel feenberg, nber (steering committee member)jason j. fichtner, joint economic committeedennis fixler, bureau of economic analysis*lucia foster, census bureaucharles funk, census bureaujohn galvin, bureau of labor statisticsgerald gates, census bureaujohn golmant , administrative office of the u.s. courtsnancy m. gordon, census bureaunick greenia, internal revenue service*keith hall, department of commercejohn haltiwanger, university of maryland (steering committee member)charlie han, bureau of transportation statisticspaul hanczaryk, census bureau*improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48appendix abrian a. harriskojetin, office of management and budgetmaurine haver, haver analyticsbrian higginbotham, joint economic committeetina highfill, bureau of economic analysispaul l. hsen, census bureauhoward hogan, census bureau*brian holly, census bureaudouglas holtzeakin, congressional budget office*ned howenstine, bureau of economic analysisron jarmin, census bureaudale jorgenson, harvard university*arthur kennickell, board of governors of the federal reserve systemsanders korenman, baruch college, cunymeredith krug, federal reserve boardcaryn kuebler, national research councilherbert lacayo jr., environmental protection agencysteven landefeld, bureau of economic analysis*timothy (bogong) li, bureau of labor statisticsjuanita tamayo lott, census bureauchristopher mackie, national research councilrosemary marcuss, bureau of economic analysis*sandra mathieson, census bureaumark mazur, internal revenue service*thomas mesenbourg, census bureauharry meyers, national academy of public administrationkimberly moore, census bureaubrent moulton, bureau of economic analysispatrick mullen, government accountability officesue okubo, bureau of economic analysisrobert parker, federal statistics consultant*thomas petska, statistics of income, internal revenue servicegeorge plesko, university of connecticut*thomas plewes, national research councildylan rassier, bureau of economic analysisralph rector, the heritage foundation (steering committee member)brooks robinson, bureau of economic analysisruth runyan, census bureauken ryder, national academy of public administrationhossain sanjani, bureau of transportation statisticscharles schultze, brookings institution (steering committee member)molly shannon, bureau of labor statisticsgerald silverstein, treasury departmentmichael siri, national research councilimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a49timothy slaper, joint economic committeejim spletzer, bureau of labor statistics*bryce stephens, national academy of public administrationmiron straf, national research councilovuokerie ubogu, temple universitykathleen utgoff, bureau of labor statistics*katherine wallman, office of management and budget*diane willimack, census bureauewen wilson, census bureauhenry wulf, census bureauqingshu xie, macrosys research and technologyimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50appendix brecent legislation governing datasharing and access to federal tax datathe confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act(cipsea) was passed as title v of the egovernment act of 2002 (p.l.107347). enactment of cipsea culminated more than 30 years of effortsto standardize and strengthen legal protections for data collected for statistical purposes by federal agencies while permitting limited sharing ofindividually identifiable business information among three statisticalagencies for efficiency and quality improvement.1title v has two subtitles. subtitle a, confidential information protection, strengthens and extends confidentiality protection for all statisticaldata collections of the u.s. government. for all data furnished by individuals or organizations to an agency under a pledge of confidentialityfor exclusively statistical purposes, it provides that the data will be usedfor statistical purposes only and will not be disclosed in identifiable formto anyone not authorized by the title. it makes knowing and willful disclosure of confidential statistical data a class e felony with fines up to$250,000 and imprisonment for up to five years.subtitle a pertains not only to surveys, but also to collections by afederal agency for statistical purposes from administrative records (e.g.,state government agency records). data covered under subtitle a are notsubject to release under a freedom of information act request. guidancefrom the office of management and budget, which is charged to oversee1this overview of cipsea is reproduced from national research council (2005).improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b51and coordinate the implementation of cipsea, is under development. itis intended to cover such topics as the steps that agencies must take toprotect confidential information; wording of confidentiality pledges inmaterials that are provided to respondents; steps that agencies must taketo distinguish any data or information they collect for nonstatistical purposes and to provide proper notice to the public of such data; and ways inwhich agents (e.g., contractors, researchers) may be designated to use individually identifiable information for analysis and other statistical purposes and be held legally responsible for protecting the confidentiality ofthat information.subtitle b of cipsea, statistical efficiency, permits the bureau of economic analysis (bea), the bureau of labor statistics (bls), and the census bureau to share individually identifiable business data for statisticalpurposes. the intent of the subtitle is to reduce respondent burden onbusinesses; improve the comparability and accuracy of federal economicstatistics by permitting these three agencies to reconcile differences amongsampling frames, business classifications, and business reporting; and increase understanding of the u.s. economy and improve the accuracy ofkey national indicators, such as the national income and product accounts.a key limitation of cipsea is that data in the census bureauõs business register, which is constructed in large part out of internal revenueservice (irs) tax data, cannot be shared. new legislation would be required to amend title 26, which governs access to irs tax data by bls,bea, and other agencies. all access to federal tax information, evenwithin irs, must be authorized by statute, meaning that legislation hasbeen codified as part of title 26 of the internal revenue code. title 26,section 6103, is the primary law articulating irsõs datasharing constraints. section 6103 provides that tax returns and return informationare confidential and may not be disclosed by the irs to other government agencies or employees except as provided in the code. it furtherspecifies nonirs access, indicating which agencies (or other entities) mayhave access to tax return information. congress must enact legislation toadd users. accompanying regulations clarify the purposes for which access may be granted, detailing specific items that can be shared and under what conditions the information will be received. the assistant secretary for tax policy of the treasury department is responsible for settingregulations. as with all users, bea access to irs tax data is codified insection 6103. for example, section 6103(j) specifies (in the accompanyingregulations) bea access to statistics of income sample files of corporations; section 6103(n) grants access to some extracts for partnerships andsole proprietorships. in some cases, policy agreements (such as the census bureauirs criteria agreement) may supplement statute and regulations. because the confidentiality of tax data is considered crucial to volimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52appendix buntary compliance, if agencies want to establish new efforts to use taxpayer information, executive branch policy calls for a business case tosupport sharing tax data.the papers by nick greenia and mark mazur and by robert parker inthis volume provide further details of statistical agency access to irs data.the full text of the cipsea legislation can be found at <http://www.eia.doe.gov/oss/cipsea.pdf>.referencesnational research council2005principles and practices for a federal statistical agency, third edition. committee onnational statistics, m.e. martin, m.l. straf, and c.f. citro, eds. division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.u.s. congress2002confidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002. (hr4528).available: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oss/cipsea.pdf [accessed may 2006].improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.part iibackground papersimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.555datasharing history and legislation:background notesrobert p. parkerconsultant on federal statisticsduring the past 20 years, the national research council of the national academies has prepared several reports on data sharing and related issues, such as privacy and confidentiality. however, as noted in thediscussion here of each of these reports, the topics covered by the workshop on the benefits of interagency business data sharing differ fromthose in the previous reports. the workshop focused on data and information on businesses, not on individuals, and their use for statistical, notresearch, purposes. in addition, the workshop focused on sharing by thebureau of labor statistics (bls), the bureau of economic analysis (bea),and the census bureau; these three statistical agencies are authorized toshare data under provision of subpart b of the confidential informationprotection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea) as enacted in december2002.this chapter reviews the history of cipsea and of efforts by the office of management and budget (omb) for related legislation that wouldexpand data sharing by changing the provisions of the tax reform act of1976, which allow the internal revenue service (irs) to share tax information with selected statistical agencies. cipsea provides statutory confidentiality protection for data collected by statistical agencies for statisticalpurposes (subpart a), and it permits identifiable business records to beshared for statistical purposes by bls, bea, and the census bureau (subpart b). cipsea, however, did not change the provisions of internal revenue code section 6103, which precludes these agencies from sharing taxreturn information for statistical purposes. such additional sharing wouldallow the agencies to develop a single business register for all of theirimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56improving business statistics through interagency data sharingeconomic surveys and programs and to use information from the registerto improve the quality of their surveys. it would also create additionalopportunities to create new statistical programs from existing data.there have been efforts by several administrations to change section6103 to allow the sharing of basic identifying information from irs recordsfor statistical purposes. this chapter also reviews the positions on thischange by the u.s. government accountability office (gao), the department of the treasury, the irs, and the joint committee on taxation (jct),as well as the positions of businesses.some of the major ongoing datasharing efforts by the three agenciesare reviewed in this chapter, which covers efforts allowed under section6103, the international investment and trade in services act of 1990, andbea, bls, and the census bureau confidentiality restrictions.in this chapter, òdata sharingó is defined as the exchange of information collected from businesses and individuals or reported to the irs inidentifiable form for statistical purposes. for other key terms, the chapterfollows the definitions in cipsea. business data are òoperating information and financial data and related information about businesses, tax exempt organizations, and government entities.ó identifiable form meansinformation òthat permits the identity of the respondent to whom the information applies to be reasonably inferred by either direct or indirectmeans.ó statistical purposes are òthe description, estimation, or analysisof the characteristics of groups, without identifying the individuals or organizations that comprise such groups.ó they also include methods andprocedures related to the òcollection, compilation, processing, or analysisó of data about these groups and the development of related òmeasurement methods, models, statistical classifications, or sampling frames.óusing definitions from the report of the privacy protection study commission (1977), the term òresearchó is used to refer to òany systematic,objective process designed to obtain new knowledge, regardless ofwhether it is ôpureõ (aimed at deriving general principles) or ôappliedõ(aimed at solving a specific problem or at determining policy).ó the termòstatisticsó in this chapter refers òboth to the data obtained through enumeration and measurement and to the use of mathematical methods fordealing with data so obtained.óprevious reports on data sharingmost of the previous reports of the national research council on datasharing and related topics touched on issues important to the discussionof changing section 6103, such as the tradeoff between greater access andreduced confidentiality. in general, the findings and recommendations ofthese reports did not focus on sharing of data and information on busiimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes57nesses or on data sharing for statistical purposes. although the most recent of these reports was completed after the enactment of cipsea, therewas little discussion of the datasharing part of the act, largely becausecipsea was limited to the data sharing of business data for statisticalpurposes, not individual data and not for research purposes. in this section, each of these reports is reviewed in terms of its relevance to businessdata sharing.in sharing research data (national research council, 1985), the focusis mostly on what researchers should do. it thus has little relevance tosharing of business data for statistical purposes. the report does include asection that identifies several benefits related to sharing business data.these benefits are the verification of results, improvements in measurement and data collection methods, and the development of theoreticalknowledge. in addition, one of the papers prepared for the conferencethat led to the report notes the creation of new data sets as a benefit ofdata sharing. however, there is no mention of the benefits of data sharingto statistical agencies, such as the ability to develop common businessregisters.sharing research data cites three earlier reports related to data sharing: (1) sharing of social science research data: an exploratory conferenceconvened by the committee on national statistics (national research council, 1980); (2) setting statistical priorities (national research council, 1976);and (3) personal privacy in an information society (privacy protection studycommission, 1977). the first report deals primarily with health data, andthe second does not deal at all with data sharing. the privacy protectionstudy commission report is discussed later in this chapter.private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics was published in 1993 (national research council, 1993).the panel on confidentiality and data access, jointly formed by the committee on national statistics and the social science research council, developed recommendations to assist statistical agencies in their stewardship of data for policy decisions and research. the panel met betweennovember 1989 and january 1992 and used the results of related workshops: the longitudinal retirement workshop (september 1987), confidentiality of and access to doctorate records (november 1988), and confidentiality and access to national center for education statistics (january1991).the panel sought to take into account the tradeoffs between data protection and data access and made recommendations to òenhance data access without decreasing data protection and increase data protection without reducing data accessó (p. 19). the panel decided to focus primarily onmajor federal statistical programs and to cover òorganizational,ó or business, data as well as individual data. this expansion reflected input fromimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58improving business statistics through interagency data sharingstatistical agencies, the experience of panel members, and current events.as a result, the report covers major issues of data protection and access tobusiness data; it includes a chapter on a framework for the treatment ofthese data (chapter 7) and covers businesses in other chapters that dealwith legislation (especially chapter 5).with regard to business data, the panel presents several relevant findings and recommendations. the executive summary includes a sectionon òbarriers to data sharing within government,ó in which the panelreported (p. 6):some of the laws that govern the confidentiality of statistical data prohibit or severely limit interagency sharing of data for statistical purposes.laws that control access to administrative records, such as reports ofearnings covered by social security, restrict their use for statistical purposes. these barriers to data sharing for statistical purposes have led tocostly duplication of effort and excessive burden on individuals and organizations who are asked to supply information. they have also madeit difficult or impossible to develop data sets needed for policy analysison topics of major interest to the public.the panel recommends that barriers to sharing data for both personsand businesses for statistical purposes should be removed subject to strictcontrols to protect confidentiality. recommendation 4.1 includes a statement that òadditional data sharing should only be undertaken in thoseinstances in which the procedures for collecting the data comply with thepanelõs recommendations for informed consent or notificationó (p. 6). recommendation 5.1(f) states that ôõa provision that permits data sharing forstatistical purposes under controlled conditions be included in the consistent set of statutes and regulations governing the maintenance of federalstatistical recordsó (p. 6). recommendation 7.4 reflects the panelõs proposal that interagency sharing of data for statistical purposes should include the sharing of lists of businesses by federal and state agencies. recommendation 7.5 asks for new legislation to expand confidentiality torecords collected by all statistical agencies (p. 226); some of this recommendation was subsequently accomplished by cipsea.although this report cites several examples of reduced sharing as aresult of the provisions of section 6103, there is no explicit recommendation to amend this act. nevertheless, the panel clearly expresses its viewsin the following section title in chapter 7: òinability to share businesslists: an embarrassment to the federal statistical system.óin addition, the report includes several important discussions relating to sharing business data that appear to conflict with the current irsinterpretation of section 6103. in a discussion on the census bureau use oftax data, it states (p. 192):improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes59for a particular establishment or employer whose identity was originallysupplied by the irs, the internal revenue code allows the census bureau to contact the taxpayer, and any response returned to the censusbureau is considered to be data collected under the authority of the census bureau (title 13 u.s.c.) rather than tax return information.the report also notes that there is little or no sharing of business datacollected by the census bureau (p. 192):exceptions are the occasional correction or updating of sic [standardindustrial classification] codes on lists provided by other agencies, under the authority of a 1953 opinion issued by attorney generalmcgranery (41 op. a.g. 120), and the release of certain ssel [standardstatistical establish list] information to bea, which has become possibleas a result of legislation passed by the 101st congress (foreign directinvestment and international financial data improvements act of 1990,p.l. 101533). as part of the same legislation, bea is required to sharewith bls and the census bureau selected data on foreign direct investment that it collects from business enterprises.improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of aworkshop was published in 2000 (national research council, 2000).this workshop report does not discuss sharing business data. the report states that a central objective of the workshop was to review thebenefits and risks associated with publicuse research data files andto explore alternative procedures for restricting access to sensitivedata, especially longitudinal survey data that have been linked to administrative records. it focuses on microdata records for research purposes. the workshop did not produce recommendations or specificfindings.principles and practices for a federal statistical agency, third edition, waspublished in 2005 (national research council, 2005a). although the report deals with a wide range of activities by statistical agencies, it lists thesharing of microdata records as a òway to improve data quality and develop new kinds of information . . . for statistical agencies that collectsimilar informationó (p. 26). it notes that the sharing of business datawould òmake it possible to evaluate reporting errors and the completeness of coverage of business firms in different surveys,ó and that òsuchsharing would also make it possible to develop more useful and accuratestatistics on the nationõs economy while decreasing the reporting burdenon business data providersó (p. 26).the report discusses the enactment of cipsea, noting that the firstformal proposal for data sharing under cipsea, which involved matching data from beaõs international investment surveys with data from thecensus bureauõs survey of industrial research and development conducted for the national science foundation, was announced in june 2003.(additional details on this match are discussed later in this chapter.)improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60improving business statistics through interagency data sharingexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunitieswas published in 2005 by the panel on data access for research purposes,which was convened at the request of the national institute on aging(national research council, 2005b). the panel report, which is builtlargely on the earlier efforts discussed above, primarily focuses on datafor research purposes. the introduction states: òthus, there are questionsabout how to provide researchersñinside and outside governmentñaccess to data that can both inform public policy and protect the privacyof respondents and the confidential nature of the information they provideó (p. 8). consequently, the report is almost exclusively research oriented although it does cover some research using business records. it focuses on microdata research and notes the policy and cost benefits fordata linking and sharing. although not an explicit recommendation, thereport does note the need to revise section 6103, stating (p. 35):[it] offers recommendations that, if implemented, will continue the pastrecord of simultaneous improvement along both dimensions. such improvement will require strong partnership between the research community and statistical and research agencies in the design of innovativeresearch on disclosure avoidance techniques and data access modalitiesand in the implementation of the advances that result from such research.the final chapter of the report makes 19 recommendations coveringsuch areas as documentation, planning for and expanding access topublicuse files and research data centers, informed consent, and safeguarding confidentiality. none of the recommendations in these areas isdirectly relevant to the sharing of business records.in a section on the legal environment, a discussion of cipsea pointsto the need for changing section 6103. the report notes (p. 23):a key element in the census bureauõs data is its business register, whichis constructed with data from the internal revenue service (irs). however, without new legislation (to amend title 26 of the u.s. code, whichgoverns access to irs tax data), the business register and associated datacannot be shared with bea and bls.the report discusses policy research but limits the discussion to theuse of microdata. it states: òdetailed microdata permit indepth analysesof socioeconomic trends and their antecedents and consequencesó (p. 40)and continues with òdetailed microdata are also needed for modelingeconomic decisions and other kinds of social behavioró (p. 41). examplesof such research noted in the report include research to model savingsbehavior and firm behavior on pollution abatement. it also includes asection on linking survey and administrative record data, but examplesare limited and omit any discussion of beaõs foreign direct investmentdata. it reports on the 1973 current population surveyðsocial securityimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes61administrationðirs (cpsðssaðirs) òexactmatch fileó that was the basis for a major dynamic microsimulation model of social welfare policiesand retirement income and for an analysis of the quality of income reporting in the march cps. the report does not cite the continuing use bythe census bureau of linkages of survey data and administrative recordsto assess and improve data quality. it also does not report that bea andirs have used the aggregate results of this match program to estimatethe extent of nonfiling by unincorporated enterprises. in fact, bea continues to fund an updated version of this match, but without the ssarecords.among the papers prepared for this panel, òprivacy, confidentiality,and data sharingó by david mcmillen is the most relevant to sharing ofbusiness data. it provides an excellent history of cipsea, tracing its mostrecent roots to the clinton administrationõs efforts to enact confidentialityand datasharing legislation in 1995. (see additional details in the nextsection.) mcmillen also identifies several examples of sharing both business and individual records. for matching of information collected undera mandatory authority, he strongly sees the need to notify respondentswhen the data they report are to be linked to irs records or made available to another agency. the report indicates some discomfort with thispart of mcmillenõs views and does not incorporate them into the panelõsrecommendations.tax reform act of 1976to provide an understanding of the changes incorporated in 1976 intosection 6103, it is important to first review the developments that led tothese changes. (most of the following discussion is based on a 1983 paperby wilson and smith and various editions of the census bureau series onthe history of the economic censuses.) the most important change wasthat, prior to the tax reform act of 1976, the president had the authorityto issue executive orders permitting access to tax records. the revisedsection 6103 limited access to tax records to specific federal and state andlocal government agencies and only for specific types of tax information.under the previously issued executive orders, access for statistical purposes had been granted to the commerce department, covering both thecensus bureau and the predecessor agencies to bea (1944 e.o. 9499 and1961 e.o. 10911), the securities and exchange commission and federaltrade commission (ftc) (1959 e.o. 10814 and 1961 e.o. 10908), and thedepartment of agriculture (1973 e.o. 11697 and 11709). under the taxreform act of 1976, access by the commerce department was continued,but beaõs access was limited to selected records of corporations, and access by the ftc to conduct the quarterly financial report was continued.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62improving business statistics through interagency data sharingaccess by the department of agriculture was not continued, although itwas restored in the 1990s, when the census of agriculture was transferredfrom the census bureau to the department of agriculture. in addition tochanges in access, the 1976 version of section 6103 included stricter disclosure rules.according to personal privacy in an information society, a report by theprivacy protection study commission, a commission mandated bythe privacy act of 1974, the changes resulted from an increase in disclosure by the irs during the first half of the 20th century (privacy protection study commission, 1977). most of these new uses were authorizedwithout any significant public discussion and, when made public, werejustified by the federal and state agency recipients of the data as essentialto an essential government function. the commission stated (p. 27 of appendix 2):the abuses that inevitably resulted were from time to time brought to theattention of the congress and the public, sometimes dramatically. thenixon administration allegedly used tax returns to harass its politicaladversaries, and an announcement early in the 1970õs that informationabout individual taxpayers would be made available to the departmentof agriculture to aid in statistical analysis aroused intense controversy.allegations that special powers of the internal revenue service were being misused to collect information for purposes well beyond tax administration eventually led to a series of congressional hearings on the propriety of various uses of tax administration.this report had been limited in scope to individually identifiable information about individuals, so the commission did not study issues regarding disclosure of information about business entities. nevertheless,the commission generally agreed with the limited access to tax return information included in section 6103 in the tax reform act of 1976. (thefinal report was published in 1977, but the commission had provided itsrecommendations to congress in june 1976.)efforts to expand data sharingbefore 1976in a 1979 study, gao reported on the status of efforts of the censusbureau to create a centralized business listing, or business register, thatwould be used by the census bureau and other statistical agencies to select samples for various surveys (u.s. general accounting office, 1979).by selecting samples from the same register, the list would improve thecomparability of the data collected in these surveys regardless of the collecting agency and would reduce duplication in the construction of theseimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes63lists. the development of such a list had been recommended by variouscommittees and commissions dating back to 1937. in 1968, omb designated the census bureau as the focal agency to develop and maintain thelist data. from 1972 to 1978, congress provided the census bureau almost$16 million to develop the list. in 1975, the list became operational andwas used by the census bureau for the 1977 economic census and currenteconomic survey programs. however, the list could not be shared withother agencies, because the census bureau had yet to propose specificlegislation to change title 13 of the u.s. code to allow it to share the listwith other statistical agencies.the enactment of the tax reform act of 1976 and replacement of previous executive orders with section 6103 had a major impact on this effortfor the centralized business register. prior to the act, it had been thoughtthat only title 13 needed to be changed to allow for sharing of the list.however, the act made it clear that because of the extensive use of taxreturn information by the census bureau (as discussed below), it alsowould be necessary to change section 6103. in december 1978, the secretary of the treasury informed the secretary of commerce that the treasurydepartment would not support legislation to change section 6103. thesecretary stated the reasons for this opposition as follows (p. 56):we would, however, have significant concerns with any proposal toamend section 6103 of the internal revenue code to authorize disclosureof tax return information to be used for ssel purposes. . . . the considerations which underlie the strict limitations imposed by congress uponthe disclosure of tax return information are the taxpayerõs expectation ofand right to privacy, and the potential impact of disclosure upon thecontinuation of compliance with our voluntary tax assessment system.1983 to 1994after the unsuccessful effort by the census bureau to change title 13and section 6103 to allow it to share its business register with other statistical agencies, omb sought legislation to allow more extensive data sharing, including the sharing of data on individuals. the new effort wouldinclude allowing for sharing by more statistical agencies, but it also wouldprovide statutory protection for data collected by all statistical agenciessimilar to the protection afforded to the census bureau by title 13. someagencies had no such supporting legislation, while others, under certaincircumstances, were to turn over data collected for statistical purposes toother agencies for nonstatistical purposes. thus, the proposed legislationwould protect data collected by all statistical agencies for statistical purposes and allow these agencies to share these data with other statisticalagencies.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64improving business statistics through interagency data sharingthe renewed effort to change section 6103 began in 1983 when theadministration sought to have the congress enact socalled statistical enclave legislation, which would provide a single set of confidentiality policies for all federal agencies and their components that collect data for statistical purposes. this legislation, unlike cipsea, would have allowedaccess to tax records by all statistical agencies and included records ofboth individuals and businesses. as described by wilson and smith(1983), this legislation was to provide ò(a) a statutory basis for the traditional promise of confidentiality long given respondents to statistical collections, and (b) restricted sharing of individually identifiable records(ôprotected statistical filesõ) for exclusively statistical agencies (ôprotectedstatistical centersõ) whose confidential records are provided statutory protection under this legislationó (p. 601). the authors express their personalagreement with the portion of the bill that would ensure that data collected for statistical purposes will be used only for statistical purposes.they also report on the objections of the treasury department to increasing access to individually identifiable data for statistical purposes. theauthors report that òthis aspect of the draft bill is unacceptable in theopinion of the department of treasury because, among other things, itmight greatly expand the dissemination of tax return information, attenuate the ability to control such dissemination, and provide insufficient safeguards to prevent further disclosure and erosion of confidentiality.ó interestingly, the authors also report that òthere also appears to be noprovision in the bill that would aid the research work needed to managetax policy or tax administration situations. in particular, no datasharingarrangements for irs statistical purposes are proposed. all the ôsharingõis in the other direction.ó it is not clear whether this is the authorõs objection, the departmentõs, or both.the authors also make it appear that the basis for the treasurydepartmentõs opposition was that òeven though controls may be providedas to redisclosure of information, if the perception is created that tax return information is widely available to others, that perception alone couldbe very destructive of public confidence in the security and privacy ofinformation provided under the tax administration system, and ultimatelydestructive of voluntary complianceó (p. 600).1995 to cipseathe next, and most recent, effort by omb to increase data sharing andchange section 6103 began in 1995, when the clinton administration sentto congress a new set of legislation proposals. this legislation was introduced on a bipartisan basis in the house of representatives in early 1996.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes65under the legislation, eight federal agencies were designated as statisticaldata centers: bea, the census bureau, bls, the national agricultural statistics service, the national center for education statistics, the nationalcenter for health statistics, the energy consumption division of the energy information administration, and the science resources statistics division of the national science foundation. enactment of this legislationwould have improved the efficiency of the federal statistical system, reduced reporting burden on the public, and improved the quality and usefulness of the federal statistics for economic and social policy decisions.a key feature of the proposed legislation required that data or information acquired by an agency for purely statistical purposes could beused only for statistical purposes and could not be shared in identifiableform for any other purpose without the informed consent of the respondent. this proposal, now the statistical efficiency act of 1999 (h.r. 2885),was passed by the house in october 1999. it increased statutory protections for the confidentiality of statistical data and permitted sharing ofdata for statistical purposes among designated agencies. the proposal alsocalled for companion legislation to make complementary changes to provisions set forth in the statistical use section of the internal revenue code.according to omb, the complementary proposal was endorsed by thetreasury department.to meet congressional concerns about the types of data to be exchanged under this proposed complementary legislation, the administration proposed a revised version of the bill. under this version, data sharing would be restricted to bea, bls, and the census bureau, and onlydata on businesses would be shared. finally, at the end of 2002, congresspassed the confidential information protection and statistical efficiencyact (cipsea) of 2002 as title v of the egovernment act (public law107ð347). this legislation established a uniform set of safeguards to protect the confidentiality of individually identifiable information acquiredfrom the public for statistical purposes, as well as consistently strongcriminal penalties for inappropriate disclosure of such information. thelegislation reaffirmed that pledges of confidentiality would be honoredand gave additional weight and stature to policies that statistical agencieshave pursued for decades, assuring respondents who provide statisticalinformation that their responses will be held in confidence and will not beused against them in any government action. cipsea also authorizes thesharing of business data among the bea, bls, and the census bureau.the companion legislative proposal, which would make complementarychanges on access to tax return data by these agencies, has been endorsedby the treasury department and submitted to congress; the proposal hasnot been enacted.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66improving business statistics through interagency data sharingcipseain 2002, congress passed cipsea. the following is the summary ofthe legislation from principles and practices for a federal statistical agency,third edition (national research council, 2005a, pp. 6263):enactment of cipsea culminated more than 30 years of efforts to standardize and strengthen legal protections for data collected for statisticalpurposes by federal agencies while permitting limited sharing of individually identifiable business information among three statistical agencies for efficiency and quality improvement.title v has two subtitles. subtitle a, confidential information protection,strengthens and extends confidentiality protection for all statistical datacollections of the u.s. government. for all data furnished by individualsor organizations to an agency under a pledge of confidentiality for exclusively statistical purposes, it provides that the data will be used only forstatistical purposes and will not be disclosed in identifiable form to anyone not authorized by the title. it makes knowing and willful disclosureof confidential statistical data a class e felony with fines up to $250,000and imprisonment for up to 5 years. subtitle a pertains not only to surveys, but also to collections by a federal agency for statistical purposesfrom administrative records (e.g., state government agency records). datacovered under subtitle a are not subject to release under a freedom ofinformation act request. guidance from omb, which is charged to oversee and coordinate the implementation of cipsea, is under development. it is intended to cover such topics as the steps that agencies musttake to protect confidential information; wording of confidentialitypledges in materials that are provided to respondents; steps that agencies must take to distinguish any data or information they collect fornonstatistical purposes and to provide proper notice to the public of suchdata; and ways in which agents (e.g., contractors, researchers) may bedesignated to use individually identifiable information for analysis andother statistical purposes and be held legally responsible for protectingthe confidentiality of that information.subtitle b of cipsea, statistical efficiency, permits the bureau of economic analysis (bea), the bureau of labor statistics (bls), and the census bureau to share individually identifiable business data for statisticalpurposes. the intent of the subtitle is to reduce respondent burden onbusinesses; improve the comparability and accuracy of federal economicstatistics by permitting these three agencies to reconcile differencesamong sampling frames, business classifications, and business reporting; and increase understanding of the u.s. economy and improve theaccuracy of key national indicators, such as the national income andproduct accounts.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes67postcipseasince the enactment of cipsea, omb has been working again to getthe companion legislation to change section 6103 enacted by congress. instatistical programs of the u.s. government: fiscal year 2005, omb reportedon the latest developments in the effort to change section 6103. in a section on òstatistical confidentiality and data sharing,ó omb reported thefollowing (p. 44):a companion legislative proposal would make complementary changesto provisions set forth in the òstatistical useó section of the internal revenue code. these changes would represent the first major revision ofthese policies in more than 20 years, reducing the amount of sensitive taxinformation that will change hands to support statistical programs whilesubstantially increasing the effectiveness of that support. this objectivewould be achieved by carefully defining statistical needs and taking advantage of the efficiencies that can be achieved by modern samplingmethods. the complementary proposal has been endorsed by the treasury department and submitted to the congress.positions on changing section 6103this section describes the public positions of various organizationswith an interest in data sharing, particularly with tax return records. (thissection excludes omb, which as discussed above, has consistently supported changing the tax laws to permit more data sharing.) the views ofgao, the council of economic advisers, the department of the treasuryand the joint committee on taxation are presented. it also includes theviews of a special study commissioned by the administrative conferenceof the united states.administrative conferencein response to a congressional request, the administrative conferencein 1975 commissioned a team of tax experts headed by charles davenportto study the operations of the irs. the result was the report on administrative procedures of the internal revenue service, october 1975, to the administrative conference of the united states, (davenport, 1976) which included asection on tax return confidentiality. this section reviewed the historyand rationale for tax return access for statistical purposes. the report concluded that òit appears that the use of tax data by census, though notconsistent with revenue administration, is a use which can be consideredbeneficial and is one which does not appear have any undesirable sideeffectsó (p. 880). the study came to a similar a conclusion for bea but notfor the statistical research service (srs) of the department of agriculimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68improving business statistics through interagency data sharingture. the key distinguishing factor for the commission was that censusand bea were strictly statistical agencies and did not engage in activitiesrelated to other functions of the department. in contrast, the commissiondetermined that the statistics collected by srs were òfor policy making bythe agency of which it is a partó (p. 886).government accountability officein 1979, gao issued a report on recent developments in the censusbureauõs efforts to create a centralized business register for use by otherstatistical agencies (u.s. general accounting office, 1979). gao, whichsupports changing section 6103, summarized its findings as follows (titlepage):the bureau of the census has developed the standard statistical establishment list, a comprehensive list of businesses in the united states.many federal agencies could use such information. but confidentialitylaws prevent the census bureau from sharing list information with otheragencies.amendments to these laws would help improve the quality and comparability of economic statistics and reduce business response burden fromnumerous federal statistical surveys.because some of the list data comes from the internal revenue service,the treasury department has reservations about using tax informationfor statistical purposes. however, the commerce department plans tointroduce proposals for changes to the confidentiality laws and gaorecommends favorable congressional consideration.in 1998, gao testified before congress on statistical agencies: proposedconsolidation and data sharing legislation (u.s. general accounting office, 1998). the testimony was about the datasharing legislation submitted in 1996 and 1997 that would permit limited sharing of data amongdesignated statistical agencies for statistical purposes, subject to procedural safeguards. the testimony included the following statement ofgaoõs position (pp. 56):for the past 2 decades, we and others have urged legislative changes thatwould allow greater sharing of data and information on data sourcesamong agencies, but so far these efforts have met with little success. thepaperwork reduction act of 1980 gave the director of omb the authority to direct a statistical agency to share information it had collected withanother statistical agency. however, this authority was limited since itdid not apply to information that was covered by laws prohibiting disclosure outside the collecting agency. in the early 1980s, the statisticalagencies, under ombõs leadership, tried to further enable federal statistiimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes69cal agencies to share data. they attempted to synthesize, in a single bill,a set of confidentiality policies that could be applied consistently to allfederal agencies or their components that collected data for statisticalpurposes. this effort, which was known as the òstatistical enclaveó bill,would have allowed statistical agencies to exchange information underspecific controls intended to preserve the confidentiality of the data providers. a bill was introduced in congress but was not enacted.more recent proposals concerning data sharing have called for enactment of legislation that would allow statistical agencies to share data andinformation with appropriate safeguards to protect against breaches ofconfidentiality. these proposals were not adopted, in part because of general concerns that greater data sharing might endanger the privacy ofindividuals. both the economic statistics initiative under president[george h.w.] bush and the national performance review (npr) underpresident clinton have recommended such actions. npr recommendedthe elimination of legislative barriers to the exchange of business dataamong federal statistical agencies, and we agreed with this recommendation. the npr recommendation did not address the sharing of information on individuals. some officials of statistical agencies and members of congress, however, have argued that a distinction should bemade between the sharing of business data and the sharing of personaldata about individuals. they noted that breaches of confidentiality protection when personal information is involved may be more serious. thenational academy of sciences has made recommendations regarding theneed for appropriate legislative provisions on data sharing that the subcommittee may wish to consider in its deliberations on s. 1404.in 2001, gao issued record linkage and privacy: issues in creating newfederal research and statistical information (u.s. general accounting office,2001). this report reviews the background of the key issues related todata sharing. however, the focus on the report was òon linkage projectsthat involve personspecific data, are conducted under federal auspices(or with federal funding), and produce new research or statistical informationó (p. 10). the report did not cover business data sharing.council of economic advisersin the 2002 economic report of the president, the council of economicadvisers noted the critical need for reliable data and that data sharingwould increase their quality. this excerpt notes the submission of proposals in 1999 and that the administration would continue to work for theirpassage (p. 25):recent economic events have emphasized the importance of timely economic information. thus one area deserving considerable attention is theneed for readily accessible realtime data. investment in sources of theseimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70improving business statistics through interagency data sharingdata could yield handsome dividends, especially at key junctures in thebusiness cycle. . . .moreover, the quality of existing statistics is far from perfect and couldbe enhanced with further investment. even real gdp, generally thoughtof as a reliable measure of overall activity in the u.s. economy, is susceptible to considerable revisions. . . . such revisions lead to uncertainty forboth government and private decisionmakers, which can cause costlydelays. . . .a number of steps can be taken to improve the accuracy and timelinessof economic statistics. in particular, targeted improvements to the sourcedata for the national accounts would go a long way toward illuminatingthe causes of the growing statistical discrepancy. another costeffectivemeasure would be to ease the current restrictions on the sharing of confidential statistical data among federal statistical agencies. such datasharing, which would be done solely for statistical purposes, is currentlyhindered by lack of a uniform confidentiality policy. confidentiality is ofkey importance to all agencies and to the individuals and businesses whoparticipate in federal surveys, but a uniform confidentiality policy wouldallow agencies such as the bureau of economic analysis, the bureau oflabor statistics, and the bureau of the census to costeffectively compare and improve the quality of their published statistics while preserving confidentiality. in the past, attempts have been made to pass legislation, together with a conforming bill to modify the internal revenuecode, allowing such data sharing under carefully crafted agreementsbetween or among statistical agencies. in 1999 such legislation passedthe house but stalled in the senate. the administration will continue toseek passage of datasharing legislation to improve the quality and effectiveness of federal statistical programs.treasury department and the joint committee on taxation, 2000section 3802 of the internal revenue service restructuring and reform act of 1998 requires the secretary of the treasury and the jct toconduct separate studies of the scope and use of provisions regardingtaxpayer confidentiality and to report the findings of such a study, together with any recommendations deemed appropriate to congress. thejct published its report on january 28, 2000; the office of tax policy ofthe department of the treasury submitted its report on october 2, 2000.the jct and the treasury department disagree on changing section6103 to permit expanded data sharing. the jct recommended that ònewaccess to returns and return information should not be provided unlessthe requesting agency can establish a compelling need for the disclosurethat clearly outweighs the privacy interests of the taxpayeró (p. 196). (seebelow for information on business taxpayer views.) the jct report didimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes71not explain how to determine both the pros and cons of such a decision,nor did it appear to fully accept the need for the existing access. (both thejct and the treasury department recommended dropping the federaltrade commission from access under section 6103.)the treasury department recommended òthe disclosure authority ofsection 6103(j) should be expanded to additional specified statistical agencies, and such agencies should be permitted, upon prior treasury approval, to share irs data with each other.ó it also specified the agencies toinclude and that the change to section 6103 should cover both individualand business records.treasury department, 2001 to presentin the 20012005 statistical programs of the united states government,omb reports support for the companion legislation that would changesection 6103.business taxpayersas noted above, the jct identified the key issues in determiningwhether to change section 6103 when it wrote ònew access to returnsand return information should not be provided unless the requestingagency can establish a compelling need for the disclosure that clearly outweighs the privacy interests of the taxpayeró (p. 196). although there is asubstantial amount of research on individualsõ views on confidentialityand data sharing, much of it conducted for the decennial censuses,there is limited information on the views of businesses. the informationthat is available seems to indicate that business taxpayers are willingto allow more access to statistical agencies for some types of tax returninformation.private business economists have actively supported data sharing. in1996, maurine haver, president of haver analytics and chair of the statistics committee of the national association for business economics(nabe), testified before the house subcommittee on government management, information and technology. in her testimony on consolidatingthe three major economic statistical agencies (h.r. 2521), she expressedsupport for the inclusion in that bill of provisions to provide for data sharing among these agencies, as it would allow for the creation of a singlebusiness register. in 2001, richard berner, the president of nabe andmanaging director and chief u.s. economist, morgan stanley, inc., testified before the house subcommittee on the census committee on government reform on the statistical efficiency act of 1999. in his testimony,berner reported on nabeõs support for the reintroduction of this act,improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72improving business statistics through interagency data sharingwhich had been passed unanimously by the house in the previous congress. he testified ònabe believes that our national data collection effortsshould be as efficient as possible. to that end, we believe that congressshould mandate ôdata sharingõ among the agencies, solely for statisticalpurposes.ó he noted that existing confidentiality statutes are barriers tosuch data sharing because òthey virtually guarantee duplication of effortand inconsistencies among related data sets collected by the affected agencies. moreover, they prevent agencies from undertaking new analyses thatcould improve the information available to policy makers. this is not acosteffective way to run any businessñeither public or private.óa 2001 article called òbusiness perceptions of confidentialityó reported on the results of a survey conducted by the urban institute onthese business perceptions (greenia, lane, and jensen, 2001). of particular interest to the issue of privacy interests is the response to a set of questions about types of data that businesses view as very sensitive. the survey results showed that less than 5 percent of respondents thought theirname and address and industrial activity were very sensitive, but 85 percent of respondents were very sensitive to data about their employees.between 50 and 75 percent of the respondents thought their financial datawere very sensitive.current interagency sharing of business dataamong the many examples of interagency sharing of business data,the oldest and most extensive is the use of tax information by the censusbureau to support its economic statistics programs. with the cooperationof the irs in modifying questions on tax returns and timely delivery oftax records, the census bureau has been able to reduce reporting burdenin the quinquennial economic censuses for small businesses, to improvethe quality of key data from these censuses, and to develop new statisticalprograms. this section discusses this sharing as well as other selectedexamples; it excludes the county business patterns report (the censusbureau, irs, and ssa) and the sharing of bls quarterly unemploymentinsurance data with bea.sharing by the census bureau and irsas reported in various editions of the history of the economic censuses, the extensive use of tax return records, from both the irs and thessa, began with the 1954 economic censuses. in previous censuses, fieldenumeration was used to collect the data. in 1954, the census bureau developed a mailing list from irs records of employers with the industryclassification based on lists from the ssa. in addition, to assist the censusimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes73bureau, the irs changed the 1954 tax forms to include information neededto determine the physical location of the business rather than the mailingaddress and other changes needed by the census bureau to determinewhether firms had employees. as a result, for the first time, it becamepossible for the census bureau to use tax return information as a sourceof census data. the census bureau decided that because firms with nopaid employees represented a very small portion of the volume of retailand service trade but constituted a large number of businesses, it wouldforgo the collection of certain information from these firms and use theavailable tax return information to òimputeó a complete report. for 1954,they used this technique by selecting a 50 percent sample of retail andservice nonemployers. in 1963, this process was improved by the cooperation of the irs in designing new census coverage questions for the1963 tax returns, assigning industry classifications to nonemployer returnsin the field offices. in 1967, the census bureau used all tax records andeliminated the sample. in addition, beginning with the 1987 economic census, a separate publication on nonemployer statistics was introduced.these data were published annually beginning with 1998, and the datafor 2003 were released in june 2005.the use by the census bureau of the irs and ssa records was expanded significantly for the 1967 economic censuses. for 1967, the censusbureau began using the same information to impute a census report forselected small employers. as a result, about 3 million small establishmentswere relieved of the task of completing census questionnaires. overall,data for approximately 60 percent of the establishments included in thescope of the census were obtained through the use of irs and ssa records.(although large in number, these small establishments account for onlyabout 7 percent of total sales.) in another expansion of the use of the irsand ssa records, the census bureau also began to use tax return information for the larger employer firms to review the quality of their responsesin the censuses.the census bureau also has used its access to tax return informationto create a new special supplement to the economic censuses, which isnow known as the survey of business ownership (sbo). using data collected in the economic censuses, business tax return information from theirs, and administrative data from the ssa, the sbo provides statisticsthat describe the composition of u.s. businesses by gender, race, andethnicity, as well as ownerõs age, education level, and veteran status. inthe 1997 economic census, this survey was conducted as two separate surveys; a survey of minorityowned businesses and a survey of womenowned businesses. these surveys have been conducted as part of the economic censuses since 1972.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74improving business statistics through interagency data sharingsharing by bea and the irsunder access to tax returns provided by executive orders and nowsection 6103, bea uses individual corporate income tax return data toestimate adjustments to the published irs corporate profits data and converts these irs data to accounting concepts underlying gross nationalproduct. for its regional economic accounts program, using a provisionof section 6103 that allows irs to give access to bea to review and tabulate individual tax return records for irs, bea produces tabulations (afterreview by the irs to ensure taxpayer confidentiality) of nonfarm proprietorsõ income by state and county that are used to distribute beaõs national totals.sharing by the census bureau and blsanother effort to improve the quality of the economic censuses camein 1992 when the census bureau and bls entered into a memorandum ofunderstanding regarding the use of bls records by the census bureaufor the economic censuses. under this agreement, the census bureaucompiled a list of single establishment employer identification numbersfor which it needed the bls industrial classification codes. the blsmatched this against its own business register and returned a listingof matched records with the appropriate industrial classification codes.the codes provided by bls were from its threeyear classification updateprogram and provided the census bureau with more uptodate classification information, as the census bureau typically updated its classification of these businesses once every five years. records are not availableto determine the extent to which the census bureau classifications werechanged as a result of this effort.in 1998, bls and the census bureau entered into another memorandum of understanding. this agreement authorized the agencies to conduct research to evaluate (1) the business registers maintained by the twoagencies, (2) opportunities to improve each otherõs list, and (3) the benefits and risks of sharing list information. after an initial round of comparisons had been completed and a report presented to the federal economic statistics advisory committee, the project was stopped by the irsbecause the census bureau may have given bls staff access to tax returninformation embedded in the census register. omb has reported that thisresearch has resumed under a memorandum of understanding that hasbeen approved by irs.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes75sharing between bea and the census bureauthe international investment and trade in services act of 1990 authorized bea and the census bureau to exchange data collected by beaunder this act and data collected by the census bureau under title 13. thepurpose of the exchange was to improve the quality of each agencyõs dataand to allow for the preparation of a report that showed the distributionby industry and geography of establishments owned by foreign directinvestors. the act authorized a similar exchange between bea and bls.in 2003, using the authority from cipsea, bea and the census bureau entered into an arrangement to match data from beaõs surveys calledforeign direct investment in the united states and u.s. direct investmentabroad with data from the census bureau survey of industrial researchand development (sird). working with the national science foundation, which funds sird, the project demonstrated the feasibility of linkingthe the census bureau and bea survey data to produce new data on thedomestic and international dimensions of u.s. research and development(r&d) activity. the project generated new data on r&d activities of u.s.and foreign multinational companies and on the location of u.s. r&dactivity by state. the project also allowed for a higher degree of integration between data on the domestic dimensions of r&d and data on theinternational dimensions. the project also provided benefits to both thecensus bureau and bea through improvements in data quality. researchon the outcomes of the matching resulted in the census bureauõs addingover 500 companies to the sample for the 2003 sird and over 60 companies to the 2004 sird sample frame. the matching also indicated significant differences in the reporting of both r&d expenditures and industryclassification. these differences were resolved and resulted in improvedquality in beaõs estimates.sharing between bea and blsbls produced several reports as a result of the sharing authorized bythe international investment and trade in services act of 1990. in 1993,bls released 1989 employment data on the occupations for manufacturing by industry and country of ownership in foreignowned establishments. bls prepared this report using data from the beaõs 1989 annualsurvey of foreign direct investment in the united states to identifyforeignowned establishments in the bls covered employment andwages data. these establishments were then linked to establishmentsfrom the bls occupational employment statistics survey of manufacturing industries for 1989.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76improving business statistics through interagency data sharingin 1995, bls released tabulations for the fourth quarter of 1991 showing a distribution by industry and geography for foreignowned establishments in the united states based on employment data from their covered employment and wages data. bea is also planning to provide blswith company and revenue data from several of its international surveysso that bls can study expanding their international price program to include a new price index for royalties and license fees. bea hopes to benefit from this sharing by comparing its sample frame with the one compiled by bls for this price program.referencesberner, r.2001testimony before the house subcommittee on the census committee on government reform on the statistical efficiency act of 1999, washington, dc.council of economic advisers2002economic report of the president. washington, dc: executive office of the president.davenport, c., and the administrative conference of the united states1976report on administrative procedures of the internal revenue service, october 1975, tothe administrative conference of the united states. senate document, 94th congress,2nd session; 94266.greenia, n., j. lane, and b. jensen2001business perceptions of confidentiality. pp. 395429 in confidentiality, disclosure,and data access: theory and practical applications for statistical agencies. p. doyle,j.i. lane, j.m. theeuwes, and l.v. zayatz, eds. amsterdam, the netherlands:northholland, elsevier science.haver, m.1996testimony before the house subcommittee on government management, information and technology, 104th u.s. congress, washington, dc.joint committee on taxation2000study of presentlaw taxpayer confidentiality and disclosure provisions as required bysection 3802 of the internal revenue service restructuring and reform act of 1998,volume i: study of general disclosure provisions (jcs100). washington, dc: u.s.government printing office.mcmillen, d.2003privacy, confidentiality, and data sharing. unpublished paper presented at thenational research councilõs committee on national statistics confidential dataaccess for research purposes workshop, washington, dc.national research council1976setting statistical priorities: report of the panel on methodology for statistical prioritiesof the committee on national statistics. assembly of mathematical and physical sciences, commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.1980report of an october 1979 conference on sharing of social science research data. committee on national statistics, commission on behavioral and social sciences andeducation. washington, dc: national academy press.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.datasharing history and legislation: background notes771985sharing research data. committee on national statistics. s.e. fienberg, m.e. martin, and m.l. straf, eds. commission on behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.1993private lives and public policies: confidentiality and accessibility of government statistics. panel on confidentiality and data access, committee on national statistics.g.t. duncan, t.b. jabine, and v.a. de wolf, eds. commission on behavioral andsocial sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.2000improving access to and confidentiality of research data: report of a workshop. committee on national statistics. c. mackie and n. bradburn, eds. commission onbehavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: national academy press.2005aprinciples and practices for a federal statistical agency, third edition. committee onnational statistics. m.e. martin, m.l. straf, and c.f. citro, eds. division of behavioral and social sciences and education. washington, dc: the national academies press.2005bexpanding access to research data: reconciling risks and opportunities. committeeon national statistics, division of behavioral and social sciences and education.washington, dc: the national academies press.office of federal statistical policy and standards1978a framework for planning u.s. federal statistics for the 1980õs. washington, dc: u.s.department of commerce.privacy protection study commission1977personal privacy in an information society. washington, dc: u.s government printing office.singer, e.2001the potential of confidentiality and attitudes toward data sharing by federal agencies. pp. 341370 in confidentiality, disclosure, and data access: theory and practicalapplications for statistical agencies. p. doyle, j.i. lane, j.m. theeuwes, and l.v.zayatz, eds. amsterdam, the netherlands: northholland, elsevier science.social security administration1991social security administrationõs continuous work history sample. social securitybulletin 52(10).u.s. bureau of economic analysis and u.s. bureau of the census2003foreign direct investment in the united states: establishment data for 1997. washington, dc: u.s. government printing office.u.s. census bureau1968economic censuses. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.20022005acounty business patterns: 2003. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.2005bresearch and development data link project: final report. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.2005cnonemployer statistics report: 2003. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.2005d 2002 survey of business owners: advanced report. washington, dc: u.s. department of commerce.u.s. department of labor, bureau of labor statistics1993new research on occupations in foreignowned manufacturing establishments in theunited states. (news release.) washington, dc: u.s. department of labor.1995employment and wages in foreignowned businesses in the united states, fourth quarter 1991. (news release.) washington, dc: u.s. department of labor.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78improving business statistics through interagency data sharingu.s. department of the treasury, department of tax policy2000report to the congress on scope and use of taxpayer confidentiality and disclosureprovisions as required by section 3802 of the internal revenue service restructuringand reform act of 1998, volume i: study of general disclosure provisions. washington, dc: u.s. department of the treasury.u.s. general accounting office1979after six years, legal obstacles continue to restrict government use of the standardstatistical establish list. washington, dc: u.s. general accounting office.1998statistical agencies: proposed consolidation and datasharing legislation. washington, dc: u.s. general accounting office.2001record linkage and privacy: issues in creating new federal research and statisticalinformation. washington, dc: u.s. general accounting office.u.s. office of management and budget2001statistical programs of the united states government, fiscal years 20022005. wash2005ington, dc: executive office of the president.wilson, o., and w. smith1983access to tax records for statistical purposes. pp. 595601 in proceedings of the survey research methods section. alexandria, va: american statistical association.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.796irs data, data users, and data sharingnick greenia and mark mazurinternal revenue service1the importance of tax data to the federal statistical system, in bothidentifiable and anonymized form, derives from the fact that they are anational asset, a virtual treasure of information. tax data are rich in bothindividual and organizational financial details that are useful in a widevariety of situations. first, these data underpin the administration of thefederal tax system, which in turn provides the resources for many federalobligations. second, tax data have almost as important a role as inputs tocritical statistical systems that inform analysts and policy makers bothinside and outside government. a critical issue for both the tax systemand the federal statistical system is the determination of when a compelling need exists for identifiable tax data (often known as federal tax information or fti) in lieu of aggregate anonymized data. the balance between the sometimes opposing interests of these systems is the focus ofthis chapter.tax data collectedthe internal revenue service (irs) collects data for a variety ofentitiesñcovering over 130 million individuals and over 20 million businesses, tax exempt organizations, and governmental entities. the scope oftax return data, often including complete balance sheets and financial1the views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and may not represent theofficial positions of the internal revenue service or the treasury department.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80improving business statistics through interagency data sharingstatements, is vast and contains information on everything from net business profits to charitable contributions made by individuals. moreover,the regularity of the data providedñannually, quarterly, and evenmonthly for some returnsñand the fact that much of the data are captured electronically and for the universe of filers, makes fti a potent resource for research and analysis.the subject of business data can be a broad one, covering corporations, partnerships, and sole proprietorships and both employers andnonemployers. intuition can be a poor guide for the types of data collected and available. for example, employer data are collected for parttime and fulltime sole proprietorships, associated with individual tax returns, corporations, and partnerships, as well as entities that are nottypically thought of as businesses, such as nonprofit organizations. employment data themselves can be compiled at the employer level throughthe employment tax returns filed by businesses (for example the form 941series long used by the census bureau). they can also be compiled at theemployee level and associated with the related employers through socialsecurity number/employer identification number (ssn/ein) crosswalks(for example, using the ssns and eins captured from form w2, used toreport annual wage and salary payments).typically, the irs tracks business data at the ein or enterprise level,but not at the establishment or place of business level unless they are oneand the same. this practice differs from that used by most federal statistical agencies. tax data accuracy is helped by the irs compliance programs,including legal disincentives for noncompliance. nevertheless, given thescope and frequency of the data processed by the irs, the agency cannotensure the accuracy of all items or the complete (100 percent) coverage ofentities. that is, fti faces limitations similar to those of data sets maintained by statistical agencies, so the tax data system per se should not beviewed as the panacea for statistical program deficiencies. as experiencehas shown, there will always be gaps and inconsistencies, even in relatively highquality data sets.purpose of data collectionfundamentally, fti is collected for use in administering the tax system, including tax policy analysis in the administration (the departmentof the treasuryõs office of tax analysis) and congress (the joint committee on taxation). the irs considers the successful administration of thetax system as highly dependent on voluntary compliance by millions andmillions of taxpayers. in turn, voluntary compliance is seen as reliant onthe protectionñincluding the perceived protectionñof taxpayer data confidentiality. taxpayers share personal information with the irs and areimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.irs data, data users, and data sharing81assured that their personal data will be handled with the utmost care. theirs believes that the tax administration purpose of fti is paramount, andother uses of tax data, including statistical uses, must not interfere withthat purpose.the statistical usage of fti is authorized by the statute (section 6103(j)of the internal revenue code, irc) and associated treasury regulations,which detail specific items and clarify the purposes for which access byparties outside the irs may be granted. the tax code implicitly recognizes that statistical and administrative uses share common ground, inthat both missions are dependent on highquality data. in summary, thereare two major goals for fti. first, the dataõs confidentiality should beprotected, so that voluntary compliance and the workings of the tax system are not harmed. second, the data should be used effectively and efficiently for authorized purposes. it should be clear from these two goalsthat the role of the irs with respect to tax data is less one of ownershipthan stewardship.data usersthe foremost use of tax data is administering the tax system and includes such functions as taxpayer account processing, audit and othercompliance activity, research, and the compilation of statistics. in addition, fti is provided, through the federalstate program, to state tax agencies in order to assist with statesõ tax administration needs. in fact, statesaccount for the lionõs share of fti record disclosures to outsidersñin2004, over 3 billion of the total 4.5 billion reported disclosures. however,the uses of tax data go well beyond that of tax administration, as thenation has long recognized their value not only for the formulation of taxpolicy and other program uses (such as social security) but also for statistical purposes. for the former purpose, tax data are used extensivelyby treasuryõs office of tax analysis and the congressional taxwritingcommitteesñthe joint committee on taxation, the senate finance committee, and the house ways and means committee. other congressionaluses include oversight work undertaken for a taxwriting committee, forexample, by the u.s. government accountability office.for a handful of federal entities listed in the tax code, selected identifiable tax datañby no means all itemsñare provided for statistical purposes. these consist of the bureau of economic analysis (bea), the census bureau, the department of agricultureõs national agriculturalstatistical service (usdanass), and the congressional budget office(cbo). the census bureau accounts for most of the statisticalpurposefti record disclosures: over one billion in 2004. tax data are also broadlyused in statistical nonidentifiable form (usually tabulations) to assistimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82improving business statistics through interagency data sharingother entities, such as businesses, policy think tanks, federal agencies notauthorized to receive identifiable data, and academic researchers. authorization process for accessevery access to fti, even within the irs, must be authorized by statute, meaning that legislation has been codified as part of title 26 of theunited states code. furthermore, the statute requires that only the minimum amount of authorized fti be provided for accomplishing a givenauthorized task. these constraints apply to all users, including the irs.for example, virtually all access to fti within the irs is authorized for thepurpose of tax administration, which is multifaceted, under section6103(h)(1) of the irc.as might be expected, given the sensitivity of fti, the law governingaccess to confidential or identifiable tax data, especially for statistical purposes, is restrictive with respect to both access and use. thirty years afterthe tax code was overhauled with the 1976 tax reform act, the number ofentities with statistical access to fti can still be counted on one hand: thecensus bureau, bea, cbo, and usdanass.2 based on the statutoryrecord to date, it seems clear that congress has regarded any expansion inaccess to fti for statistical purposes as deserving of cautious and comprehensive consideration. unsurprisingly, the rate of change has been glacial, primarily involving usdanass, when the census of agriculturewas transferred to that agency from the census bureau in the late 1990s,and cbo soon after, with its statutory addition for the purpose of longterm modeling of social security and medicare. even in these instances,however, the historical precedent provided some reassurance regardingthe entry of these two new members to the fti club. working as specialsworn status individuals in the census bureau, nass had conductedmuch of the previous agriculture censuses. similarly, cbo had longstanding experience in handling fti as an agent for the joint tax committee under section 6103(f)(4) of the irc. thus, neither was a novice withregard to either fti or the associated culture of confidentiality that ftiaccess requires.adding statistical users or increasing access for current users of ftimeans section 6103(j) must be amended; that is, a new law must be passed.thus, the first requirement of any datasharing proposal entailing access2the federal trade commissionõs inclusion in this statute is vestigial, as its quarterlyfinancial report function was transferred to the census bureau in the mid1980s. althoughtreasury is also listed in the statute, virtually all of its fti receipts are authorized by section6103(h)(1) as being related to tax administration.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.irs data, data users, and data sharing83to tax data is that the agencies proposed for sharing data must all be in thetax statute or section 6103(j). this is a necessary but not a sufficient condition, as the agencies must also share statutory authorization to receive thesame types of datañfor example, corporate total income and individualinvestment income. in addition, applicable regulations, which require formal approval by the treasury departmentõs assistant secretary for taxpolicy, may also be needed to authorize access and use of the sametax items for the agencies statutorily enabled to receive fti. treasury regulations may not only list the specific item content an agency is authorizedto receive but also stipulate a more focused purpose. regulations can alsobe amended to remove items that are no longer needed by an authorizedrecipient. in fact, need and, in particular, the requirement of providingonly the minimum amount of data needed to accomplish a compellingagency task, is a bedrock principle used for determining not only the necessity of a new statute, but also a regulation amendment. historically,both congress and the treasury department have required that a compelling datadriven case be made for amending either statute or regulation, although clearly, it is more difficult to amend the statute.occasionally, policy agreements crafted by the treasury departmentor the irs and one of the statistical agencies may be used to supplementthe statute and regulations. for example, the irscensus bureau criteriafor the review and approval of census bureau projects that use federaltax information (sometimes called the criteria agreement) has been usedto delineate and clarify the process under which fti may be accessed fornew census bureau purposes, especially authorized research purposes atthe census bureau as part of their research data center arrangement.challenges in protecting confidentialityprotecting the confidentiality of tax data is challenging for the irs,especially because there is no statute of limitations and because the taxcode treats all fti the same with respect to confidentiality protection. thatis, to the irs, a business name or address is as deserving of confidentialityprotection as income items for a large corporationõs or individualõs taxreturn, and all must be protected in perpetuity, even after they have beenanonymized as statistical tabulations for public release. given these constraints, the resource consequences of safeguarding taxpayer confidentiality over time are nontrivial. these constraints are exacerbated by thepotential for complementary disclosure, or the reidentification of taxpayerdata using indirect means, for example, using data in other publicly released data to identify fti related to a particular taxpayer. given the everincreasing public releases of tax and other data, the task of protecting ftiis daunting, especially over time.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84improving business statistics through interagency data sharingconstraints on using dataas indicated earlier, the access of fti must be only for purposes authorized by statute, possibly supplemented with regulations and, infrequently, policy agreements. in addition, authorized recipients are subjectto regular safeguards reviews in order to confirm their understandingand implementation of the many requirements covering physical andcomputer security, data need and use, and appropriate documentation.other requirements include separate systems for processing or accessingfti and background checks on individuals accessing it within facilitiescertified for such purposes. all these requirements are intended to preserve the confidentiality of fti, whether maintained in its original form orcommingled with data from other sources. in addition, the penalties andfines for unauthorized disclosures or inspections (also known as browsing) can be severe and are detailed in the tax code.all of these constraints are largely driven by concerns for taxpayerconfidentiality, and, in general, they seek to control or regulate the use oftax data by conceptually limiting, physically confining, and tracking suchaccess in order to provide a documented audit trail that will withstandoutside or thirdparty scrutiny. implicitly, both the irs and congress recognize that this approach does not guarantee complete confidentiality, asthe only means for such an assurance would be not to release any data atall. however, padlocking the treasure of tax data is viewed as neither adesirable nor a viable outcome, so some disclosure risk is accepted as partof the necessary balance of protection and access. the challenge is to identify acceptable risk, and the approach utilized to date is taking steps thatprevent reidentification of tax data through òreasonable means.ó the interpretation of reasonable means includes the use of reasonably availablecomputer technology, mathematical/statistical techniques, and a working knowledge of the related subject matter. the reasonable means standard attempts to avoid system meltdown in the use of fti. òreasonablemeansó is a technologyrelative concept and thus, it may be a movingtarget. nevertheless, it represents an attempt at balancing the two goalsfor tax data: their protection and their effective use.it seems clear that there is probably some overall limit on tax dataaccess, even if that limit is not precisely known. the need for this limit canbe attributable to both resource costs of protection and what might betermed as the perception of a plausible quantity limit on access. to seewhy such a limit makes sense, consider that even large amounts of safeguarding resources cannot enable unlimited access to fti. the reason iscredibility. it is simply not credible that unlimited access would ever passa perceptions test on confidentiality protection, especially for thirdpartyscrutiny. that is, such an outcome would not seem plausible, as it wouldseem to turn the very concept of confidentiality on its head.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.irs data, data users, and data sharing85sometimes conflicting mandatesstatistical agencies such as the census bureau are mandated to useexisting data systems (especially administrative records) to the maximumextent possible. combined with the irs statutory mandate to provide ftionly to the minimum extent needed for authorized purposes, these mandates create a tension that drives a need to negotiate the appropriateamount of fti accessible for a given statistical task. this is not to say thatthe relationship between tax agency and nontax agency needs to be veryadversarial. in effect, access to fti should be treated as a scarce resource.accordingly, the opposing mandates create an initial starting point thatrequires interagency cooperation in order to find a welfareimprovingoutcome, in which both parties find it in their interest to move to this newpoint. thus, while tension from the conflicting mandates may be viewedinitially as a problem, it is probably necessary to ensure the protection oftaxpayer confidentiality and the provision of fti only to the extent necessary for compelling statistical needs. without such tension, there wouldprobably be some biasñeither too much access or too little. with this constraint, the irs and the authorized statistical agencies are compelled tobargain hard toward an equilibrium that upholds their respective mandates, and that both sides are willing to defend. ultimately, any interagency agreement must be documented in order to be clearly implemented and to successfully withstand outside scrutiny. thus, the conflictin mandates provides a type of pricing mechanism for achieving a balance between supply and demand for fti access. forces likely to continueexerting pressure on this mechanism would include declining survey response rates, statistical processing costs, response burden, and, of course,the need to maintain voluntary tax compliance by protecting taxpayerconfidentiality.the census bureauirs criteria agreementa 19992000 irs safeguards review of the census bureau raised concerns over access by its research data centers (rdcs) to fti, especiallyfrom the perspective of statutorily authorized purpose. as a result, thecensus bureau and irs agreed to the terms of the coauthored criteria forthe review and approval of the census bureau projects that use federaltax information, effective september 19, 2000. the criteria agreementoutlined protocols and other requirements governing access to fti fornew uses by the census bureau, especially for rdc projects. the irsreview role, assigned to the statistics of income division, consists of approving or concurring on the predominant title 13, chapter 5, purposeof proposed projects and ensuring that the minimal fti needed would beaccessed for a given proposed usage. scientific merit remained the provimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86improving business statistics through interagency data sharingince of the census bureau and the researcher community, and, for purposes of the criteria agreement, outside researchers were treated as census bureau employees (under the special sworn status designation). thecriteria agreement can be seen as a good outcome for the opposingagency mandates governing access to fti for statistical purposes. as apolicy agreement, it established an explicit interagency standard for authorized purpose that supplemented longstanding statutes and regulations in adapting to changing user needs. a cornerstone of the agreementwas its emphasis on proposal review documentation, including explicitdual agency approvals on both the project proposals and postprojectcertifications. in addition, the review process it fostered implicitly enlisted the research communityõs active participation by forcing it to develop and maintain review capital and adding to the interagency appreciation of confidentiality needed to make this process viable. such anoutcome recognizes the limited review resources available in both thecensus bureau and irs and was essential in order to promote a viableflow of projects. the process also made all three participantsñthe census bureau, the irs, and the researcher communityñaware of the needto work together in order to make the process demonstrably credible forpurposes of potential thirdparty scrutiny.datasharing proposalsfor three decades, the federal statistical community has attempted toovercome certain deficienciesñparticularly list frame coverage acrossagenciesñof the decentralized data collection system by submitting anumber of proposed statistical datasharing bills to congress. these usually died in committee after being introduced, and many required anamendment to the tax code, due to the importance of tax data in theseproposals, and because fti for business is inextricably commingled withnonfti on the census bureauõs business register. as a result, a numberof the datasharing proposals were accompanied by companion tax bills,known as òj bills,ó due to their proposed amendment of section 6103(j). inthe 1990s, two of these proposals addressed both demographic and business data and encompassed all 10 major statistical agencies. neither wasenacted.the most recent datasharing legislation, part b of the confidentialinformation protection and statistical efficiency act (cipsea), focusedon sharing only business data and was restricted to the three major business data statistical agencies: bea, the census bureau, and the bureau oflabor statistics (bls). a companion j bill accompanied cipsea when itwas introduced in congress in july 2002. this strategy led to the enactment of partial (nontax) data sharing when cipsea was signed into lawimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.irs data, data users, and data sharing87in december 2002. however, the accompanying j bill attracted less legislative support, never made it to the floor of the house, and expired withthat congress.from this experience a number of lessons have emerged, some ofwhich cipsea had already absorbed, and some of which, with hindsight,might have led to some differences in both approach and content.lessons learnedstrong leadership is neededstrong leadership was provided for cipsea throughout the 2002 effort by both the council of economic advisers and the office of management and budget. more advocates were probably needed, especially incongress, in order to advance both (tax and nontax) parts of the proposalonce it arrived there. in fact, support by members in both the house andthe senate would seem critical in order to overcome concerns about increased sharing of identifiable tax data. in a similar vein, the support ofcongressional staffñespecially on the taxwriting committeesñneeds tobe enlisted, with a compelling case on why the bill is needed, includingnot only how government statistical operations would be improved butalso how taxpayer confidentiality would remain protected.dispell the myth of access being a zerosum activitypart of the education effort needed would be well spent focusing onthe myth in the tax community that expanded access to fti is undesirablein general and that access cannot be expanded in one area without a commensurate reduction somewhere else. for example, the notion that increasing the number of agencies accessing business data can only be accomplished at the expense of reducing another agencyõs existing access tofti must be countered. one strong argument countering this position isthe evidence provided by adding both usdanass and cbo to the statute as authorized recipients of fti without reduction in access elsewhereand without observable problems in terms of weakened confidentiality.another counterargument might be the controlled expansion in accessenabled by the census bureauirs criteria agreement for the rdcsñnow in its sixth year of implementation.discrete steps may be better than bold leapsconcerns articulated by some opponents of the 2002 cipsea effortinclude the notion that the j billõs expanded access seemed too broad beimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88improving business statistics through interagency data sharingcause (1) it was modeled on the census bureauirs criteria agreement,which included access by researchers at the census bureau rdcs, and (2)the statutory language referenced regulations to be released in the futurefor purposes of authorizing access to specific items of fti. the two majorpurposes of sharing fti for part b of cipsea have largely been describedas establishing a common business list frame for all three agencies (bea,the census bureau, and bls) and in providing common identifier information that would enable the three agencies to exchange nontax data witheach other. the potential for excessive access to tax data under the cipseaj bill was a concern, given that expanding item access via regulation wouldrequire only treasury approval, not an act of congress. this concern mayhave been heightened by the interest bls has indicated in sharing limitedfti with its state partners. moreover, both bea and bls might some daywant to pursue access arrangements with researchers in a way similar towhat the census bureau has done with its rdc model, which would increase the number of persons with fti access. in short, these concernswere raised about the ability to limit, track, or control access to fti andshould be addressed by any future j bill.one possibility for assuaging such concerns is to stipulate a limitedamount of fti in the statute itself, obviating the need for regulations. theitems themselves might be limited to, say, taxpayer identification number(tin), name, address, industry code, and one or two magnitude variables,such as employment size and income, for the purpose of stratifying asample. listing in the statute only the items needed for purposes of addressing the central problem (i.e., mutual list frame coverage, exchange ofnontax data) might help emphasize the agenciesõ good faith effort to request and use only the items justified by the datasharing rationale, sothat the principle of the minimum fti needed would be met. in addition,such a statutory limitation might help signify that these agencies did notintend to replace surveys with fti per se, an argument sometimes raisedby opponents of expanded access.show some benefit to the treasurywhen cipsea and the j bill were introduced to congress in july 2002,staff from both the house ways and means and the senate finance committees raised questions about how the legislation, especially the datasharing enabled by the j bill, would benefit the treasury department.cipsea seemed to contemplate a oneway flow of data for statistical purposes, which did not appear to include statistical tax analysis conductedby the office of tax analysis in the treasury department and the statistics of income division at the irs. thus, the general consensus seemed toimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.irs data, data users, and data sharing89be that treasury would not directly benefit much by cipsea and the accompanying j bill.one way of addressing this concern might be for treasury (and otheroutside analysts) to benefit from the creation and release of more publicuse files, including those created with synthetic data. two problems attend this recommendation. first, the jury is still out on the utility ofpublicuse files created with synthetic data. second, virtually no publicuse files of business data exist due to the difficulty of masking the interesting data features of concentrated industry activity at the same timethat these properties are needed for analysis. a more direct way to provide treasury with analytical benefit might be for the census bureau toconsider treasury and the irs researchers for rdc access on meritoriousproject proposals, as long as they adhere to the same requirements as otherresearchers, including predominant title 13 purpose. preliminary discussions between the irs and the census bureau so far indicate that thismight have value.one possible objection to this idea pertains to section 7214(a)(8) of thetax code. this statute requires treasury and irs employees with evidenceof revenue law violations to report it. the census bureauõs concern is thatthis obligation might overshadow the confidentiality oaths required forspecial sworn status at the census bureau. several factors might help mitigate this concern. for example, the statuteõs evidentiary standard on whatconstitutes information that a revenue violation has occurred is high, andit is unlikely to be uncovered during the sort of research and analysis thattreasury or the irs might propose, especially given the limited data related to actual tax liability available at an rdc. an additional point is thatany treasury or irs researcher would most likely be intent on statisticalresearch. enforcement personnel, such as auditors or tax examiners,would not be likely candidates for access, so there would be little emphasis on casebycase compliance issues. this standard would be consistentwith the engagement of some researchers at rdcs who represent commercial enterprises with a variety of clients. that is, the suspension of anonrdc allegiance for purposes of data access is hardly unprecedentedin the census bureauõs rdc experience.interagency disclosure coordination neededas additional assurance to reviewers of a future j bill, it may be advisable to consider making explicit, perhaps in the narrative accompanyingthe bill, that the agencies authorized to share fti would collaborate onstatistical disclosure limitation methodologies. it is probably importantthat such coordination be given clear prominence in the j bill itself, giventhat the statute (section 6103(j)(4)) requires that both direct and indirectimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90improving business statistics through interagency data sharingmeans of reidentification be prevented with any public release of data. allfti, including the building blocks of any list frame, such as name, address, and tin, will probably remain subject to perpetual protection under provisions of the tax code, as discussed previously. accordingly, legislators who understand that the statistical community has the issue oftaxpayer and respondent confidentiality foremost in mind as it seeks expanded access to confidential data may be more sympathetic to a future jbill. demonstrating such care and foresight may also assist with any future proposals that might expand data sharing beyond three agencies andencompass more than business data.conclusionwe view fti as a national asset that can have great value in manysituations faced by the statistical community. however, this asset comeswith numerous constraints on its use, in particular, a strong emphasis ontaxpayer confidentiality and a requirement that only the minimumamount of fti be provided to meet authorized uses. these constraints canbe productively addressed through good faith bargaining between theirs and the statistical agencies authorized to receive fti. we believe thisbargaining process is a useful way to strike the right balance betweenneeded access to fti and concerns for taxpayer confidentiality. futureexpansions of the statutory provisions allowing access to fti are possible,but will take a concerted effort by the affected federal statistical agencies.learning from past efforts can help increase the chances of success in thisendeavor.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.917the importance of data sharing toconsistent macroeconomic statisticsdennis fixler and j. steven landefeldbureau of economic analysisthe bureau of economic analysis (bea) has a unique position in thedecentralized u.s. statistical system. bea produces the national incomeand product accounts (nipas), a comprehensive and consistent doubleentry set of accounts for the economy. bea uses a myriad of data collected from public and private data sources to construct these accounts. inthis role, bea often confronts major inconsistencies in piecing these datatogether that are not evident from the perspective of the agencies collecting the individual pieces of the economic puzzle. bea has been describedas the canary in the mineshaft for the u.s. statistical system.the u.s. statistical system has evolved over time in such policy agencies as the u.s. department of commerce, labor, the treasury, agriculture, and energy to provide data and answer questions relevant to theagenciesõ missions. surveys and the legislation supporting them haveevolved independently. the result is a diverse set of data using differentbusiness registers, different industry classifications for establishments,different concepts and definitions, different timing, and different collection methods.these differences in survey frames and procedures produce significant quantitative differences in what would appear to be the same measures of economic activity. for example, employment in individual industries as reported by the labor departmentõs bureau of labor statistics(bls) can differ markedly from that reported by the department ofcommerceõs census bureau. differences exist for wages and salariesacross industries, across states, and in the aggregate (see tables 72and 76).improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92improving business statistics through interagency data sharingwhy it mattersthe implications of these differences in estimates is illustrated in table71, which summarizes the various data sources used by bea in constructing one of its sets of accounts. gross domestic product (gdp) is mainlyestimated using data collected by the census bureau, while gross domestic income (gdi) is mainly estimated using data collected by bls, the census bureau, and the statistics of income (soi, part of the internal revenueservice, irs). in concept, gdp should equal gdi because all final expenditures should end up as income to households, business, or government.however, because of the differences in the source data used in estimatinggdp and gdi, often they are not equal, and the result is the statisticaldiscrepancy.such discrepancies between gdp and gdi can have large impacts onfiscal and monetary policy. during the latter half of the 1990s, a large andpersistent discrepancy arose, with real gdi growing 0.6 percent faster thanreal gdp (19952000). this was important for budget planning becausereal trend gdp growth is used as the baseline for estimating neartermtrend growth in 5year budget forecasts made by the office of management and budget (omb) and the congressional budget office. to illustable 71bea summary account 1ñprimary data sources (billionsof dollars)primary data source2004income sidelabor compensationbls$6,693.4corporate profits & govõt enterprisescensus bureau, soi973.6proprietorsõ income and rental incomecensus bureau, soi1023.8interest on assets, taxes, & misc. paymentssoi, frb1,531.3depreciationcensus bureau1,435.3gross domestic income$11,657.5statistical discrepancy76.8gross domestic product$11,734.3expenditure sidepersonal consumption expenditurescensus bureau$8,214.3gross private domestic investmentcensus bureau1,928.1govõt consumption exp. & gross invest.govõt, census bureau2,215.9net exports of goods and servicescensus bureau, beað624.0gross domestic product$11,734.3improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing93trate the impact, according to ombõs fy 2006 analysis of the òsensitivityof the budget to economic assumptions,ó a persistent understatement ofreal gdp growth by 1.0 percent would result in an overstatement of theprojected deficit of $530 billion. similarly, a persistent understatement ofreal trend gdp growth could lower the federal reserveõs estimate of noninflationary sustainable growth and signal the need for a tighter monetary policy than necessary.one possible answer to the source of this discrepancy could lie in therecording of stock options, bonuses, and fringe benefits in employee compensation. while there are many sources of the difference between blsand the census bureau payroll data, it is interesting that during the latterhalf of the 1990s, when stock options and bonuses were growing rapidly,the census bureau data rose at a 7.8 percent average annual rate, whereasthe bls data rose at a 7.5 percent average annual rate (19952000). part ofthis may reflect the recording of stock options. for example, in washington stateña state with significant stock option activityñthe census bureau data grew nearly twice as fast (11.5 percent) as the bls payroll data(6.2 percent) for 2000. if it turned out that stock options were underreported in the bls data, it would suggest that the growth rate of gdimight be even higher, thereby focusing additional effort on improvingthe reporting of final expenditures on services and other lesswellmeasured components of gdp.another example of the importance of bea accuracy is illustrated byits regional data, which are used in the geographic allocation of nearly$200 billion in federal funds. these data are also used by virtually everystate for its tax and planning purposes. bea uses bls data for these stateand local estimates, which are taken from quarterly employment and unemployment tax forms.the differences between the two sets of payroll data across states varyfrom the bls setõs being 4.2 percent higher in new mexico to 9.5 lower inalaska than what is reported by the census bureau. these differencescould have a significant impact on the allocation of state medicaid funds,which uses bea per capita state personal income to determine the federalshare of payments for each state. differences in growth rates can also havean important impact on state tax projections and spending plans. for example, in new york the $1.2 billion difference in growth in wages andsalaries between 2001 and 2002 between bls and the census bureau series would amount to about a $173 million difference in projected incometaxes.these are but a few of the examples of the implications for government and business decision makers. in the sections below, the implications for users of estimates ranging from profits and productivity to inflation and offshoring are explored.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94improving business statistics through interagency data sharingdata sharingover the years, numerous proposals have been put forth to resolvethe problems associated with a decentralized system. one has been thecreation of a central statistical office such as those that exist in canada,australia, and other countries. the creation of such an entity has notproved popular for various reasons. consolidation would require extensive budget negotiation and resources to coordinate and implement aprocess that ensures there is little to no disruption in data production.furthermore, the current system allows for the specialization thathas arguably led to many of the innovations produced by u.s. statisticalagencies.given these difficulties, a practical way to achieve many of thebenefits of a central statistical agency without the costs is to permit thesharing of business data among the three generalpurpose statisticalagenciesñbea, bls, and the census bureauñthat produce the bulk ofthe nationõs economic data. all three agencies have an excellent record ofprotecting confidential data, have access to various types of tax data, andshare various types of data that could be significantly improved by datasharing.a major step forward in allowing data sharing was the passage of theconfidential information protection and statistical efficiency act of 2002(cipsea). section 521 stipulated that business data can be shared for statistical purposes among bea, the census bureau, and bls. at the timecipsea was formulated, it was understood that for data sharing to becompletely operational, there would have to be some changes in section6103, paragraph (j), of title 26 (internal revenue code) and the accompanying regulations that govern access to federal tax information (fti).these changes are necessitated by the facts that much of the census bureau information is commingled with fti and neither bea nor bls hasthe census bureau level of access to use such data. although there havebeen discussions concerning the formulation of a bill to submit to congress to bring about the necessary changes in title 26, to date no bill hasbeen written for submission.the absence of fully implemented data sharing especially affects beabecause it collects few data of its own and relies primarily on the censusbureau for its data. data sharing, however, does not just affect the abilityof bea to access census bureau data; the inability of bls and the censusbureau to share data greatly affects the quality of the data that bea receives from both agencies. in this chapter we provide examples of howthe absence of data sharing affects bea estimates.the limited access to business tax data has enormous effects on beaõsability to access census data that are commingled with tax data. the cenimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing95sus bureau sample frames are constructed from irs data, and, under current rules, name, address, and employer identification numbers are generally considered tax data. although in principle bea has access to corporate tax records in the soi sample, the census bureau does not know theidentification of those firms and so bea has generally not been allowedaccess to census records. without going into the arcane detail, whetherbea has access to corporate census records that are commingled with taxdata is determined by the extent to which the census bureau claims thatdata are based on their own collection and not irs records. such a claim isgenerally made by the census bureau in the case of multiunit establishments. thus bea cannot access census bureau records from singleunitestablishments. finally, because legislation limits bea access to corporatetax records, bea cannot access partnership and sole proprietor censusbureau records, which are collected from tax dataðbased sample frames.the limited access to tax data also impedes beaõs use of the censusrecords to construct sample frames for its international surveys. the impediment is especially problematic in the services area, because many ofthese providers are not multiunit establishments. in a joint effort by bea,census, and the national science foundation (nsf) regarding identifying international research and development expenditures, it was discovered that there was considerable difference between census and beasample frames. in this case, bea had identified many firms that were notin the census bureau sample.below we provide some detailed illustrations of how the absence ofdata sharing affects bea estimates. we also discuss how the effect on beaestimates would affect policy decisions that are based on those estimates.industry employment differencesbls, the census bureau, and soi are the main sources of wage andsalary data in the u.s. economy. figures 71 and 72 show that the levelsand growth of total payroll according to these sources are broadly consistent, but that there are significant differences in magnitudes. below wefocus on the bls and the census bureau data, as those are the two mainsources used by bea.1bls prepares comprehensive wage and salary data in its quarterly1the soi data are composed from a sample of tax returns and therefore are not as comprehensive as either bls or the census bureau data. furthermore these data are released witha lag.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96improving business statistics through interagency data sharing3,0003,2003,4003,6003,8004,0004,2004,4004,6004,8005,000199819992000200120022003census business patterns (cbp)bls qcew (formerly es202)soi salaries and wagesbillions of dollarstotal payrollyearfigure 72payroll data comparisonñthe census bureau, bls, and soi growth.figure 71payroll data comparisonñthe census bureau, bls, and soi levels.20246810121994199519961997199819992000200120022003census business patterns (cbp)bls qcew (formerly es202)soi salaries and wagespercentagetotal payroll growthyearcensus of employment and wages program (qcew).2 these data arewidely used in bea and are the basis for the wage and salary componentof personal income. the census bureau also prepares payroll data as partof its quinquennial economic census and annual survey programs.these census data are considered to be less timely than bls data, but insome areas, such as educational services, membership organizations, andnonprofits, they are considered to be more complete than the qcew data.2these data are commonly referred to as the es202 data, the former name of the program.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing97in addition, census data on wages are generally recognized as providinga better industry distribution of aggregate wages, and incorporating thesedata into bea estimates offers a unique opportunity to create greater consistency among the bea industry accountsõ measures of gross output, intermediate inputs, and value added. the decision, however, to chooseone set of data over the other has implications for the measurement ofvalue added in the industry accounts, which can be traced out throughexamining the estimates prepared as part of the annual industry accounts.for some industries, the differences in the level of employment aresignificant. table 72 identifies the differences in levels between bls andthe census wage and salary data for 2002, an economic census year.3 theprimary explanations for the differences are that the census bureau andbls have different sample frames of establishments and that establishments in both frames are not always classified in the same industry. thecensus bureau and bls are currently engaged in a project that seeks tostudy this source of difference and explore other sources of differences.before this project could be undertaken, approval from the irs had to beobtained. the presentation at the workshop by james spletzer (bls) andpaul hanczaryk (census bureau) provided details of the study (see chapter 2 of this volume).as shown in table 72, there are many relatively large differencesamong industries in which estimates are available from both bls and thecensus bureau. in the case of oil and gas extraction, the census payrollestimate is about 50 percent lower than the bls estimate. in addition, thecensus bureau estimate for all of manufacturing is about 15 percentñorroughly $100 billionñlower than the bls estimate. in contrast, censuspayroll estimate for management of companies and enterprises is about63 percentñor over $70 billionñhigher than the bls estimate.4because employment and wage data are used in several places in thenational accounts, we will now show how bea estimates would be different if the census data were used instead of the currently used bls datafor manufacturing and a few other industries in the computation of valueadded. although the currentdollar growth rate could change by as muchas 2.0 percentage points (e.g., computers and electronic products), table73 shows the relative rankings for the selected industries tended to berelatively stable.3the census payroll data used are from the u.s. census bureau web site as of april 1,2005. bls wage data are consistent with the 2004 annual revision to the national income andproduct accounts and the 2004 annual revision to the annual industry accounts.4this pattern may suggest a different classification treatment of head company offices bythe census bureau and bls.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 72differences in bls wages and the census bureau payrollby naics industry, 2002 (in thousands of dollars)1997 naics codesindustry namebea wagesaall industries4,968,131,000private industries4,119,730,00011agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting31,815,000111, 112crop and animal production (òfarmsó)17,685,000113, 114, 115forestry, fishing, and related activities14,130,00021mining30,788,000211oil and gas extraction11,455,000212mining, except oil and gas10,470,000213support activities for mining8,863,00022utilities40,094,00023construction272,418,00031, 32, 33manufacturing675,523,00033, 321, 327durable goods441,182,000321wood product manufacturing17,585,000327nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing20,674,000331primary metal manufacturing23,209,000332fabricated metal product manufacturing59,742,000333machinery manufacturing57,050,000334computer and electronic product manufacturing98,359,000335electrical equipment and appliance manufacturing20,630,0003361, 3362, 3363motor vehicle, body, trailer, and parts manufacturing58,705,0003364, 3365, 3366, 3369other transportation equipment manufacturing38,954,000337furniture and related product manufacturing18,232,000339miscellaneous manufacturing28,042,00031, 32 (excludingnondurable goods234,341,000321 and 327)311 ,312food product manufacturing60,356,000313, 314textile and textile product mills14,525,000315,316apparel manufacturing10,751,000322paper manufacturing25,611,000323printing and related support activities27,061,000324petroleum and coal products manufacturing7,632,000325chemical manufacturing57,293,000326plastics and rubber products manufacturing31,112,00042wholesale trade280,745,00044, 45retail trade360,341,00048, 49transportation and warehousing,162,206,000excluding postal service481air transportation30,550,000482rail transportation11,824,000483water transportation2,888,000484truck transportation47,917,000improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing99continuedpercent differencedbls andblscensusbea andbls andcensuswagesbpayrollccensuscensusdifferenceeññ3,923,090,541ññ24,146,183ññ15,862,753ññ8,283,429ññ30,557,227ññ11,269,8295,564,811ð51.4ð50.6ð5,705,01810,321,3538,987,397ð14.2ð12.9ð1,333,9568,966,0446,707,242ð24.3ð25.2ð2,258,80239,895,55143,493,8048.59.03,598,253260,841,814254,000,182ð6.8ð2.6670,676,772573,401,510ð15.1ð14.5ð97,275,262437,547,486370,407,941ð16.0ð15.3ð67,139,54516,952,33115,909,908ð9.5ð6.1ð1,042,42320,543,61817,933,376ð13.3ð12.7ð2,610,24223,246,08021,508,667ð7.3ð7.5ð1,737,41359,352,28057,361,374ð4.0ð3.4ð1,990,90656,689,50949,470,768ð13.3ð12.7ð7,218,74198,045,56964,314,150ð34.6ð34.4ð33,731,41920,479,51617,957,015ð13.0ð12.3ð2,522,50158,579,12950,331,680ð14.3ð14.1ð8,247,44938,446,53431,231,174ð19.8ð18.8ð7,215,36018,107,13317,364,837ð4.8ð4.1ð742,29627,105,78727,024,992ð3.6ð0.3ð80,795233,129,286202,993,569ð13.4ð12.9ð30,135,71759,649,42152,334,562ð13.3ð12.3ð7,314,85914,501,50612,333,814ð15.1ð14.9ð2,167,69210,360,5888,567,969ð20.3ð17.3ð1,792,61925,744,23221,336,257ð16.7ð17.1ð4,407,97526,457,61025,738,613ð4.9ð2.7ð718,9977,891,0826,202,508ð18.7ð21.4ð1,688,57457,322,15044,032,801ð23.1ð23.2ð13,289,34931,202,69732,447,0454.34.01,244,348276,607,852249,986,560ð11.0ð9.6ð26,621,292348,909,029296,215,722ð17.8ð15.1ð52,693,307146,810,674ññð146,810,67430,180,386ññð30,180,38610,869ññð10,8692,793,5563,031,8805.08.5238,32446,824,53147,833,730ð0.22.21,009,199improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.100improving business statistics through interagency data sharing485transit and ground passenger transportation8,996,000486pipeline transportation3,272,000487, 488, 492other transportation and support activities39,802,000493warehousing and storage16,957,00051information189,736,000511publishing including software58,394,000512motion picture and sound recording industries18,258,000513broadcasting and telecommunications84,838,000514information and data processing services28,246,00052finance and insurance370,088,000521, 522federal reserve banks, credit intermediation132,010,000and related services523securities, commodity contracts, investments112,344,000524insurance carriers and related activities119,830,000525funds, trusts, and other financial vehicles5,904,00053real estate, rental, and leasing71,785,000531real estate51,015,000532,533rental and leasing services and lessors20,770,000of intangible assets54professional and technical services415,422,0005411legal services80,297,0005415computer systems design and related services84,251,00054125414, 54165419other professional, scientific and technical services250,874,00055management of companies and enterprises117,147,00056administrative and waste services193,525,000561administrative and support services180,230,000562waste management and remediation services13,295,00061educational services74,446,00062health care and social assistance472,214,000621ambulatory health care services209,724,000622, 623hospitals and nursing and residential care facilities217,119,000624social assistance45,371,00071arts, entertainment, and recreation51,526,000711, 712performing arts, museums, and related activities24,724,000713amusements, gambling, and recreation26,802,00072accommodation and food services153,922,000721accommodation40,764,000722food services and drinking places113,158,000table 72continued1997 naics codesindustry namebea wagesaimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing101continued7,787,2987,575,497ð15.8ð2.7ð211,8013,277,9323,082,558ð5.8ð6.0ð195,37439,101,44534,489,516ð13.3ð11.8ð4,611,92916,834,65818,689,12210.211.01,854,464188,758,526ññð188,758,52658,307,08964,712,02810.811.06,404,93917,879,78512,516,040ð31.4ð30.0ð5,363,74584,664,46188,624,4634.54.73,960,00227,907,19127,686,444ð2.0ð0.8ð220,747356,371,058ññð356,371,058131,188,066124,076,870ð6.0ð5.4ð7,111,196108,325,327101,285,387ð9.8ð6.5ð7,039,940110,965,984120,683,1830.78.89,717,1995,891,681ññð5,891,68168,801,129ññð68,801,12948,110,83241,911,444ð17.8ð12.9ð6,199,38820,690,29618,706,319ð9.9ð9.6ð1,983,977390,450,138ññð390,450,13869,875,72869,939,404ð12.90.163,67683,897,95272,168,495ð14.3ð14.0ð11,729,457236,676,458ññð236,676,458117,462,176190,807,53162.962.473,345,355191,825,310ññð191,825,310178,563,429195,425,0358.49.416,861,60613,261,88112,178,484ð8.4ð8.2ð1,083,39764,700,545ññð64,700,545456,030,369ññð456,030,369204,320,753203,716,200ð2.9ð0.3ð604,553215,390,850212,480,514ð2.1ð1.4ð2,910,33636,318,76636,090,970ð20.5ð0.6ð227,79647,050,671ññð47,050,67124,652,96124,057,801ð2.7ð2.4ð595,16022,397,71021,069,716ð21.4ð5.9ð1,327,994142,208,429ññð142,208,42936,805,62934,874,261ð14.4ð5.2ð1,931,368105,402,80192,632,794ð18.1ð12.1ð12,770,007percent differencedbls andblscensusbea andbls andcensuswagesbpayrollccensuscensusdifferenceeimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102improving business statistics through interagency data sharing81other services, except government155,989,000government848,401,000federal civilian141,631,000federal military59,529,000state and local647,241,000table 72continued1997 naics codesindustry namebea wagesanote: census payroll data are from the u.s. census bureau web site as of april 1, 2005. blswage data are consistent with the 2004 annual revision of the national income and productaccounts and the 2004 annual revision of the annual industry accounts.awage and salary disbursements consists of the monetary remuneration of employees,including corporate officers salaries and bonuses, commissions, payinkind, incentive payments, and tips. it reflects the amount of payments disbursed, but not necessarily earnedduring the year. wage and salary disbursements are measured before deductions, such associal security contributions and union dues. in recent years, stock options have become apoint of discussion. personal income includes stock options of nonqualified plans at the timethat they have been exercised by the individual. stock options are reported in wage andsalary disbursements. the value that is included in wages is the difference between theexercise price and the price that the stock options were granted.estimates of valueadded in the annual industry accounts are prepared in a twopart process. first, threedigit north american industryclassification system (naics) industry estimates are controlled to thenational income and product accounts for compensation of employees andòtaxes on production and imports less subsidies,ó and initial estimates ofgross operating surplus are extrapolated from the most recent set of òbalancedó gross operating surplus estimates.5 second, these threedigitnaics industry controls are distributed to greater industry detail in theannual inputoutput tables through a twostep process. detailed industrylevels are extrapolated using qcew data for compensation, and òtaxesless subsidiesó and gross operating surplus are extrapolated using detailed gross output estimates. then all three components are scaled backto the threedigit controls. extrapolation of industry detail for compensation could result in differences in shares depending on the choice to use5the recently adopted integration methodology for the annual industry accounts allowsfor intermediate inputs and gross operating surplus to adjust during the iterative rowandcolumn balancing procedure. for a discussion of the integration methodology, see moyet etal. (2004)improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing103breported quarterly total wages are the wages paid by unemployment insurance coveredemployers during the calendar quarter, regardless of when the services were performed.reported total annual wages are the sum of the total wages reported for the correspondingquarters.cpayroll includes all forms of compensation, such as salaries, wages, commissions, dismissal pay, bonuses, vacation allowances, sickleave pay, and employee contributions, toqualified pension plans paid during the year to all employees. for corporations, payrollincludes amounts paid to officers and executives; for unincorporated businesses, it does notinclude profit or other compensation of proprietors or partners. payroll is reported beforedeductions for social security, income tax, insurance, union dues, etc. this definition of payroll is the same as that used by the irs on form 941.dcomputed as census payroll less bls wages, divided by bls wages.ecomputed as census payroll less bls wages.qcew or the census data. again, these differences would be the largestfor detailed industries in which the magnitude of the difference is thegreatest.the employment differences also have an impact on the computationof chaintype quantity indexes, real valueadded by industry, and contributions to real growth. to measure the impact, beaõs doubledeflationmethod for preparing real valueadded for the industry accounts wassimulated to incorporate different nominal valueadded levels, and thenthe resulting impact on the real valueadded estimates was examined. forthis exercise, threedigit naics industry estimates for valueadded wereallowed to increase (decrease) by the difference in wage data betweenbls and the census bureau, and new levels of nominal intermediate inputs were computed as the difference between published gross output byindustry and the simulated valueadded by industry. next, the new intermediate input levels were deflated by the published price indexes for intermediate inputs to produce real intermediate inputs. finally, real valueadded by industry was computed as the difference between publishedreal gross output by industry and real intermediate inputs by industry.the choice of wage data affects the resulting change in real value100,987,088ññð100,987,088ññ0ññ0ññ0ññ0percent differencedbls andblscensusbea andbls andcensuswagesbpayrollccensuscensusdifferenceeimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104table 73differences in currentdollar valueadded growth by manufacturing industries and for ictproducing industries combined, 20022002publishedsimulated1997 naics codeindustrypublishedsimulatedrankrank31, 32, 33manufacturing0.40.733, 321, 327 durable goodsð0.9ð0.4321wood product manufacturingð4.2ð4.41516327nonmetallic mineral product manufacturingð3.5ð3.71415331primary metal manufacturing1.21.788332fabricated metal product manufacturingð2.4ð2.31313333machinery manufacturingð5.4ð5.41717334computer and electronic product manufacturingð4.7ð2.71614335electrical equipment and appliance manufacturingð6.2ð6.318183361, 3362, 3363motor vehicle, body, trailer, and parts manufacturing10.010.2113364, 3365, 3366, 3369other transportation equipment manufacturing1.10.899337furniture and related product manufacturingð0.7ð0.61010339miscellaneous manufacturing3.93.95531, 32nondurable goods2.32.1(excluding 321 and 327)311, 312food product manufacturing3.23.177313, 314textile and textile product millsð1.8ð1.61111315, 316apparel manufacturing8.610.221322paper manufacturing3.83.965323printing and related support activitiesð1.8ð1.81112324petroleum and coal products manufacturingð23.1ð24.91919325chemical manufacturing6.26.033326plastics and rubber products manufacturing4.54.444addenda:ictproducing industriesað2.3ð1.4note: the 3digit naics industry estimates for value added were allowed to increase (decrease) by the difference in wage data between bls andthe census bureau. estimates were simulated based on data published as part of the 2004 annual revision to the annual industry accounts.aconsists of computer and electronic products; publishing industries (includes software); information and data processing services; and computer systems design and related services.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.105table 74 differences in real valueadded growth by manufacturing industries and for ictproducingindustries combined, 20022002publishedsimulated1997 naics codeindustrysimulatedpublishedrankrank31, 32, 33manufacturing2.32.833, 321, 327durable goods1.32.0321wood product manufacturingð3.2ð3.41616327nonmetallic mineral product manufacturingð5.2ð5.41818331primary metal manufacturing1.01.598332fabricated metal product manufacturingð2.9ð2.91414333machinery manufacturingð5.9ð6.01919334computer and electronic product manufacturing7.415.643335electrical equipment and appliance manufacturingð4.4ð4.217173361, 3362, 3363motor vehicle, body, trailer, and parts manufacturing15.016.0223364, 3365, 3366, 3369other transportation equipment manufacturingð1.1ð1.51111337furniture and related product manufacturingð3.1ð3.21515339miscellaneous manufacturing1.11.181031, 32nondurable goods3.73.8(excluding 321 and 327)311, 312food product manufacturingð1.9ð2.51213313, 314textile and textile product mills0.71.2109315, 316apparel manufacturing10.111.834322paper manufacturing5.25.266323printing and related support activitiesð2.3ð2.31312324petroleum and coal products manufacturing31.634.611325chemical manufacturing6.67.155326plastics and rubber products manufacturing3.53.477addenda:ictproducing industriesa2.03.6note: beaõs doubledeflation methodology for preparing real value added for the industry accounts was simulated to incorporate different nominal valueaddedlevels and then the attending impact on the real value added was examined. for this exercise, threedigit naics industry estimates for value added were allowed toincrease (decrease) by the difference in wage data between bls and the census bureau, and new levels of nominal intermediate inputs were computed as thedifference between published gross output by industry and the simulated value added by industry. estimates were simulated based on data published as part of the2004 annual revision to the annual industry accounts.aconsists of computer and electronic products; publishing industries (includes software); information and data processing services; and computer systems designand related services.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106improving business statistics through interagency data sharingadded for an industry. in general, the impact is greatest for industrieswith the largest differences in blscensus payroll levels. for example,real valueadded for computer and electronic products would double thatof the published estimates (15.6 versus 7.4 percent) if the 2002 censusrather than bls payroll data had been used (see table 74). this impacton the real valueadded growth for computers would have resulted in adifferent story for the recovery of manufacturing in 2002: the publishedestimates show real growth for manufacturing increasing 2.3 percent; thesimulated estimates result in a 2.8 percent real growth. in addition, thereal valueadded growth for the ictrelated industries6 would have increased by 3.6 percent in 2002, or 1.6 percentage points over the published estimate, if bea used the census bureau payroll data. the shiftsin the industry distribution of real valueadded growth shown in table74 also affect the estimates for contributions to growth and productivity.in addition, the changing labor and capital shares for an industry thatresult from the changes in the computation in real valueadded would inturn produce changes in the weighting of each industryõs valueaddedprice index. an industryõs valueadded price index represents the pricesof its primary factors of production. thus, the industryõs price index andthe currentdollar components of its valueadded can be used to assessthe contribution of each component to the valueadded price index. toillustrate, suppose that the census payroll data were used in place of thebls wages in preparing a measure of currentdollar valueadded for theoil and gas extraction industry. compensation of employees would fallby the amount of the difference in wage data or by approximately 50 percent (see table 72), thereby reducing currentdollar valueadded by thedifference between the two wage measures. thus, compensation of employees as a percentage of currentdollar valueadded for the oil and gasextraction industry would fall from approximately 19 to 13 percent, andgross operating surplus would rise from approximately 66 to 72 percent,thereby increasing the cost of capital.7in the annual industry accounts, valueadded unit costs are computedby dividing currentdollar valueadded and its components by real(chaineddollar) valueadded. the resulting quotients provide the value6consists of computer and electronic products; publishing industries (includes software);information and data processing services; and computer systems design and relatedservices.7shares of currentdollar valueadded were computed from the data in table 72 and frompublished data on currentdollar valueadded by industry found in the gdpbyindustryaccounts. the published currentdollar data are available on the bea web site, at http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/gdpbyinddata.htm. choose the gdpbyindvanaics.xls fileunder the header ò19982004 naics data.óimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing107added chaintype price indexes and the component price indexes. that is,unit cost measures provide estimates of a componentõs share of the valueadded price index for an industry. the changes in the share for unit laborcosts, reflected by the change in compensation of employees and for unitcapital costs and embedded in the change in gross operating surplus, willhave an impact on the valueadded unit costs as well.8 the reason is thatvalueadded unit costs attribute changes in the valueadded unit prices tothe components of valueadded in proportion to the componentõs share ofcurrentdollar valueadded. as a result, yeartoyear changes in component shares of currentdollar valueadded result in changes in the contributions of the cost components to valueadded prices even if the prices donot change.table 75 presents ratios of gross output, as measured by bea, to thedifferent measures of employment. the data for gross output come fromthe preliminary 2002 benchmark inputoutput accounts instead of thegdpbyindustry measures used above. also, the census employmentdata are of a different vintage: data are as of october instead of the aprildata used in the other tables. in general, the absolute value of the difference between the nipa ratio and the census ratio exceeds that of thenipa ratio and the bls ratio. in addition, there are several industries forwhich there is a sign difference. if these ratios are viewed as indicators ofindustry productivity, one would tell different stories for many industries. however, comparisons of the rankings of industries by the ratio reveal that there are no substantive differences between them; that is, therankings differ by several places, but the top and the bottom of therankings contain similar industries.analysis of impact on regional estimatesthe choice of wage data affects the analysis of state economic activity.at the state level the range of differences in total private wages and salaries in 2003 vary from bls being 4.2 percent higher in new mexico to 9.5percent lower in alaska than what is reported by the census bureau in itscounty business patterns (cbp) data (see table 76). although the u.s.level of bls wages is lower by only 0.6 percent, or $25.1 billion, newyorkõs bls data is lower than the census data by 2.0 percent, or $6.7 billion, and the combination of connecticut, new jersey, and new york islower than the census by $13.0 billion.the differences between the two programs have implications for8gross operating surplus in the annual industry accounts reflects a measure of capitalinputs and net profits. for more information, see strassner et al. (2005).improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 75employment data and ratios from the bea, census, andbls, 2002bea grossoutput2002(billions ofnaics codeindustry namedollars)a11agriculture, forestry, fishing, and hunting270.6111112 farms220.4113115 forestry, fishing, and related activities50.121mining179.1211oil and gas extraction103.7212mining, except oil and gas48.0213support activities for mining27.422utilities314.723construction909.23133manufacturing3,839.2321, 327, 331335, 33613366, 3369, 337, 339durable goods2,080.5321wood products87.5327nonmetallic mineral products93.0331primary metals138.2332fabricated metal products243.4333machinery241.2334computer and electronic products353.2335electrical equipment, appliances, and components100.533613363motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts463.633643366, 3369other transportation equipment162.8337furniture and related products74.2339miscellaneous manufacturing122.7311316, 322326nondurable goods1,758.7311312food and beverage and tobacco products562.3313314textile mills and textile product mills75.2315316apparel and leather and allied products47.7322paper products151.8323printing and related support activities94.7324petroleum and coal products212.4325chemical products444.8326plastics and rubber products169.842wholesale trade866.64445retail trade1,046.04849transportation and warehousing603.6481air transportation98.1482rail transportation45.5483water transportation23.7484truck transportation202.3485transit and ground passenger transportation31.6486pipeline transportation28.0487488, 492other transportation and support activities129.9493warehousing and storage44.5improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing109continuednipacensusblsnipacensusblsemploymentbemploymentcemploymentdratioratioratiothousands of employeesoutput per employee in dollars1,564n/an/a173,018n/an/a870n/an/a253,333n/an/a694n/an/a72,190n/an/a511485507350,489369,548353,411124105121836,290991,595853,547213197210225,352243,214228,932175183176156,571149,964156,025594663591529,798474,629532,4936,9787,3746,694130,295123,306135,82215,34914,69315,218250,127261,299252,2809,5289,0529,454218,356229,830220,064574540554152,439162,102157,953520484517178,846192,311179,816506495506273,123279,422273,1601,5521,5731,545156,830154,736157,5691,2291,1641,221196,257207,158197,5611,5001,2611,497235,467280,024235,913498492496201,807204,486202,6261,1531,0881,152402,082425,957402,594679608678239,764267,911240,188607596604122,241124,467122,948708752685173,305163,151179,0205,8225,6405,764302,078311,803305,1231,7601,6661,743319,489337,432322,570487449484154,415167,639155,416419387404113,843123,156118,037542488541280,074311,126280,597724719706130,801131,795134,0881171031181,815,3852,062,6171,798,598928846923479,310525,512481,711845982844200,947172,862201,1765,7115,8655,617151,742147,749154,28315,50014,64815,01267,48471,41169,6774,265n/a3,989141,524n/a151,329562n/a561174,555n/a174,796194n/an/a234,536n/an/a546653438,889358,260445,7571,3671,4351,337147,988140,955151,29440339837278,41279,32184,946423742666,667761,076660,6731,1271,0501,108115,262123,756117,22951656651486,24078,68786,524improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110improving business statistics through interagency data sharing51information956.6511publishing industries (includes software)251.3512motion picture and sound recording industries81.6515517broadcasting and telecommunications525.6518519information and data processing services98.25253efinance, insurance, real estate, rental, and leasing3,358.05456professional and business services1,838.454professional, scientific, and technical services1,052.15411legal services215.75415computer systems design and related services171.554125414, 54165419miscellaneous professional, scientific, and664.9technical services55management of companies and enterprises297.856administrative and waste management services488.5561administrative and support services435.0562waste management and remediation services53.56162educational services, health care, and1,310.8social assistance61educational services152.962health care and social assistance1,157.9621ambulatory health care services526.8622623hospitals and nursing and residential care facilities523.4624social assistance107.77172arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodation,709.3and food services71arts, entertainment, and recreation175.7711712performing arts, spectator sports, museums,82.3and related activities713amusements, gambling, and recreation industries93.472accommodation and food services533.6721accommodation143.7722food services and drinking places389.981other services, except government452.7table 75continuedbea grossoutput2002(billions ofnaics codeindustry namedollars)aagross output data were obtained from the bea web site at the following address: http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn2/iobenchmark2002.htm (october 7, 2005).bdata were obtained from the nipa tables at the bea web site at the following address:http://www.bea.gov/bea/dn/nipaweb/tableview.asp#mid (october 7, 2005).cdata were obtained from the u.s. census bureau web site at the following address: http://www.census.gov/econ/census02/data/us/us000.htm (october 7, 2005).ddata were obtained from the blsõ quarterly census of employment and wages (october 12, 2005).improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing111enot all of the industry entitled òfunds, trusts, and other financial vehicles (525)ó is included. the gross output for finance, insurance, and real estate includes the imputation forowneroccupied dwellings which causes higher output to employment ratios.fthe census bureau data for hospitals for 2002 include government and nongovernmenthospitals. to make data comparable, government hospitals were not included.3,3813,7363,359282,934256,045284,8219981,090961251,804230,638261,548393303385207,634269,176211,9801,5071,7721,534348,772296,694342,739484572479202,893171,737204,8777,9998,5467,724419,803392,955434,75316,41818,64915,926111,97598,578115,4347,1037,3026,662148,121144,084157,9151,2791,1701,116168,647184,422193,2091,1481,1071,144149,390154,874149,8514,6765,0254,402142,194132,318151,0591,6852,6051,682176,736114,306177,0417,6308,7427,58164,02455,88164,4347,3118,4107,26459,49951,72459,887319332318167,712161,232168,37616,752n/a15,35378,247n/a85,3752,709n/a1,96156,442n/a77,98514,04314,01013,39382,45482,65186,4574,7584,9384,630110,719106,681113,7906,8936,965f6,84675,93275,14176,4482,3922,1061,91745,02551,14256,18912,25511,97012,00057,87859,25859,1091,9101,8491,80291,99095,04197,528495546494166,263150,835166,7051,4151,3031,30866,00771,67871,41510,34510,12110,19851,58152,72252,3221,7931,8131,76980,14579,24781,2428,5518,3088,43045,59746,93346,2546,859n/a4,25366,001n/a106,443nipacensusblsnipacensusblsemploymentbemploymentcemploymentdratioratioratiothousands of employeesoutput per employee in dollarsimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 76census bureau (cbp) payroll and bls (qcew) privatewage comparison (billions of dollars, unless otherwise noted)yryr % chgcbp annual payrolla2001200220012002200320022003alabama45.245.547.10.73.5alaska8.38.48.71.23.0arizona60.061.164.41.85.3arkansas25.825.927.00.54.3california521.8510.8520.6ð2.11.9colorado71.567.867.9ð5.20.2connecticut68.968.569.7ð0.61.8delaware15.014.715.1ð2.02.5d.c.20.821.422.52.75.1florida189.6192.9202.41.74.9georgia115.9113.8116.3ð1.92.2hawaii12.713.414.15.35.9idaho12.412.613.11.74.3illinois204.3197.8201.0ð3.21.6indiana79.379.481.40.12.6iowa34.534.836.01.13.4kansas33.333.234.0ð0.52.7kentucky42.642.543.8ð0.12.9louisiana45.245.647.11.03.3maine14.214.414.81.22.9maryland74.275.078.91.15.1massachusetts134.7127.9127.1ð5.0ð0.6michigan142.9142.4144.0ð0.41.1minnesota84.984.587.3ð0.43.3mississippi22.722.823.60.23.8missouri74.474.175.6ð0.42.0montana7.27.47.72.84.0nebraska20.821.723.14.46.2nevada27.529.331.36.46.9new hampshire18.518.718.80.91.0new jersey154.2152.4154.5ð1.21.4new mexico14.815.115.81.94.9new york343.5329.8332.6ð4.00.9north carolina103.0101.8104.6ð1.22.7north dakota6.46.66.91.85.3ohio156.9154.8157.5ð1.31.7oklahoma33.433.633.60.50.0oregon44.143.544.3ð1.31.9pennsylvania169.9169.2174.5ð0.43.1rhode island13.213.514.53.07.3south carolina43.844.044.60.41.4south dakota7.67.88.01.82.7tennessee70.771.373.20.82.7texas282.3277.8281.6ð1.61.4utah26.126.226.80.42.3improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing113continuedqcew private wagesbyryr % chg2001200220032002200344.945.646.81.62.87.37.67.93.83.362.763.165.80.64.325.525.926.51.92.2518.6508.2521.1ð2.02.571.668.969.1ð3.70.368.366.868.0ð2.21.913.713.714.20.53.522.122.723.62.94.0191.0195.7204.52.44.5116.3114.8116.4ð1.21.313.313.814.53.45.512.812.913.20.92.4199.2196.8198.3ð1.20.878.979.681.10.91.834.134.635.61.42.933.033.133.30.20.943.343.845.11.12.844.244.745.71.12.314.114.414.92.23.373.474.977.72.13.7130.4126.4127.6ð3.00.9144.0143.0145.3ð0.71.682.483.185.40.82.822.623.023.51.71.973.273.774.70.71.47.47.78.14.14.720.621.021.72.03.129.730.332.62.27.519.119.119.60.02.8146.0147.0150.00.72.015.615.916.52.53.6334.6322.1325.9ð3.71.2101.9101.8103.1ð0.11.26.36.56.82.84.9154.1154.2156.60.11.532.332.232.8ð0.31.744.043.744.5ð0.81.9167.5169.0173.40.92.613.013.414.23.05.942.542.944.00.82.57.57.67.92.43.570.571.773.91.72.9286.6281.7284.1ð1.70.825.925.726.2ð0.61.6improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 76continuedyryr % chgcbp annual payrolla2001200220012002200320022003vermont7.37.47.72.13.0virginia102.5101.7106.1ð0.84.3washington86.583.190.6ð3.99.0west virginia14.514.815.22.33.0wisconsin74.375.378.31.44.0wyoming4.95.15.42.76.3us sum3,989.13,943.24,040.9ð1.22.5us published3,989.13,943.24,040.9ð1.22.5ain addition to private wages, the cbp payroll data cover those government employeeswho work in government hospitals, federally chartered savings institutions and creditunions, liquor stores, and wholesale liquor establishments.b the bls data do not cover certain religious elementary and secondary schools because asupreme court decision exempts some of these schools from unemployment compensationtaxes. the bls data also exclude college students (and their spouses) who are employed bythe school in which they are enrolled and student nurses and interns who are employed byhospitals as part of their training. in half of the states, the bls data only include nonprofittable 76 continuedbls less census bureau% difference200120022003200120022003alabamað0.30.1ð0.3ð0.70.2ð0.5alaskað1.0ð0.8ð0.8ð11.9ð9.7ð9.5arizona2.72.01.54.53.32.3arkansasð0.30.0ð0.5ð1.20.1ð1.9californiað3.2ð2.70.5ð0.6ð0.50.1colorado0.11.11.20.11.61.7connecticutð0.6ð1.7ð1.7ð0.9ð2.5ð2.4delawareð1.4ð1.0ð0.9ð9.0ð6.7ð5.8d.c.1.31.31.26.16.35.2florida1.42.72.10.71.41.1georgia0.31.10.10.30.90.0hawaii0.60.40.44.93.02.7idaho0.50.40.13.72.91.1illinoisð5.1ð1.0ð2.8ð2.5ð0.5ð1.4indianað0.40.2ð0.4ð0.50.3ð0.4iowað0.4ð0.2ð0.4ð1.0ð0.7ð1.1improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing115organizations with four or more employees during 20 weeks in a calendar year. beginningin 2001, bls classifies all native american tribal data under local government; previously,commercial establishments were classified as private.sources: cbp (county business patterns) from the census bureau web site: 2003 datareleased 08/05, downloaded 9/28/05. qcew (quarterly census of employment and wages)from flat file downloaded from bls web site on 9/28/05. fixed decimals.continuedqcew private wagesbyryr % chg200120022003200220037.57.57.70.92.3103.2102.4106.3ð0.83.982.681.883.5ð1.02.015.115.215.41.01.073.074.276.11.72.65.05.25.33.23.83,952.23,930.84,015.8ð0.52.23,952.23,930.84,015.8ð0.52.2state and local inc taxeffective state and local tax bls toas % of total wagescensus bureau difference (millions of dollars)2001200220032001200220033.703.573.49ð113ð90.000.000.000002.802.572.567652384.894.684.53ð152ð236.675.215.18ð211ð139253.483.963.72244445.264.484.64ð34ð77ð795.024.474.43ð68ð44ð392.792.272.283631260.000.000.000004.784.464.44164835.545.264.883421196.604.934.89311873.053.173.06ð155ð33ð844.534.334.32ð1711ð154.534.244.15ð16ð11ð17improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116improving business statistics through interagency data sharingkansasð0.3ð0.1ð0.7ð0.9ð0.3ð2.0kentucky0.71.31.31.83.02.9louisianað0.9ð0.9ð1.4ð2.1ð2.0ð3.0maineð0.10.00.1ð0.80.20.6marylandð0.8ð0.1ð1.2ð1.1ð0.2ð1.5massachusettsð4.3ð1.50.5ð3.2ð1.20.4michigan1.00.51.30.70.40.9minnesotað2.4ð1.5ð1.9ð2.9ð1.7ð2.2mississippið0.10.2ð0.2ð0.41.0ð0.8missourið1.3ð0.4ð0.9ð1.7ð0.6ð1.2montana0.20.30.32.43.74.3nebraskað0.2ð0.7ð1.4ð1.0ð3.3ð6.1nevada2.11.01.27.73.44.0new hampshire0.60.40.83.22.34.1new jerseyð8.3ð5.4ð4.5ð5.4ð3.5ð2.9new mexico0.70.80.74.95.54.2new yorkð8.9ð7.7ð6.7ð2.6ð2.3ð2.0north carolinað1.10.0ð1.5ð1.10.0ð1.4north dakotað0.10.0ð0.1ð1.4ð0.4ð0.9ohioð2.8ð0.6ð0.9ð1.8ð0.4ð0.6oklahomað1.1ð1.3ð0.8ð3.2ð3.9ð2.3oregonð0.10.10.1ð0.20.30.3pennsylvaniað2.3ð0.2ð1.1ð1.4ð0.1ð0.6rhode islandð0.1ð0.1ð0.3ð1.0ð0.9ð2.2south carolinað1.3ð1.1ð0.6ð3.0ð2.5ð1.4south dakotað0.1ð0.1ð0.1ð1.9ð1.4ð0.6tennesseeð0.20.50.6ð0.30.70.9texas4.33.92.51.51.40.9utahð0.2ð0.4ð0.6ð0.7ð1.6ð2.4vermont0.20.10.12.61.50.8virginia0.70.70.30.70.70.3washingtonð3.9ð1.3ð7.1ð4.5ð1.6ð7.9west virginia0.60.40.14.12.80.9wisconsinð1.3ð1.1ð2.2ð1.8ð1.5ð2.8wyoming0.10.10.01.52.0ð0.5us sumð36.9ð12.4ð25.1ð0.9ð0.3ð0.6us publishedð36.9ð12.4ð25.1ð0.9ð0.3ð0.6table 76 continuedbls less census bureau% difference200120022003200120022003sources: cbp (county business patterns) from census bureau web site: 2003 data released 08/05, downloaded 9/28/05. qcew (quarterly census of employment and wages)from flat file downloaded from bls web site on 9/28/05. fixed decimals.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing1174.724.324.19ð14ð4ð296.246.206.214779803.193.163.12ð30ð29ð446.545.915.75ð7257.817.427.35ð65ð11ð886.295.125.46ð269ð76254.143.753.574220475.055.445.25ð123ð79ð1013.293.183.16ð38ð64.664.254.17ð59ð19ð375.324.794.83913164.574.163.97ð10ð30ð560.000.000.000000.350.300.222124.443.753.67ð367ð202ð1663.943.993.802933267.936.966.96ð709ð536ð4685.895.595.42ð67ð3ð812.472.202.12ð2ð1ð16.286.305.97ð175ð37ð545.225.004.98ð55ð66ð387.317.237.47ð7994.904.584.54ð115ð10ð495.464.884.65ð7ð6ð154.354.144.09ð57ð46ð250.000.000.000000.230.160.130110.000.000.000005.144.644.60ð9ð20ð294.664.784.269535.614.654.913832130.000.000.000005.095.145.03302275.805.395.44ð77ð60ð1190.000.000.00000ñññð2,353ð1,084ð1,276ññññññstate and local inc taxeffective state and local tax bls toas % of total wagescensus bureau difference (millions of dollars)200120022003200120022003improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118improving business statistics through interagency data sharingpublic policy and business administration. specifically, regional data affect federal government fund allocations to states, analysis of state government tax efforts, state and local government tax and revenue planning,business analyses of the size of markets, and the extent of the safety net atthe state level. for example, the medicaid program uses bea per capitapersonal income in the federal medicaid assistance percentage formulato determine the federal share of payments for each state. since wagesand salaries and wagerelated components account for about twothirdsof personal income, the level of differences among the statesñvaryingfrom $2.5 billion in texas to ð$7.1 billion in washington for 2003ñwouldhave a significant impact on the federal share of medicaid payments foreach state.in new york, the $1.2 billion dollar difference in growth in wages andsalaries from 2001 to 2002 between bls and the census bureau series,shown in table 76, would amount to about a $173 million difference inprojected state and local government income taxes received. new jerseywould have a $165 million projected difference in income taxes, and massachusetts would have a $193 million projected difference.if the difference between bls and the census bureau reflects coverage differences, then, for example, the 10.4 percent average difference inalaska for the years 2001 through 2003 would reflect the percentage of theworkforce that is not covered by unemployment insurance. this information would be very useful to those officials interested in the extent of theunemployment insurance safety net among the states.finally, the differences may also reflect changes in coverage betweenthe programs. for example, beginning in 2004, the washington state unemployment insurance program no longer covers exercised stock optionsin its definition of covered wages and salaries, whereas the census bureau wages continue to cover exercised stock options for all states. thusan increase in the differences between the two programs is expected beginning in 2004. access to microdata in the programs would allow identification of the amount of the exercised stock options in the state.regional and industry influences combined:county business patterns by industry compared withbls qcew databea uses bls qcew data in its initial estimates of wages, since it isthe most comprehensive and earliest available data. this choice is madebecause the cbp data become available later. these data, however, areused as a check on the initial estimates as well as a data source for certainareas that are not covered by qcew. although the two data series have alarge amount of overlap, at the naics sector (twodigit) level of wageimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing119detail, cbp data and qcew data can show different trends for certainindustries. in table 77, the mean absolute difference in average annualgrowth between 1998 and 2002 across industries is 0.9 percentage points.table 78 shows larger variations across industries with respect to oneyear growth rates: mean absolute differences in growth rates are 1.0, 2.1,2.0, and 1.2 percentage points for 1999 through 2002, respectively.9for individual industries, there is a considerable difference in growthrates as well. between 1998 and 2002 the absolute difference ingrowth rates can vary as much as 2.2 percentage points, as is the case forthe information sector (51), and as little as 0.2 percentage points, as in thehealth care and social assistance sector (62). oneyear growth rates showlarger differences. in 2002 there was a 5.6 percentage point difference ingrowth for the administrative, support, waste management, andremediation services sector (56), and in 2001 there was a 6.5 percentagepoint difference for the arts, entertainment, and recreation sector (71). in2000, there was a 9.0 percentage point difference in the growth rate for theinformation sector (51) and a 6.7 percentage point difference for the forestry, fishing, hunting, and agriculture support sector (11). in the lattercase, cbp data show a decline of 2.7 percent, while qcew data show anincrease of 4.0 percent.employment differences and bea international accountsbea collects data on the activity of multinational firms at theenterprise level. in the early 1990s a study was conducted to compileestablishmentbased data for foreignowned establishments in the unitedstates, the results of which are included in foreign direct investment in theunited states: establishment data for 1987. for this study, bea shared itsconfidential enterpriselevel data with bls and the census bureau sothat each could determine the relevant set of establishments. there wasno interaction between the census bureau and bls in the compilation ofeach list. as shown in table 79, bls identified 3 percent more establishments for all industries than the census bureau, and the correspondingbls employment level is 4 percent less than the corresponding census9all of the qcew data in table 77 are based on the private sector in order to better matchthe survey population of the cbp. in addition, it should be noted that the 2001 growth ratesare based on 2000 levels that are backcasted for qcew; that is, all qcew data prior to 2001are backcasted for naics. for a description of the backcasting procedure, see morisi (2003).many of the larger differences between the data series during the period of backcasting arein services sectors.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 77private annual payroll datañcensus bureau (cbp) and bls(qcew): levelsnaics1998codeindustry code descriptioncbpqcew$ diff.% diff.total3,309.43,338.729.30.911forestry, fishing, hunting, and4.721.516.8362.0agric. support21mining21.929.57.534.322utilities38.134.5ð3.6ð9.423construction198.5202.94.42.231manufacturing607.3678.971.611.842wholesale trade233.9238.54.62.044retail trade260.3294.334.013.148transportation and warehousing108.6128.720.218.651information146.8160.113.29.052finance and insurance290.0279.2ð10.8ð3.753real estate, rental, and leasing49.955.85.911.954professional, scientific, and technical services277.6309.131.411.355management of companies and enterprises175.6105.4ð70.3ð40.056admin, support, waste management,163.7152.2ð11.5ð7.0remediation services61educational services52.347.7ð4.6ð8.862health care and social assistance395.5358.3ð37.2ð9.471arts, entertainment, and recreation36.037.91.85.172accommodation and food services109.6117.68.07.381other services (except public administration)96.082.3ð13.7ð14.2mean (excluding total and 11)1.9bureau level. however, at the individual industry levels, the differencescan be substantial. the average percentage difference in the number ofestablishments (fifth column in the table), without regard to direction ofthe difference, is 24 percent and the corresponding average difference inemployment is 7.7 percent. inasmuch as the table reflects data classifiedunder the standard industrial classification (sic) system, the movementto naics is likely to have affected these estimates. for example, underthe sic system, auxiliaries in manufacturing (mainly head offices) wereincluded in the manufacturing sector as a separate industry, and whilethe census bureau followed that classification, bls dispersed the auxiliaries into the other manufacturing industries. under naics, auxiliariesare still separately identified, but they are now placed in a sector entitledimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing121òmanagement of companies and enterprisesó; thus, they are no longerin the sector of the establishments that they serve. indeed, one of themajor differences in the number of manufacturing establishments thatcan be found in the 1997 economic census between the sic system andnaics is due to the different treatment of auxiliary establishments.a more recent study examined differences in establishments and employment in the area of research and development (r&d) performed byu.s. firms. the nsf through the census bureau collects data on the r&dexpenditures of u.s. firms. bea collects data on the r&d expenditures ofu.s. and foreign multinational companies. the bea/census bureau/nsfr&d link project was a study to determine whether an integrated data seton u.s. r&d performance and funding could be created by linking thecensus bureau data on the r&d activity of all u.s. companies with bea1999cbpqcew$ diff.% diff.3,554.73,594.740.11.14.822.317.5363.621.028.17.133.839.435.5ð3.9ð9.8219.1224.25.12.3625.5702.476.912.3250.0255.65.62.2281.9314.332.411.5116.7137.721.018.0170.3186.215.99.4313.2303.0ð10.3ð3.354.159.45.39.9311.2362.551.316.5192.4113.3ð79.1ð41.1183.1167.1ð16.0ð8.756.951.2ð5.7ð10.0409.2372.1ð37.1ð9.139.441.01.64.0116.9125.78.87.5102.086.9ð15.1ð14.81.7continuedimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 77continuednaics2000codeindustry code descriptioncbpqcew$ dif.% dif.total3,879.43,889.09.60.211forestry, fishing, hunting, and agric. support4.723.218.5395.721mining22.129.77.634.322utilities40.737.9ð2.7ð6.723construction239.9245.85.92.431manufacturing644.0743.899.815.542wholesale trade270.1276.86.72.544retail trade302.6335.833.211.048transportation and warehousing125.6147.221.617.251information209.4212.32.91.452finance and insurance346.8333.8ð13.0ð3.753real estate, rental, and leasing59.264.45.28.854professional, scientific, andtechnical services362.0395.433.49.255management of companies and enterprises211.4124.0ð87.4ð41.456admin, support, waste management,remediation services210.3185.4ð24.9ð11.861educational services61.955.6ð6.4ð10.362health care and social assistance431.4394.7ð36.8ð8.571arts, entertainment and recreation43.245.11.94.472accommodation and food services125.6134.28.66.981other services (except public administration)109.992.7ð17.2ð15.6mean (excluding total and 11)0.9note: bls qcew data prior to 2001 have been backcasted to naics 2002 using naicsreports from employers in the first quarter of 2001. data for 2001 and 2002 also use naics2002. cbp data are based on naics 1997.data. this project was conducted under the authority of the internationalinvestment and trade act and cipsea. no title 26 data were used in thelinking operation or subsequent tabulations or reports for this study; neither bea nor the census bureau data sets used for the project containedsuch data, as all original fti were replaced by respondent data for thecensus bureau surveys being linked. the census bureau informed theirs of the project to alleviate any questions or concerns the irs mighthave.the project demonstrated that it is feasible to link the census bureauand bea survey data, and that by linking the data an integrated data seton the domestic and international dimensions of r&d can be created.table 710 compares the nsf data with the bea data for u.s. parent companies and therefore examines only a subset of u.s. firmsñu.s. affiliatesof foreign companies were not included. despite the smaller bea uniimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing123sources: census web site (5/23/05): http://censtats. census.gov/cgibin/cbpnaic/cbpsel.pl; and bls web site (5/24/05): ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cew/.verse, the table shows that in some industries bea data indicate afar higher level of r&d expenditures than that for all u.s. firmsñpharmaceuticals and medicines, for example. at the micro level, therewere 11 cases in which the bea and census data for total r&d spendingfor the matched u.s. parent companies differed by more than $500 million. there is a substantial difference in the collected data for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing. the substantially lower number for nonmanufacturing may result from the fact that r&d expenditures fornonmanufacturing firms are relatively more difficult to define and identify; so this area is more likely to be affected by differences in treatment.the study also demonstrated some of the main benefits of data sharingñin the improvement of sample frames and the quality of reporteddata. for example, as a result of the project, the census bureau addedover 500 companies to the sample for the survey of industrial research20012002cbpqcew$ dif.% dif.cbpqcew$ dif.% dif.3,989.13,952.2ð36.9ð0.93,943.23,930.8ð12.4ð0.34.823.618.8393.25.024.119.2385.025.031.96.927.724.030.66.627.541.939.3ð2.6ð6.241.839.9ð1.9ð4.7247.2260.213.05.2247.3260.813.55.5617.7704.186.414.0580.4670.790.315.6275.9279.63.71.3262.5276.614.15.4314.8344.129.39.3320.7348.928.28.8129.5149.820.315.6127.3146.919.615.4207.1205.8ð1.3ð0.7188.1188.80.70.4373.6359.4ð14.2ð3.8372.7356.4ð16.3ð4.464.066.92.94.665.268.83.65.5374.4403.729.37.8368.8390.521.75.9213.1118.4ð94.8ð44.5204.8117.5ð87.3ð42.6221.4189.1ð32.3ð14.6212.2191.8ð20.4ð9.667.160.4ð6.7ð10.072.064.7ð7.3ð10.1465.7425.5ð40.3ð8.6499.2456.0ð43.1ð8.646.145.2ð0.9ð2.047.747.1ð0.7ð1.4128.6138.19.57.4131.1142.211.18.5115.297.7ð17.5ð15.2118.9101.0ð17.9ð15.1ð0.70.1improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 78 private annual payroll datañcensus bureau (cbp) andbls (qcew): growthgrowth rate (%)1999naicsab.codeindustry code descriptioncbpqcewdiff.diff.total7.47.70.30.311forestry, fishing, hunting, andagric. support3.43.80.40.421miningð4.4ð4.7ð0.30.322utilities3.32.8ð0.50.523construction10.410.50.10.131manufacturing3.03.50.50.542wholesale trade6.97.20.30.344retail trade8.36.8ð1.51.548transportation and warehousing7.56.9ð0.50.551information16.016.30.40.452finance and insurance8.08.50.50.553real estate, rental, and leasing8.46.5ð2.02.054professional, scientific, and technical services12.117.35.25.255management of companies and enterprises9.57.5ð2.02.056admin, support, waste management,remediation services11.99.8ð2.02.061educational services8.87.4ð1.41.462health care and social assistance3.53.90.40.471arts, entertainment, and recreation9.48.2ð1.11.172accommodation and food services6.76.90.20.281other services (except public administration)6.25.5ð0.70.7minimumð2.00.1meanð0.21.0maximum5.25.2and development. for more information, see a report on the findings ofthe projectñòresearch and development link project: final reportó atwww.bea.gov/bea/di/finalreportpublic.pdf.how data sharing could helpa large part of beaõs job is adjusting the various data for differencesin timing, concepts, and definitions. however, this is often difficult because, for the most part, bea does not have access to the underlyingimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing125microdata. if armed with full datasharing capability, bea, bls, and thecensus bureau could explore and resolve differences in the activities ofmajor companies or in their classification to various industries and regions. the agencies could also compare data to investigate and resolvepersistent differences, such as the reporting of bonuses and stock options, the capitalization of computer investment, the impact of differencesin timing, and the differences in company practices with respect to thewritingdown of inventories or to the treatment of pensions and otherfringe benefits.2000cbpqcewdiff.ab. diff.9.18.2ð0.90.9ð2.74.06.76.75.35.70.40.43.36.93.63.69.59.60.10.12.95.92.92.98.08.30.20.27.36.8ð0.50.57.66.9ð0.70.723.014.0ð9.09.010.710.2ð0.50.59.58.4ð1.11.116.39.1ð7.27.29.99.4ð0.40.414.811.0ð3.93.98.98.5ð0.30.35.46.10.60.69.610.10.40.47.46.8ð0.60.67.86.7ð1.01.0ð9.00.1ð0.62.16.79.0continuedimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 78 continuedgrowth rate (%)2001naicsab.codeindustry code descriptioncbpqcewdiff.diff.total2.81.6ð1.21.211forestry, fishing, hunting, andagric. support2.31.8ð0.50.521mining13.27.7ð5.65.622utilities3.23.70.50.523construction3.05.92.82.831manufacturingð4.1ð5.3ð1.31.342wholesale trade2.11.0ð1.11.144retail trade4.02.5ð1.61.648transportation and warehousing3.11.8ð1.31.351information1.1ð3.1ð2.02.052finance and insurance7.77.7ð0.10.153real estate, rental, and leasing8.13.9ð4.24.254professional, scientific, and technical services3.42.1ð1.31.355management of companies and enterprises0.8ð4.5ð5.45.456admin, support, waste management,remediation services5.32.0ð3.33.361educational services8.48.70.40.462health care and social assistance7.97.8ð0.10.171arts, entertainment, and recreation6.80.3ð6.56.572accommodation and food services2.42.90.50.581other services (except public administration)4.95.30.50.5minimumð6.50.1meanð1.52.0maximum2.86.5the limited access also affects beaõs ability to study observed anomalies in the census bureau data. the following are some examples of observations that bea would like to study.¥there are substantial differences in the reported payrolls from thecensus bureau and bls, by area. for example, in washington state, between 1999 and 2000, the census bureau reports an 11.5 percent increase(more than $9 billion) while bls reports a 6.2 percent increase ($5 billion).there are many possible reasons for the discrepancy, and data sharingnote: bls qcew data prior to 2001 have been backcasted to naics 2002 using naicsreports from employers in the first quarter of 2001. data for 2001 and 2002 also use naics2002. cbp data are based on naics 1997.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing127with access to tax data would help get at the cause. for example, onesource of the difference could be differences in the recording of stock options. by knowing the companies in the state, it would be possible to checkwith firm reports about reported stock options and thereby reconcile anydifference. such huge differences in the payroll numbers affect the estimation of gdi.¥bea obtains monthly data from the census bureau for the manufacturing sector based on the m3 (manufacturersõ shipments, inventoriesand orders) survey. however, because participation in this survey is vol200219982002cbpqcewdiff.ab. diff.cbpqcewdiff.ab. diff.ð1.2ð0.50.60.64.54.2ð0.30.33.92.2ð1.71.71.72.91.21.2ð4.2ð4.3ð0.10.12.20.9ð1.31.3ð0.21.41.71.72.43.71.31.30.00.30.20.25.66.50.80.8ð6.0ð4.71.31.3ð1.1ð0.30.80.8ð4.8ð1.13.83.82.93.80.80.81.91.4ð0.50.55.44.3ð1.01.0ð1.7ð1.9ð0.20.24.03.4ð0.70.7ð9.2ð8.30.90.96.44.2ð2.22.2ð0.2ð0.8ð0.60.66.56.3ð0.20.21.92.80.90.96.95.4ð1.61.6ð1.5ð3.3ð1.81.87.46.0ð1.31.3ð3.9ð0.83.23.23.92.7ð1.21.2ð4.21.45.65.66.76.0ð0.70.77.27.1ð0.10.18.37.9ð0.40.47.27.20.00.06.06.20.20.23.44.00.60.67.35.6ð1.71.71.93.01.11.14.64.90.30.33.23.40.20.25.55.2ð0.30.3ð1.80.0ð2.20.20.71.2ð0.40.95.65.61.32.2sources: census bureau web site (5/23/05): http://censtats. census.gov/cgibin/cbpnaic/cbpsel.pl and bls web site (5/24/05): ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cew/.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128table 79comparison of the census bureau and bls data for foreignowned establishments, 1992censusbls value as percentage ofbureaublscensus bureau valuenumbernumbernumbernumbernumbernumberofofof reportingofofofestablishmentsemployeesunitsemployeesestablishmentsemployeesall industries102,9584,944,157106,0414,747,63710396agricultural services, forestry,1395,8141394,26510073and fishingamining120,7821,640102,81410285construction3,3222,30590,86618997manufacturing812,004,94713,0761,930,13510296transportation and public utilitiesb231,6383,792222,9999796wholesale trade91513,01234,999491,57818696retail trade3,19026,756853,15871100finance, insurance, and real estate401,0189,558360,2878390services2,77512,899676,0918594otherc91,1165693,137n.m.n.m.note: n.m. = not meaningful.aexcludes agricultural production of crops and livestock.bthe census bureau data exclude railroad transportation.cfor the census bureau: consists of private education and noncommerical establishments; for bls: consists of nonclassifiable establishments.sources: the census bureau data: foreign direct investment in the united states: establishment data for 1992 available on beaõs web site athttp://www.bea.gov/bea/ai1.htm#beacens. bls data: bls news release: òemployment and wages in foreignowned businesses in the unitedstates, fourth quarter 1992,ó october 1996.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing129table 710comparison of nsf r&d expenditures by all u.s.companies with bea r&d expenditures by u.s. parent companies,2001 (millions of dollars or percentage)parentnsf:bea: u.s.companies asall u.s.parentpercentage of allcompaniescompaniesu.s. companiesall industries198,505143,01772manufacturing120,705115,11895food1,81991450beverage and tobacco products152469309textiles, apparel, and leather(d)125n.a.wood products182(d)n.a.paper, printing and support(d)(d)n.a.activitiespetroleum and coal products(d)1,002n.a.chemicals17,89231,927178basic chemicals1,8761,74293resin, synthetic rubber,(d)2,972n.a.fibers, and filamentpharmaceuticals and medicines10,13723,169229other chemicals(d)4,045n.a.plastics and rubber products(d)929n.a.nonmetallic mineral products99033934primary metals485484100fabricated metal products1,59955435machinery6,4048,561134computer and electronic products47,07938,35681computers and peripheral(d)7,727n.a.equipmentcommunications equipment15,50714,52694semiconductor and otherelectronic components14,35811,11477navigational, measuring,12,9474,15832electromedical, and controlinstrumentsother computer and electronic(d)832n.a.productselectrical equipment, appliances,4,9802,00840and componentstransportation equipment25,96525,14797motor vehicles, trailers, and parts(d)18,183n.a.other(d)6,964n.a.furniture and related products30112843miscellaneous manufacturing6,6062,57039nonmanufacturing77,79927,89936mining, extraction, and(d)411n.a.support activitiesutilities1335944continuedimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130improving business statistics through interagency data sharingconstruction320(d)n.a.trade24,372(d)n.a.transportation and warehousing1,848121information(d)9,514n.a.publishing13,7606,45247newspaper, periodical,book, and database649(d)n.a.software13,111(d)n.a.broadcasting andtelecommunications(d)796n.a.telecommunications(d)782n.a.other(d)14n.a.other information(d)2,266n.a.finance, insurance, and real estate(d)624n.a.professional, scientific, and27,70410,34837technical servicesarchitectural, engineering,3,386181and related servicescomputer systems design9,1548,92998and related servicesother15,1641,4019notes: (d) = suppressed to avoid disclosure of data of individual companies; n.a. = notavailable.sources: r&d spending by all u.s. companies: research and development in industry: 2001available on the nsf web site at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/nsf05305/htmstart.htm;r&d spending by u.s. parent companies: u.s. direct investment abroad: operations of u.s.parent companies and their foreign affiliates, revised 2001 estimates available on thebeaõs web site at http://www.bea.gov/bea/ai/iidguide.htm#link12b.table 710continuedparentnsf:bea: u.s.companies asall u.s.parentpercentage of allcompaniescompaniesu.s. companiesuntary and some firms decide not to participate, bea does not know theextent of participation. a recent example is the decision by a major producer of semiconductors to terminate its participation, which representeda huge erosion in the representativeness of the surveys. the annual survey of manufacturers, however, is mandatory. thus bea must wait untilthe annual data are available before it can check the estimates based onthe monthly data. if bea had access to the m3 data, then it could identifythe firms responsible for missing data and possibly estimate the missinginformation from publicly available sources such as company reports.publicly available sales data from company reports could aid in the estimation of missing shipment data from a company that did not provideimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the importance of data sharing131such information in the m3 survey. the ability to estimate such missinginformation would serve to reduce revisions to gdp.¥relatedly, the m3 surveys provide inventories data to bea, andbea does not always know whether a company has reported an inventory adjustment to the census bureau in the same way that the companyhas entered it on its financial accounts. a few years ago the press reporteda major writedown of inventory by a major producer of information technology equipment. without knowing how the firm entered the writedown in its census bureau report, bea had no way of checking if theinventory adjustment was accurately reflected both on the product side ofthe national accounts (inventories is a component of investment) and onthe income side (the valuation of inventories affects corporate profits). infact, there was a large adjustment to inventories.how data sharing would help cope with disastersthe massive destruction wrought by hurricane katrina is having asignificant impact on the ability of the statistical agencies to collect economic data in the affected regions. as a result of the disappearance ofsample units, estimates of retail trade, construction, employment andwages, and other components of the principal economic indicators willcontain many imputations. data sharing would allow a combining of datathat would enable the statistical agencies to better impute missing values.for example, in the absence of complete business list reconciliation between the census bureau and bls, data sharing would allow one of theagencies to find alternative establishments that might serve as proxies formissing establishments and thereby provide a straightforward imputation. in addition, the census bureau sales values might be used by bls toimpute prices for its price indexes. the ability to share data would alsoenable the statistical agencies to examine each otherõs establishmentlevelimputations to see if they suit an agencyõs needs. for example, the bearegional program would have access to the bls establishment imputations for qcew to see if their needs are met. in short, data sharing wouldallow the statistical agencies to economize resources to efficiently handledisruptions to the usual production of economic statistics.referencesmorisi, t.2003recent changes in the national current employment statistics survey. monthlylabor review june.moyer, b.c., m.a. planting, m. fahimnader, and s.k.s. lum2004preview of the comprehensive revision of the annual industry accounts. survey ofcurrent business 84(march):3851.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132improving business statistics through interagency data sharingnational science foundation, division of science resources statistics2005research and development in industry: 2001. (nsf #05305.) arlington, va: nationalscience foundation. available: http://nsf.gov/statistics/nsf05305/front.htm [accessed may 2006].strassner, e.h., g.w. medeiros, and g.m. smith2005annual industry accounts: introducing klems input estimates for 19972003.survey of current business 85(september):34.u.s. bureau of economic analysis, international economic accounts2005aforeign direct investment in the united states: establishment data for 1992. (censusdata.) available: http://www.bea.gov/bea/ai1.htm#beacens [accessed may2006].2005bu.s. direct investment abroad: operations of u.s. parent companies and their foreignaffiliates, revised 2001. available: http://www.bea.gov/bea/ai/iidguide.htm#link12b [accessed may 2006].u.s. bureau of economic analysis and u.s. census bureau1992foreign direct investment in the united states: establishment data for 1987. washington, dc: u.s. government printing office.u.s. census bureau2003county business patterns, naics. available: http://censtats.census.gov/cgibin/cbpnaic/cbpsel.pl [accessed may 2006].u.s. census bureau, bureau of economic analysis, and national science foundationdivision of science resources statistics2005statistics research and development data link project: final report. available: http://www.bea.gov/bea/di/finalreportpublic.pdf [accessed may 2006].u.s. department of labor, bureau of labor statistics1996employment and wages in foreignowned businesses in the united states, fourth quarter 1992. (news release.) washington, dc: u.s. department of labor, bureau oflabor statistics.2002quarterly census of employment and wages program data. available: ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cew/ [accessed may 2006].improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1338using tax return data to improveestimates of corporate profitsgeorge a. pleskouniversity of connecticut school of businessthis chapter describes the role of tax and financial accounting information in the estimation of corporate profits, summarizes the currentdualreporting requirement that publicly traded firms are subject to, anddescribes how a broader use of tax return information, coupled with agreater use of financial accounting information, might increase the accuracy of preliminary national income estimates of corporate profits.measuring corporate incomefor the purposes of this volume, there are two relevant measuresavailable to assess the profitability of corporations. the first, based on therules for financial reporting (generally referred to as òbook incomeó), provides a measure of income to the users of financial statement information.the users, under the concepts of financial accounting for publicly tradedcorporations, are investors, creditors, and any other party needing information to make a decision about whether or not to engage in a businessrelationship with a firm, but not necessarily able to compel the firm toprovide the information.it is worth noting that foundations of financial accounting and reporting do not explicitly include tax authorities as a user. the reason forthis exclusion is that financial accounting disclosures are intended to provide information to those who do not otherwise have the ability to demand information. the separation of audiences, and rules, leads to thesecond measure of corporate income, based on the internal revenuecode. in contrast to the rules of financial reporting, tax reporting removesimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134improving business statistics through interagency data sharingmuch of the discretion for the application of rules that are built into financial reporting.the differences between the amount of income reported to shareholders and the amounts reported to tax authorities, known as booktax differences, have generated attention both in the press and in policy. however,once a dual measurement system is in place, income differences are a natural occurrence, and the key issue becomes understanding the causes andconsequences of the differences. booktax differences have been a characteristic of the u.s. reporting system since the inception of the corporateincome tax, generating academic interest from the start. for example,smith and butters (1949) provide an analysis of booktax differences for asmall sample of corporations active during the 1930s.sources of booktax differencesbooktax differences occur because the amount of income reported asearned is based on different concepts and rules under each reporting system. since the target audience of financial statements is investors and others who need information to make decisions about a company, includingwhether to invest in the companyõs equity or debt, companies that issuepublicly traded equity or debt securities are required by the securitiesand exchange commission to file audited financial statements. such statements must follow generally accepted accounting principles (gaap),which include an adherence to pronouncements of the financial accounting standards board (fasb) and other accounting standards.tax accounting is designed to administer the u.s. tax laws, with theinternal revenue service (irs) the primary audience for tax filings. incontrast to gaap, tax rules can change frequently, depending on legislative initiatives, and are not necessarily designed to present as consistent adefinition of income over time as are financial accounting rules.an important element of financial accounting is the amount of discretion left to the corporation in implementing gaap in their business. forexample, in determining the useful life and depreciation pattern of a capital asset, depreciation schedules of the same asset can vary by companyand by usage and usually follow a straightline pattern. tax depreciationis determined by the internal revenue code and leaves less discretion tothe company. the lack of discretion in the tax code is intended to lead tomore uniform application of the tax system.differences between tax and financial measures of income can arisefrom two types of measurement differences in the accounting systems:temporary and permanent. temporary (timing) differences occur whenboth tax and financial reporting recognize the same total amount of income or expense, but they do so either over different time periods or inimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.using tax return data to improve estimates135different patterns over the same period. timing differences arise not onlyfrom the different reporting rules under each system, but also becausegaap allows managers greater discretion in determining the amounts ofincome and expense in each period than does the tax system.permanent differences in the measures of income arise when a particular item of income or expense is recognized under one system but notthe other. for example, taxexempt interest on municipal bonds is included in book income but not in the determination of tax net income.both temporary and permanent differences are reported in corporationsõ financial statements. under fasbõs statement of financial accounting standards number 109, corporations report a total amount of tax liability based on currentyear financial reporting income, delineating theportion currently owed to the government from that which is deferreddue to differences in income and expense recognition between the twomethods. if the deferred portion is positive, a deferred tax liability is created, representing the amount of taxes not paid on financial statementincome during this period because of temporary differences reducing taxable income below book income. such is usually the case in the short termwith depreciation, as more deductions are taken for tax purposes duringthe early years of an assetõs life than are recognized as expenses for bookpurposes. the deferred tax liability associated with the asset on acorporationõs financial statements represent the (undiscounted) amountof tax to be paid in the future relative to future book earnings when thetax depreciation deductions fall below the book depreciation expense. incontrast to deferred tax liabilities, deferred tax assets are created whenmore taxes are paid than would be paid if financial reporting income wereused to base tax liability, and they represent a financial claim on the government for taxes paid ahead of time relative to financial reporting.permanent differences, such as the effect of taxexempt interest, neverreverse and therefore do not create deferred tax assets or liabilities. corporations account for permanent differences in a separate financial disclosure in the tax footnote of their financial statements.booktax differences have generated increased attention since the1999 treasury department report on tax shelters and related testimony(talisman, 2000), in which reporting differences were suggested as evidence of increased tax sheltering by corporations. the joint committee ontaxation (2003) report on enron provided additional evidence of tax sheltering behavior and of reporting differences for book and tax purposes.bea methodologythe methodology used by the bureau of economic analysis (bea)explicitly incorporates a combination of publicly available informationimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136improving business statistics through interagency data sharingdrawn from both financial statements and tax return data to estimate corporate income. the concept of corporate income in the national accountsis closer to tax than book income, but the time lag in the availability of taxdata, described below, requires bea to forecast current income based onpast tax data and recent financial reports. the recent attention to the roleof booktax differences in affecting the estimate of corporate profits is related to the occurrence of large, unexpected differences in the growth rateof each income measure in the 1990s and early 2000s. the sharp revisionsin estimated corporate profits have been discussed by others, includingthe congressional budget office (2005), mead et al. (2004), and patrick(2001).the rules governing financial reporting by public corporations, specifically financial accounting standard 109 called òaccounting for incometaxesó (financial accounting standard board, 1992), require firms to reconcile their book measure of tax liability to their actual liability. furthermore, income tax reporting requires firms to reconcile their taxable income to their book income on form 1120. as a result, the underlyingeconomic activity of a firm is reported using two distinct measurementsystems and, in theory, allows for a better understanding of the financialposition of a firm. ideally, the information in the tax and financial statements is complementary, since each provides a unique measure of the same economicactivities. furthermore, research suggests that information about booktax differences, as reported in firmsõ tax footnote, is useful to investors(hanlon et al., 2005) in predicting their future performance.however, a problem occurs when the components of the tax disclosure are examined at the firm level and a user tries to determine specificinformation, such as taxable income and a companyõs tax payments. financial disclosures have been found to be unsatisfactory in providinginferences about the tax attributes of a firm (see hanlon, 2003; plesko,2000a, 2003).figure 81 is a schematic of these reporting relations. until 2004, thereconciliation of income for tax reporting purposes was reported on theschedule m1 of the corporate income tax return form 1120. an analysisof the m1õs shortcomings outlined by mills and plesko (2003) shows thatthese reconciliations were of little practical value to the irs. as a result,for tax year 2004 and after, the schedule m1 has been replaced by schedule m3 for larger corporations. the efficacy of the schedule m3 has yetto be assessed.the importance of these issues, from an empirical view, is that thefinancial statement information that bea relies on will misrepresent thetaxable income numbers it is trying to infer if booktax differences arelarge and changing in ways not observable in the financial data. recentimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.using tax return data to improve estimates137adjustment for all corporations [excluding s, ric, and reit] 19902003200,0000200,000400,000600,000800,0001,000,00019901991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003yearpretax book incometax net incomebooktax differencemillions of dollarsfigure 81pretax book income, tax net income, booktax difference, m1 explains, and estimated intercompany dividend.work by plesko (2000b, 2002), plesko and shumofsky (2005), and boyntonet al. (2005) has established that booktax differences are not only large,but also growing. figure 82, reproduced from boynton et al. (2005), showsthat book income has differed from taxable income both in scale and inannual changes. similarly, table 81 shows that these differences are notuniform across industries.402002040608010012019901991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003yearpercentage of tax net incomefigure 82the booktax difference as a percentage of tax net income, 19902003.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138improving business statistics through interagency data sharingtable 81how significant are booktax differences?btd as a share of tax net incomerawallmaterials anddistribution andactiveindustrialenergygoodstransportationcorporationsdivisionsproductionproductionof goods1995 0.1041996 0.1401997 0.1821998 0.242ð0.088 0.0370.1161999 0.690 0.297 0.6030.4712000 0.611 0.900 0.4060.2732001ð0.150 1.277ð0.0260.103as figure 82 shows, there are two years in which the booktax difference is negative, 1992 and 2001, and both are generally explainable. in1992, a financial accounting change required firms to begin recognition ofexpenses to pay postretirement benefits, leading to large reductions inreported book income for that year. the negative difference in 2001 isdriven by firms with large negative tax net income that have smaller, orpositive, book income. the change in 2003, the most recent year for whichdata are available, is dramatic, with book income almost double taxableincome.the existence, magnitude, and pattern of booktax differences raisestwo important issues for national income purposes: (1) why these differences exist and (2) whether these differences can be identified in financialstatements in the years before tax return data become available and corporate profits estimates are finalized. since both sets of information aredriven by the same underlying economic events, the hope is that financialinformation, which is available sooner than tax information, can complement other available data to make profit estimates and generate both timelier, and more accurate, estimates.the timing of income reportingin the case of corporate profits, it is important to note that the amountof information released to investors a short time after the accounting period has ended is large relative to that which can be inferred concurrentlyimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.using tax return data to improve estimates139finance,insurance,education,leisure,real estate,professionalhealth,accommodation,and rentaland businessand socialand foodotherinformationand leasingservicesassistanceservicesservices0.9540.9450.0647.7260.323ð0.1381.0211.3560.6477.3490.097ð0.5304.8301.0620.9313.2860.283ð0.5032.7840.1810.2721.9730.393 3.047begin year 0end year 0end year 2end year 1quarterly tax paymentsearnings releases10k filed(march 30)return due(march 15)return received(september 15)soi tabulations availableauditfigure 83timeline of financial and tax reporting.from the tax system. figure 83 provides an abbreviated time line for acalendar year corporation, that is, one with a year end of december 31.companies make quarterly announcements of their profits and quarterly payments of their expected tax liabilities, although these dates donot directly align. of greatest importance is when annual earnings, whichimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140improving business statistics through interagency data sharingare described here and in figure 83 as year 0, ending on december 31,are disclosed. for publicly traded firms, financial reports are filed bymarch 30 of the following year. the due date for a calendar year corporation to file a tax return is march 15, prior to the filing of financial statements; however, corporations typically file their returns, after an extension, six months later. as a result, the tax return is not usually filed untilseptember 15.shortly after the march 30 filing date, financial data become availablein machinereadable form. tax return data, however, may take two ormore years to collect and tabulate and exclude any audit activities. if corporate financial reporting can be used to infer tax attributes, it may bepossible to effectively model and estimate taxable income two or moreyears ahead of having tax return data. quarterly tax liability patterns arepotentially inferable via estimated tax payments; the financial statements,in theory, provide sufficient disclosure of tax items to estimate the taxableincome of the firm. in other words, if the financial statement informationcorrectly conveys the information it is intended to, it can be used to predict, or improve the predictions of, the ultimate aggregate tax informationeventually reported in the statistics of income tabulations.sources of differencesidentifying the sources and magnitude of the differences betweenbook income and taxable income has been a growing research interestsince the 1999 treasury department study. the previous discussion suggests that the differences between book and taxable income are relativelystraightforward and dictated by a clear set of regulatory requirements. inpractice, however, understanding these differences is not a simple matter.two different approaches have been used to analyze them, depending onthe data available. the first approach uses publicly available data to estimate the booktax difference using information in financial statementsand then attempts to model the amount of booktax difference as a function of firm and industry characteristics (such as the amount of depreciable assets or foreign operations). the second, direct, approach for analyzing booktax differences relies on tabulations from tax returns and isdiscussed by plesko (2002), plesko and shumofsky (2005), and boynton etal. (2005).a significant factor in the recent divergence between book and taxable income has been stock options, which do not affect financial accounting earnings but do reduce taxable income. the difficulty in isolating theireffect, however, is that, for tax purposes, the optionrelated expense isincluded in total compensation and not separately identified. thus, evenimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.using tax return data to improve estimates141with access to tax return data, disclosures may be insufficient to fully understand the causes of the differences.the new schedule m3 (see http://www.irs.gov/pub/irsutl/2005f1120sm3.pdf) will provide a large amount of additional data to helpthe irs, treasury, and bea better understand how financial reporting caninform tax administration. schedule m3 covers three pages and providesmuch more information than the schedule m1, which consisted of 10lines.an important element of the m3 appears on page 1, where firms arenow required to provide identifying information on the financial statement filing entity of which the tax entity is a part. this is followed by aprecise derivation of the amount of book income attributable to the taxentity. this reconciliation will better enable tax authorities and analysts toadjust for consolidation differences.the remaining two pages of the m3 provide greater detail relative towhat was provided prior to 2004, requiring information not only on theamount of an item reported for financial and tax accounting purposes, butalso a delineation of the amount of the difference that is temporary andpermanent. among the additional items now reported, stock options appear in part iii on line 8.the benefits of additional datatwo brief examples demonstrate the importance of additional data toanalysts. first, in forecasting corporate profits, the additional data provided by the m3 will offer greater insight into the relation between taxable income and the book profits reported in financial statements. thisgreater detail should allow for a better use of book income and other information in financial statements to estimate the pattern that taxable income will follow.tax policy will also be assisted by the collection of additional information. with the schedule m3, not only will analysts have more dataconcerning the specific operations and organization of a firm, includingspecific decisions related to tax planning, but also the link to financialstatements will make contemporaneous financial information more useful. in estimating the effects of changes in tax policy on businesses, betterinformation about current operations, rather than that reported for previous tax years, should allow for improved estimates of the economic andfiscal effects of proposed changes.the tax return is the ultimate source of information for determiningthe effects of tax policy, but it is not the only one. there is substantialevidence suggesting that firms look beyond tax reporting when makingtax planning decisions. changes in corporate behavior, such as investimproving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142improving business statistics through interagency data sharingment or financial policy, take place in a tax system that interacts with thecapital market through other types of reporting. without a way to link allof the constraints affecting a business, analysts will have difficulty fullyidentifying and accurately measuring the effects of changes in tax policy.a better use of both financial and tax information, supplemented by newdata provided by the new schedule m3, will provide a better understanding of the interrelationships between the two systems.acknowledgmentsi have benefited from discussions with dan feenberg, ralph rector,john phillips, and david weber.referencesboynton, c., p. defilippes, and e. legel2005prelude to schedule m3: schedule m1 corporate booktax difference data 19902003. 109 tax notes 1579 (december 19).congressional budget office2005 the budget and economic outlook: an update. washington, dc: u.s. governmentprinting office.financial accounting standards board1992accounting for income taxes. fasb statement no. 109. norwalk, ct: financial accounting standards board.hanlon, m.2003what can we infer about a firmõs taxable income from its financial statements?national tax journal (4):831863.hanlon, m., s. kelley laplante, and t. shevlin2005evidence on the possible information loss of conforming book income and taxable income. available: http://ssrn.com/abstract=686402 or doi:10.2139/ssrn.686402[accessed may 2006].joint committee on taxation2003report of investigation of enron corporation and related entities regarding federal taxand compensation issues, and policy recommendations. (jcs303). washington, dc:u.s. government printing office. available: http://www.gpo.gov/congress/joint/jcs303/vol1/index.html [accessed may 2006].manzon, g., and g. plesko2002the relation between financial and tax reporting measures of income. tax lawreview 55(2):175214.mead, c.i., b.r. moulton, and k. patrick2004nipa corporate profits and reported earnings: a comparison and measurement issues.paper presented at the assa/aea meetings, january 35, san diego, ca. available: http://www.bea.gov/bea/papers.htm [accessed may 2006].mills, l.f., and g.a. plesko2003bridging the reporting gap: a proposal for more informative reconciling of bookand tax income. national tax journal (4):865893.patrick, k.2001comparing nipa profits with s&p 500 profits. survey of current business(april):1620.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.using tax return data to improve estimates143plesko, g.a.2000abooktax differences and the measurement of corporate income. proceedings of theninetysecond annual conference on taxation 1999:171176.2000bevidence and theory on corporate tax shelters. proceedings of the ninetysecondannual conference on taxation 1999:367371.2002reconciling corporation book and tax net income, tax years 19961998. soi bulletin 21(4):116.2003an evaluation of alternative measures of corporate tax rates. journal of accountingand economics 35(2):201226.plesko, g.a., and n. shumofsky2005 reconciling corporationsõ book and taxable income, 1995ð2001. washington, dc: u.s.government printing office.smith, d.t., and butters, j.k .1949taxable and business income. cambridge, ma: national bureau of economicresearch.talisman, j.2000penalty and interest provisions, corporate tax shelters. u.s. department of thetreasury testimony before the senate committee on finance, march 8.u.s. department of the treasury1999the problem of corporate tax shelters: discussion, analysis and legislative proposals.washington, dc: u.s. government printing office.improving business statistics through interagency data sharing: summary of a workshopcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.