detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/11904strategy for an army center for network science, technology,and experimentation98 pages | 6 x 9 | paperbackisbn 9780309106962 | doi 10.17226/11904committee on strategies for network science, technology, and experimentation;board on army science and technology; division on engineering and physicalsciences; national research councilstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on strategies for  network science, technology, and experimentationboard on army science and technologydivision on engineering and physical sciencesstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract no. w911nf06c0066 between the national academy of sciences and the department of defense. any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number13: 9780309106962international standard book number10: 0309106966limited copies of this report are available from the board on army science and technology, national research council, 500 fifth street, n.w., room 940, washington, dc 20001, (202) 3343118.additional copies are available from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055, (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area), internet, http://www.nap.edu.copyright 2007 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americastrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprot, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientic and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientic and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. charles m. vest is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientic and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. charles m. vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on strategies for network science, technology, and experimentationverne l. (larry) lynn, chair, defense advanced research projects agency (retired)raj k. aggarwal, rockwell collins corporationa. michael andrews ii, l3 communications richard l. dunn, consultant, edgewater, marylandgerald harris, global business networkjason f. providakes, mitre corporationzita m. simutis, u.s. army research institute for the behavioral and social sciences (retired)w. david sincoskie, telcordia technologies, inc.ronald l. smith, university of nevada school of medicinestaffrobert j. love, study director harrison t. pannella, senior program ofcernia d. johnson, senior program associatealexander r. repace, senior program assistantsarah e. pellegrin, senior program assistantstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viboard on army science and technologymalcolm r. o™neill, chair, lockheed martin corporation (retired), vienna, virginiaalan h. epstein, vice chair, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge raj k. aggarwal, rockwell collins, cedar rapids, iowaseth bonder, the bonder group, ann arbor, michiganjames carafano, the heritage foundation, washington, d.c.robert l. cattoi, rockwell international corporation (retired), dallas, texasdarrell w. collier, u.s. army space and missile defense command (retired), leander, texasrobert r. everett, mitre corporation (retired), new seabury, massachusettspatricia k. falcone, sandia national laboratories, livermore, californiawilliam r. graham, national security research, inc. (retired), arlington, virginiapeter f. green, university of michigan, ann arborcarl guerreri, electronic warfare associates, inc., herndon, virginiam. frederick hawthorne, university of missouri, columbiamary jane irwin, pennsylvania state university, university parkclarence w. kitchens, science applications international corporation, vienna, virginialarry lehowicz, quantum research international, arlington, virginiajohn w. lyons, u.s. army research laboratory (retired), ellicott city, marylandedward k. reedy, georgia tech research institute (retired), atlantadennis j. reimer, dfi international, washington, d.c.w. david sincoskie, telcordia technologies, inc., morristown, new jerseyjudith l. swain, university of california, san diegowilliam r. swartout, institute for creative technologies, marina del rey, californiaedwin l. thomas, massachusetts institute of technology, cambridgeellen d. williams, university of maryland, college parkstaffbruce a. braun, directorchris jones, financial associatedonna l. randall, administrative coordinatordeanna p. sparger, program administrative coordinatorstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiprefacethe 2005 nrc report network science developed a working denition for network science as ﬁthe study of network representations of physical, biological, and social phenomena leading to predictive models of these phenomenaﬂ (nrc, 2005, p. 2). in this light, network science can be seen as a cornerstone for future military operations and the conduct of networkcentric warfare.the present report, strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentation, builds on the network science report by evaluating a possible framework for the army to conduct research, development, test, and evaluation (rdte) in areas of network science important to the future. the study was conducted in an environment in which changes were well underway to relocate and alter signicantly the network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) resources of the army and in which there exist diverse views on effective ways to organize and conduct science and technology (s&t) within a military construct. the overall challenge for the army is to organize its s&t resources so as to advance nste on a broad front while maintaining those relationships and activities that have proven productive.the statement of task for the study was as follows:the assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics, and technology) (asaalt) has requested the nrc bast to conduct a study to dene advanced operating models and architectures for future army laboratories and centers. the nrc will examine several representative centers, and address the following issues: 1. consult with the asaalt base realignment and closure (brac) technical assessment board to obtain data on organizational goals, functions that support strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viii prefacethe goals, activities that support the functions, and the disciplines required to support the activities and the critical mass required for each discipline for the network science, technologies, and experimentation center (nstec). 2. examine the various business models, managerial architectures and manpower needs both current and future for nstec, to include the assessment and potential utility of best practices in successful multidisciplinary research consortiums.3. identify deciencies in the army infrastructure for conducting stateoftheart s&t for networkcentric warfare (ncw), and recommend how these should be improved.4. consider the establishment of a worldclass user facility with stateoftheart equipment within the nstec to engage the broad community (both civilian and military) doing r&d in networks, both humanengineered and biologically evolved, and situational awareness technologies and systems to further the transformational goals of ncw. include the delineation of the core competencies and a detailed manpower analysis (relevant disciplines, critical mass in each area, etc.) for such an organization.5. recommend relocations within existing legal authority to better manage the various assets and resources and to create an improved synergy among them to achieve the goals of ncw.6. explore existing legal authorities, which will enable the army to best exploit partnerships, alternative funding and sharing of resources with industry through various relationships. i would like to thank the committee for its hard work in interviewing numerous experts, assessing the pertinent issues, and developing recommendations to address these concerns. the committee in turn is grateful to the many army personnel engaged in nste for the useful information they provided. we also greatly appreciate the support and assistance of the national research council staff, which ably assisted the committee in its factnding activities and in the production of this report.lastly, this study was conducted under the auspices of the nrc board on army science and technology (bast). the bast was established in 1982 as a unit of the national research council at the request of the united states army and brings broad military, industrial, and academic scientic, engineering, and management expertise to bear on technical challenges of importance to senior army leaders. the board is not a study committee; rather, it discusses potential study topics, develops and frames study tasks, ensures project planning, suggests potential experts to serve as committee members or reviewers, and convenes meetings to examine strategic issues for the sponsor, the assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics, and technology).although the board members are listed on page vi of this report, they were not, with the exception of any board members nominated and appointed to serve strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface ixas formal members of the study committee, asked to endorse the committee™s conclusions or recommendations, nor did they review nal drafts of the report before its release. larry lynn, chaircommittee on strategies for network science, technology, and experimentationstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiacknowledgment of reviewersthis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research council™s report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:frank doyle, university of california, santa barbara,charles b. duke, xerox innovation group (retired),paul j. kern, the cohen group,larry g. lehowicz, quantum research international,richard m. murray, california institute of technology,steven l. schooner, george washington university law school,george t. singley, science applications international corporation, andsteven g. wax, sri international.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the nal draft of the report before its release. the review of this report was overseen by gerald e. galloway, jr., university of maryland, college park. appointed by the national research council, he was strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xii acknowledgment of reviewersresponsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiicontentssummary 11 introduction 10background, 10statement of task and study objectives, 12major assumptions and constraints, 12network science, 13report organization, 142 what network science, technology, and 16 experimentation is needed by the army?scope of network science, technology, and experimentation, 16communications and information networks, 18human performance in networks, adversary understanding, and  other network areas, 19priorities, 23 nste s&t investment strategy, 24 proposed mission statement, 25chapter summary, 253 network science, technology, and 28 experimentation across the army todaynste organizations, 28 information and communications, 29 human performance in networks, 35strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv contents adversary understanding, 36 efforts in other network areas, 36chapter summary, 374 infrastructure resources necessary for army 38 network science, technology, and experimentationinfrastructure framework, 39 development of theory and associated technologies, 40 human performance in networks, 41 integration of new technologies, 42 experimentation, 43organizational elements of an nstec, 47 army contributions, 47 academic (university) contributions, 47 industry contributions, 48 scope and structure, 48 centralized versus distributed facilities, 49chapter summary, 505 goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 51organizational goals, 51 attracting and retaining human talent, 52 partnering with industry and academia, 53 meeting special military needs, 53operating models for nstec governance, 55 structure, 55 special authorities, 56 governance and business attributes, 61 command relationships and leadership, 64 alternatives, 65 recommended strategy, 65chapter summary, 67references 69appendixesa committee meetings 73b biographical sketches of committee members 77strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvtables, figures, and boxtabless1 network areas and priorities, 721  areas of network research of interest to the army, 1722  examples of biological and social (nonphysical) networks, 2023  network areas and priorities, 2431  current locations of army nste, 3141 elements of nstec infrastructure, 4651 comparative analysis adapted from rand edelphi exercise, 63figuress1 recommended nstec organization, 521  typical communications and information network topology, 2231 current army organizations engaged in nste, 3051 recommended nstec organization, 67box51  key attributes of an army science, technology, and experimentation center, 56strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviamsaa army materiel systems analysis activityapg aberdeen proving groundapi application program interfacearcic army capabilities integration centerari army research institute for the behavioral and social sciencesarl army research laboratoryaro army research ofceasa (alt)  assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics and technology)bast board on army science and technologybrac base realignment and closurec2 command and control c2d command and control directorate c3 command, control, and communicationsc3otm command, control, and communications onthemovec4isr command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissancecerdec communicationselectronics research, development, and engineering centercio chief information ofcercisd computational and information sciences directoratecoin counterinsurgencycots commercial offtheshelfacronyms and abbreviationsstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.acronyms and abbreviations xviicrada cooperative research and development agreementcta collaborative technology alliancectsf central technical support facilitydarpa defense advanced research projects agencydhs department of homeland securitydisn defense information systems networkdod department of defenseerdc  engineer research and development centerfar federal acquisition regulationfcs future combat systemsffrdc federally funded research and development centerfgc federal government corporationgig global information gridgigbe global information gridbandwidth expansiongoco governmentowned, contractor operatedgwot global war on terrorismhld highlevel designhred human research and engineering directoratei2wd intelligence and information warfare directorateinfosec information securityinscom u.s. army intelligence and security commandip internet protocolipa intergovernmental personnel actisr  intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissanceit information technologyita international technology alliancelan local area networklcmc life cycle management centerm&s modeling and simulationmanet  mobile ad hoc networksmls multilevel securitynaca national advisory commission on aeronauticsnasa national aeronautics and space administrationnco networkcentric operationsstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviii acronyms and abbreviationsncw networkcentric warfarendia national defense industrial associationnisita international technology alliance in network and information sciencesnrc national research councilnrl naval research laboratorynsa national security agencynsc natick soldier centernsif network science integration facilitynsps national security personnel systemnste network science, technology, and experimentation nstec network science, technology, and experimentation centernvesd night vision and electronic sensors directorateomb ofce of management and budgetosi open system interconnectionpeo program executive ofcerpm program managerqos quality of servicer&d research and developmentrdec research, development, and engineering centerrdecom u.s. army research, development, and engineering commandrdt&e research, development, test, and evaluations&t science and technologys&tcd space and terrestrial communications directoratesci sensitive compartmented informationscif sensitive compartmented information facilitysedd sensors and electron devices directoratetrac tradoc analysis centertradoc training and doctrine commanduarc universityafliated research centeruav unmanned aerial vehicleugs unattended ground sensorusaf u.s. air forceusn u.s. navystrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1the u.s. military and its allies have committed to a strategy of network centric warfare (ncw) with everincreasing levels of investment in and dependence on networked systems. as a result, the army has become increasingly aware of the critical role that network science will play in achieving national defense goals. this report discusses a strategy for an army center for conducting network science, technology, and experimentation supportive of all of the military services and joint operations.the report examines, evaluates, and recommends appropriate operating  models and infrastructure for an army network science, technology, and experimentation center (nstec). to a large extent, the study was initiated as a result of base realignment and closure (brac) decisions that are presenting the army with many challenges and opportunities; a major study goal included minimizing the former and maximizing the latter. although technologies for command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (c4isr) technologies, and associated concepts such as situational awareness, are currently the main focus for developing the ﬁnetworkﬂ in ncw, these areas are only part of the overall picture. the 2005 national research council (nrc) report network science (nrc, 2005) identied areas of research and challenges involving biological, social, and engineered networks that are key to advancing network science and technology. future advances in ncw will be highly dependent on a combination of basic and applied research, multidisciplinary concepts, experimentation, and the timely transition of innovative developments to usable applications. the challenge for the army is to expand the present emphasis on c4isr networks to incorporate the full scope of emerging developments in network science by taking advantage of the impending brac relocations of summarystrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 strategy for an army center for nsteresearch, development, and engineering resources to aberdeen proving ground (apg), maryland.at the onset of this study, the army sponsor claried the statement of task (see preface) to include a consideration of networks in a broad sense, as well as an examination of the needs of the army for network science and technology (s&t) investment that would support its longerterm goals. these goals relate to network layers commonly referred to as the transport, services, information, and human interaction layers. the committee on strategies for network science, technology, and experimentation was asked to compare these needs with the current army organization capacity for undertaking s&t, to assess the spectrum of practical options available to pursue longterm goals, and to recommend an optimized collaborative approach for army research, technology, and experimentation that would enable solutions for important realworld problems for the army involving networks and network operations. the study addresses the functions that a worldclass center for network science, technology, and experimentation must perform. clearly, basic and applied research and experimentation activities are essential,1 but an nstec could also support acquisition program managers on a reimbursable basis to transition network technology, essentially spanning the gamut of funding for research, development, and acquisition. network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) is rapidly evolving with changing needs, emerging technology, and new capabilities. the committee acknowledged the importance of the role of the soldier in the successful application of network technology in warfare and recommends increased investments in behavioral and social sciences research that would consider human performance in networks and add to understanding of the adversary. the committee assumed that the purposes for establishing an nstec would be to promote creativity and innovation, to attract and retain intellectual talent, to establish partnerships that can capitalize on frontier research at universities and in industry, and to achieve affordable and timely network technology and system solutions through interactions with the warghter/user.the committee consulted directly with army materiel command personnel and other personnel responsible for and familiar with brac planning and implementation. it reviewed models of existing organizations in government and industry that might possibly be used to form a basis for an army nstec, including models envisioned in relevant past studies. the committee also reviewed the activities and resources of the army and other military services that are currently engaged in nste. deciencies or shortcomings that a new organization for nste might be required to address were identied, and a mission statement to overcome these was formulated.1these are activities supported through army budgetary classications 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 for program funding. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 3the committee evaluated the pros and cons of centralized facilities versus purely distributed elements and determined that a hybrid of the two would be necessary based on practical limitations. it then considered the infrastructure resources necessary for an army nstec and the physical realization of these in light of army facilities planning for brac, and it examined legal and governance considerations necessary for an nstec to accomplish its mission and to exploit contemplated partnerships with industry and academia and relationships throughout the department of defense (dod). it evaluated a variety of approaches over the course of the study and considered options for operating models, both new ones and those that have been explored in other studies. the committee also considered where nste activities are situated within the army, as well as elsewhere in the dod or other government facilities, in academia, and in industry. the impending relocations of key army organizations involved in nste from ft. monmouth, new jersey, to aberdeen proving ground, maryland, were deemed a prime opportunity to facilitate establishment of a worldclass organization for nste that the committee believes is urgently needed to confront the challenges of ncw. in brief, the report provides answers to the following questions: what network science, technology, and experimentation is needed by the army? (chapter 2)what constitutes nste across the army today? (chapter 3)what infrastructure resources are needed? (chapter 4)what operating and governance models are most likely to satisfy the creation of a worldclass nste capability? (chapter 5)networkcentric operations have proven their worth in military operations and are a central premise for warghting capabilities. nste must provide the developmental basis for networkcentric operations in both conventional and irregular warfare. as the military increases its reliance on networks, the army will be pressed to exploit nste to an unprecedented degree. the army will need to consider a range of topics in a broad array of network science areas to translate its investment strategy into advances in network research and technology. to facilitate the identication of nste activities, the committee developed the following denition:network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) encompasses all information and information exchange, visualization, collaboration, manipulation, protection, restoration, transport, services, data storage, and application layers. information sources (e.g., sensors) and the processing inherent in them are interfaced to the network, but the sensors and processing per se are not included in the denition, except for cases where the processing is necessarily integral to the network, such as for strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 strategy for an army center for nstedistributed remote sensors. human use of networks is a critical component of nste. as a result of brac, many, if not most, of the personnel and facilities performing essential nste activities for the army will move to apg. the two major organizations involved with nste include the army research laboratory (arl) at adelphi, maryland, and the communicationselectronics research, development, and engineering center (cerdec), now at ft. monmouth, new jersey. elements of other organizations are also involved with nste, including the army research institute for the behavioral and social sciences (ari), the army research institute of environmental medicine (ariem), the engineer research and development center (erdc), and others. without a plan to combine and unify nste activities, the army will merely relocate and reconstruct cerdec at apg in its present form and fail to capitalize on the synergies possible with network science research. options for physical realization of an army nstec range from a centralized facility in a single location to an organization using networked connectivity that is fully distributed in multiple locations. there are important pros and cons for each, but regardless of the conguration selected, there will be a critical requirement for partnerships with academia and industry that will require interconnections to many locations. the magnitude and diversity of the required infrastructure suggest a phased implementation approach to establishing an nstec. the brac timetable is relatively in˚exible, and the requisite talents and skills of the leadership team that will be needed are likely to be different for different phases of implementation. the content of the nste r&d portfolio will also change as the new organization assumes its mission and matures. previous comparative analyses have narrowed the eld of consideration of prospective models for army research organizations to governmentowned, contractoroperated (goco), federally funded research and development center (ffrdc), and governmentowned, federal government corporation (fgc) operating models. the army has a wealth of experience with a variation of the ffrdc known as the universityafliated research center (uarc), and this is the path recommended by the committee. a core nstec uarc/ffrdc could be established at any appropriate location or locations and then be relocated at or in proximity to aberdeen proving ground as circumstances warrant. in its early days, the uarc/ffrdc could perform a ﬁgap llerﬂ role when (1) existing army resources are inadequate to accomplish all aspects of nste or (2) particular army organizations involved in brac relocation to apg are unable to retain key personnel. in the longterm evolution of the nstec, the core uarc/ffrdc could consolidate responsibility for s&t in network science research and applications. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 5overall coordination and implementation of nste for the army will require extraordinary leadership at a level commensurate with the importance of networkcentric operations in the future. besides incorporating the core uarc, the new nstec organization would alter existing boundaries of responsibility for the various nste functions that are now performed by multiple organizations. for this reason, a director for all nste activities should be assigned immediately to assist with planning and establishment of the recommended nstec organization with a uarc/ffrdc core. figure s1 illustrates the committee™s recommendation for how the new organization should be formed. all nste efforts would become the responsibility of s1 and 51r01028network sciencefigure s1 recommended nstec organization. (acronyms are dened on pages xvixviii in the front matter.)strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 strategy for an army center for nstethe proposed nstec. within the nstec, the core uarc/ffrdc would begin by lling current gaps in s&t and would take responsibility for efforts that cannot be performed due to qualied technical staff deciding not to move to apg. conclusions and recommendationsthe following conclusions and recommendations address the complex set of requirements outlined in the committee™s statement of task, which is given in the preface. conclusion 1: table s1 provides a priority list of the network science areas and applications that the committee believes will be most important to the army in the future. these include communications and information; human performance in networks; adversary understanding; and other nonphysical areas of network science, such as systems biology, neural networks, and economic networks.recommendation 1a: the army should base its investment strategy for network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) on the priorities shown in table s1 and develop and fund a plan that:continues the current army focus on information networks, expanding these activities to address basic understanding and predictability of those networks;provides the theoretical and scientic foundations for all network science research and applications;signicantly increases funding and efforts in human performance in networks and adversary understanding; andinvests in other disciplines, such as sociology, behavioral biology, and neural science, to ensure that the army continually advances its understanding of network science.recommendation 1b: the army should immediately increase funding in the critical areas of: predictability of network performance,human performance in networks, andadversary understanding.moreover, the army nste community should continuously consult with the training and doctrine command (tradoc), the army capabilities integration center (arcic), and the program executive ofcer/program manager (peo/pm) of programs of record to identify additional gaps for immediate emphasis.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 7table s1 network areas and prioritiesprioritynetwork areasimportant applications1communications and informationpredictable performance: fundamental to command and control (c2) systems, logistics, training, etc., for both high and low levels of conflict, including operations at higher echelons down to the individual units and soldiers2human performance in networks improved command decision processes, soldier and team interaction, training, social interactions, etc.2adversary understanding social, cultural, organizational, religious, and economic command and control networks; critical counterinsurgency (coin) interactions; intelligence analysis3nonphysical areas of network science (see table 22)systems biology, neural networks, and economic networksrecommendation 1c: in order to implement its investment strategy in nste, the army should organize a center for nste (nstec) with a mission to:strengthen the theoretical underpinnings of network science;conduct basic research on how and why biological and social (non physical) networks function and determine their applications to military networks;manage activities in network science research, technology development, and experimentation for the army;focus science and technology (s&t) investments to enable network centric operations and warfare;focus applied s&t to enable social networks important to army operations; andenable development of network science applications and facilitate their transition to army and joint operations.conclusion 2: current responsibility for nste is fragmented across several  organizations. as the brac relocations to apg occur with concomitant losses in personnel and facilities, the existing nste capabilities will be further divided and eroded, hindering essential progress toward improvements in the army™s ability to conduct networkcentric operations and warfare.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 strategy for an army center for nsterecommendation 2: the army should change its organization and coordination of nste efforts to ensure essential support for future warghting operations.conclusion 3a: the extensive infrastructure needed to support army nste requirements will be developed initially from the facilities of existing organizations and will require a special planning effort to synchronize with brac relocations already in progress. conclusion 3b: the magnitude and diversity of the required infrastructure suggest a phased implementation approach to establish an army nstec. a plan to develop nste capabilities and infrastructure could be phased over multiple years, beginning with the reorganization of existing and relocated facilities and ending with the establishment of a worldclass center for network science, technology, and experimentation. an adequate plan will involve leadership with the appropriate talent and vision for all phases, especially as the content of the nste r&d portfolio matures. conclusion 3c: based on army needs, the nstec should be a hybrid operation consisting of two or three centralized facilities having interconnectivity to a variety of distributed supporting elements.recommendation 3: the army should plan and fund for nste infrastructure resources that provide for (1) ˚exible congurations of network experiments and integration, both internally and externally; (2) facility designs that enhance and encourage academic and industry partnerships; and (3) an environment with worldclass experimental capabilities and a campuslike atmosphere to attract truly talented people. conclusion 4: the uarc/ffrdc operating model has emerged in recent years as a ˚exible and productive model capable of integrating commercial and military r&d development for the army. the uarc/ffrdc is also superior to other operating models, because it allows ongoing access to a broad range of expertise, talent, and innovation while efciently using government resources.recommendation 4: the army should establish a new uarc/ffrdc (or  expand an existing uarc/ffrdc) to serve as the core of an overall army nstec organization. conclusion 5: an nstec organization must exhibit a high degree of ˚exibility in personnel policies that will enable it to become a worldclass leader in network research and development. establishment and evolution of the nstec will require exceptional leadership.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.summary 9recommendation 5a: the army strategy for nste should be to establish an nstec organization with a uarc/ffrdc core as shown in figure s1.recommendation 5b: the army should immediately designate a director to establish an army nstec at aberdeen proving ground (maryland). the nstec director should report to the u.s. army research, development, and engineering command (rdecom) at a level equivalent to the arl and rdec directors. all nste funding and resources should be assigned to this individual. recommendation 5c: for the nstec to be able to accomplish the mission envisioned, the army should designate at least two deputy directors: one for technology and another for human performance/adversary understanding. this action will ensure that the large number of cerdec engineers does not overwhelm research and development efforts in human performance and adversary understanding.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.101introduction the u.s. military and its allies have committed to a strategy of developing networkcentric warfare (ncw) capabilities through everincreasing levels of investment in and dependence on networked systems. as a result, the army is becoming increasingly aware of the critical role that network science research, technology, and experimentation will play in achieving national defense goals. this report discusses a strategy for an army center for conducting network  science, technology, and experimentation supportive of all of the military services and joint operations.this chapter provides the context for the study covered in this report, including clarications to the statement of task made by the report™s sponsor. it also discusses likely goals that the establishment of an army center for network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) could meet, basic assumptions of the study, and the environment in which the study was undertaken. it also explains the organization of the report.backgroundthe overall study requirement was to examine, evaluate, and recommend appropriate operating models and infrastructure for a network science, technology, and experimentation center (nstec) with special attention given to including assets currently existing within the department of the army. determining appropriate potential relationships between such a center and existing government, industry, and academic organizations was also important, since such relationships are critical for promoting the effective transfer of scientic knowledge and technologies among the user community, and for furthering the development strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 11and demonstration of technological innovations that will enable continuous development of ncw capabilities.  ncw capabilities are highly dependent on information and communications network technologies and are most often associated with conventional warghting operations. however, the nature of likely future u.s. adversaries has changed. in the next decade, it is unlikely that any other existing military force would take on the u.s. military in a forceonforce conventional war. although the army must be prepared for traditional conventional war, the greater likelihood is that potential enemies are going to resort to asymmetrical or irregular approaches so they do not have to directly counter u.s. military technology. to be fully relevant in the future, ncw capabilities that traditionally have been viewed in terms of large forceonforce operations will need to apply to the activities of small army units and to interface with small groups of friendly foreign military, paramilitary, nongovernmental organizations (ngos), and civilian government forces. future networks must be described not only in terms of military operations, but also in terms of how they can integrate the social, cultural, economic, and political aspects of human performance, including understanding the adversary in irregular warfare. in recognition of this, while the traditional focus of army nste on physical networks must continue, it must also support research activities that are on the cutting edge of applying network science to the challenges of asymmetric warfare. in this context, an army nstec may well become the key organization setting the course for s&t in networkcentric warfare.technologies for command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (c4isr), and associated concepts such as situational awareness, are currently the main focus for development of the ﬁnetworkﬂ in ncw. however, these technologies and concepts are only part of the overall picture. the contribution of the human dimension must be properly integrated within the spectrum of c4isr technologies for the potential of ncw to be fully realized. this necessitates an integrated, multidisciplinary approach to ensure that an nstec addresses humanintensive issues associated with the function of social and other nonphysical networks. a challenge for the army is to expand the present emphasis on c4isr networks to incorporate the full scope of the emerging eld of network science. the impending base realignment and closure (brac) relocations of research, development, and engineering resources to aberdeen proving ground (apg), maryland, provides a prime opportunity to do so.the committee grappled with what functions should be included within the construct for an nstec. clearly, basic and advanced army research s&t activities are essential,1 but an nstec could also support acquisition program 1 these are activities supported through army budgetary classications 6.1, 6.2, and 6.3 for program funding. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 strategy for an army center for nstemanagers on a reimbursable basis to transition technology, essentially spanning the gamut of funding for research, development, and acquisition. the committee evaluated a variety of existing and creative approaches that could help the army overcome very difcult organizational and bureaucratic barriers and considered options for various organizational models, both new ones and those that have been previously explored in other studies. statement of task and study objectivesthe statement of task for the study is contained in the preface. this task statement was further claried by the sponsor to include the specic study objectives outlined below:consider networks in the broader sense. examine the army needs for network science and technology (s&t) to support its longerterm goals, including network layers commonly referred to as the transport, services, information, and human interaction layers. compare these needs with the current army organization to undertake s&t and assess the spectrum of practical options available to pursue them. these options should include physical locations, organizational models, and required infrastructure. recommend an optimized collaborative approach for army research, technology, and experimentation to solve important realworld army problems involving network science and technology and network operations. collaboration in this sense means developing a multidisciplinary approach within the army and also collaborating or partnering with academia, industry, and other relevant organizations to bring their expertise and intellectual capital to bear on relevant problems of mutual interest. existing army organizations, current plans, and legal authorities need to be considered. if changes are recommended, they need to be practical and capable of being executed in a timely and resourceconstrained manner.recommend how to relocate organizations currently involved with network science and technology at ft. monmouth, new jersey, and other facilities to aberdeen proving ground, maryland, to facilitate establishment of a worldclass center of nste activity for the army. major assumptions and constraintsnste is rapidly evolving with changing needs, emerging technologies, and new capabilities. flexibility is an essential characteristic for any organizational structure that will engage in nste in the future. the committee assumed that the purpose of establishing an nstec would be to promote creativity and innovation, to attract and retain intellectual talent, to establish partnerships that can capitalize strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 13on frontier research at universities and in industry, and to develop affordable and timely solutions to issues concerning network technology and systems through interactions with the warghter/user.the committee made other key assumptions focused on the uncertainties of need and the practicalities of resource constraints in recognition that the army cannot undertake everything that it deems important. these include:base realignment and closure (brac) decisions are faits accomplis, but the individual personnel who will physically relocate to aberdeen proving ground (apg) remain to be determined.the location of apg could limit the ability to recruit and retain personnel with the highest qualications and desired levels of expertise.army compromises between the ideal and the practical are going to be necessary and should be carefully balanced.study recommendations should be based on practical and realistic approaches.recommendations should not require new enabling legislation.the proposed nstec would be capable of serving the needs of both army and joint operational requirements.of necessity, the committee took a highlevel approach to its analyses of both personnel and infrastructure. detailed data on current and projected levels of personnel resources and investments in all of the networkrelated activities were not available for all organizations, making a detailed manpower analysis impossible. s&t funding for an nstec was estimated by extrapolating amounts provided for fiscal year 2006 networkrelated activities.  network scienceas a starting point, the committee reviewed ndings and recommendations of the 2005 national research council (nrc) report network science, which identied for the army key research challenges, specic research areas, and the scope of facilities and equipment necessary to conduct worldclass research in network science (nrc, 2005). although that report was focused on basic research, it provided ndings that had considerable relevance to the establishment of an nstec. these ndings can be brie˚y summarized as follows:networks are pervasive in all aspects of life (biological, physical, and social).fundamental knowledge about the prediction of the properties of complex networks is primitive.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 strategy for an army center for nstecurrent funding policies and priorities are unlikely to provide adequate fundamental knowledge.network science is an emerging eld, and there is consensus on the topics appropriate to a network science curriculum among practitioners of network research in diverse disciplines.the high value attached to the efcient and failurefree operation of global, engineered networks makes their design, scaling, operation, and protection a national priority.the 2005 report also identied seven major research challenges for network science (pp. 3637):dynamics, spatial location, and information propagation in networks. better understanding of the relationship between architecture and function is needed.modeling and analysis of very large networks. tools, abstractions, and  approximations are needed that allow reasoning about largescale networks as well as techniques for modeling networks characterized by noisy, incomplete data.design and synthesis of networks. sufcient understanding and adequate techniques are needed to design or modify a network to obtain the desired properties.increasing level of rigor and mathematical structure in characterizing networks. abstracting common concepts across elds. practitioners of network science in disparate disciplines need uniform denitions for common concepts.better experiments and measurements of network structure. current data sets on largescale networks tend to be sparse, and tools for investigating their structure and functions are limited.robustness and security of networks. a clear need exists to better understand and design networked systems that are both robust to component variations and secure against hostile intent.report organizationthe logic of the study and the organization of this report are represented by the following sequence of questions:what network science, technology, and experimentation is needed by the army?what constitutes nste across the army today?what infrastructure resources are needed?what operating and governance models are most likely to satisfy the creation of a worldclass nste capability?strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 15chapter 2 discusses the scope of what a center for nste should do. chapter 3 describes what constitutes nste in the army today. chapter 4 considers infrastructure requirements and the physical realization of an nstec, pre and postbrac. chapter 5 describes basic organizational goals, compares operating models, and evaluates alternatives. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162what network science, technology, and experimentation is needed by the army?this chapter discusses what constitutes network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) in the army; proposes a mission statement for an army center of nste activities, an army nstec; and identies science and technology research areas that such a center might undertake.scope of network science, technology, and experimentationdiscussions of network science, its elements, and its criticality to military applications vary widely depending on how network science is dened. the committee chose to adopt the denition from the 2005 national research council report network science, which dened basic network science as ﬁthe study of network representations of physical, biological and social phenomena leading to predictive models of these phenomenaﬂ (nrc, 2005, p. 2). this denition is intentionally very broad and includes interactions between complex, multidisciplinary nodes. the network science report also summarized various areas of network research that are of interest to the army (table 21). as currently used by the army and within the greater military establishment, the word ﬁnetworkﬂ is used in terms such as ﬁnetworkcentric operations,ﬂ ﬁnetworkcentric warfare,ﬂ or just ﬁthe networkﬂ to refer to information or communications networks and the humans that use them. such networks play an increasingly important role in modern warfare in enabling command and control and providing information on force locations and activities. this is true for both conventional highintensity warfare (e.g., desert storm and the more recent ﬁrun to baghdadﬂ) and counterinsurgency (coin) warfare. the former application is strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what nste is needed by the army? 17table 21 areas of network research of interest to the armyresearch areakey objectivemodeling, simulating, testing, and prototyping very large networkspractical deployment tool sets command and control of joint/combined networked forcesnetworked properties of connected heterogeneous systemsimpact of network structure on organizational behaviordynamics of networked organizational behaviorsecurity and information assurance of networksproperties of networks that enhance survivalrelationship of network structure to scalability and reliabilitycharacteristics of robust or dominant networksmanaging network complexityproperties of networks that promote simplicity and connectivityimproving shared situational awareness of networked elementsselfsynchronization of networksenhanced networkcentric mission effectivenessindividual and organizational training designsadvanced networkbased sensor fusionimpact of control systems theory hunterprey relationshipsalgorithms and models for adversary behaviorsswarming behavior selforganizing unmanned aerial and ground vehicles; selfhealingmetabolic and gene expression networkssoldier performance enhancementsource: nrc, 2005.obvious and widely accepted, but the importance of communications networks applies equally to the latter; consider, for example, the physically smaller network involving an unmanned aerial vehicle (uav) supporting a squad of soldiers who need to know what is around the next corner.it is clear that the use of communications and information networks will continue to be critically important to the army, and major investments are currently being made in systems to support such networks. however, at this time the largest fraction of these investments is being devoted to developing and acquiring strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 strategy for an army center for nstetechnology for operational systems, while support for research into the theoretical foundations for networks is lacking. basic research in network science is needed to expand understanding of the fundamentals of network structure, performance, and predictability, along with the corresponding strengths and weaknesses of networks. this knowledge can ultimately be applied to the creation and management of functional networks of various types important to army and joint operations.in addition to physical networks, such as communications and information networks, a wide variety of biological and social (nonphysical) networks can be identied. as listed in table 22, these nonphysical networks range in nature and scale from the molecular to the intercultural. the structure and functional characteristics of these networks are worthy of study in terms of their potential for application to army operations. nonetheless, essential basic and applied research in many of these areas has been neglected by the army. future advances in ncw are highly dependent on a combination of basic and applied research, multidisciplinary concepts, experimentation, and timely transition of innovative developments to usable applications.coordinated efforts to expand awareness and understanding of diverse networks are among several appropriate goals for army nste. all of the networks in table 22 are relevant to army and joint military operations; this fact provides a strong motivation for the army to take the lead in nste collaboration across the military services. communications and information networksthe army™s vision of a networkcentric capable force is for one that is robustly networked by means of a communications and information infrastructure that is global, secure, realtime, reliable, internetbased, and userdriven. for this reason, the army™s highest priority for nste should be ensuring the predictable performance of communications and information networks. a typical communications and information network topology is shown in figure 21. it consists of network nodes that are interconnected by network infrastructure. the nodes themselves may have their own subnetworks. as depicted in figure 21, the defense information systems network (disn) global information grid (gig) is the central focus for ncw operations, with various sub networks (including homes, ofces, and other militaryafliated networks with gig interfaces). the technical scope for an army nstec would include science and technology for both the network infrastructure and the nodes.the principal areas of research that are most important to the requirements of communications and information infrastructure and networks for military operations are as follows:network infrastructure, architecture, and topology to ensure š sufcient bandwidth to allow acceptable levels of quality of service,strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what nste is needed by the army? 19 š capacity to be selfforming to be effective in highly dynamic situations, and š flexibility to support all armyprojected missions.network connectivity robustness to enable š rapid recovery, š scalable routing protocols, and š support of multiple network structures. network security to ensure š network availability throughput under cyberattack, š wired and wireless distribution of cryptographic keys, and š multilevel security (mls) to provide for secure transmission of different levels of classied information.network management capabilities to š minimize bandwidth overhead, š minimize requirements for handson operation, and š enable operations by all military personnel.other focus areas include:cognitive capabilities to activate network management functions during setup, operation, maintenance, and monitoring of networks. leveraging commercial offtheshelf technologies (cots) for military networking requirements. cotsbased networking technologies could help lower the cost and power requirements of network components.standardizing interfaces to the gig and applications (such as internet protocol [ip]based commercial applications) to help interoperability. standards that apply across the army, navy, and air force will be key to fostering reusability, global connectivity, and interoperability.training researchers on methodologies for experimentation and validation of conceptual network designs in terms of a systems perspective. training on specic military requirements (e.g., information assurance, mobile ad hoc networks, uav networks) and to evolve solutions for networking is key to overall system performance and effectiveness.human performance in networks, adversary understanding, and other network areasbehavioral and social science research in human factors, leader development, personnel, training, and social networks has much to contribute to improving human performance in networked systems. soldiers and leaders alike will be critical nodes extracting and using information from networks to gain information and make decisions. human performance research will be critical to designing the information and communications aspects of networks so that the needs of strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 table 22 examples of biological and social (nonphysical) networksnetwork typefunctional  elementsnode componentschallengesthreats to soldiersoperational implicationsneuralsensory inputs: visual, aural, tactilecommunications systems, ﬁsoldier as a sensorﬂinput capacity, mental awarenesssensory overload, nonoptimal cognition, differences in individual comprehensionconfusion, incapacitation, no common operating picture of the battlefieldautonomic/visceralbrain, nerves, heart, glandsinvoluntary/uncontrollablephysical illness, incapacitation, deathphysical performance degradationmotor functionbrain, nerves, musclestraining conditioned responsesinadequate training, injuryphysical performance degradationmetabolicnutrition/hydrationwater and food suppliesmaintaining health and energy outputinterruption of suppliesphysical and psychological performance degradationpersonal and personnel supporthealth maintenance, medical carehealth maintenance/medical treatment systemsseamless from battlefield to hospitalslack of expertise, supplies, transportation, facilitiesloss of troops to injury or illnessphysical protectionpersonal protection equipmenteffective versus obstructiveimpediments to movement, exposure to elements or enemyphysical performancedegradation, injury or loss of troopsmobilitytransportationtransportation systemavailability and qualityinadequate availabilityisolation, impaired troop movement, vulnerability to attackdisease transmittinginfectious agentsviruses, bacteria, vectors of transmissioncontagious illnessesspread among troops, biological warfareincapacitation, injury or loss of troopshumaninterpersonal, interunit, interservice, and intercultural relationshipsﬁbattlefield buddies,ﬂ squads, platoons, rank hierarchy, and native peoplesinterdependence, efficacy of group performance, barriers due to differences in rank, language and cultural differencesindividual versus group goals and function; lack of cooperation; impediments to communication, verbal and otherwiseconflict, confusion,functional degradation of performance of individuals or groups, offensive/threatening behavior by troops or enemy economicuse of natural, human, and financial resources in financial infrastructure to produce products and servicescapital and operational budgets, human resource management systems, physical plants and equipmentcreation of valueadded products and services, successfully competing with other business networkscompetition, waste, inefficiency, mismanagement, technical obsolescence, governmental regulation effectsinadequacy of funding; personnel supply, support, management, and retention; research budget; facilities and maintenancestrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.21table 22 examples of biological and social (nonphysical) networksnetwork typefunctional  elementsnode componentschallengesthreats to soldiersoperational implicationsneuralsensory inputs: visual, aural, tactilecommunications systems, ﬁsoldier as a sensorﬂinput capacity, mental awarenesssensory overload, nonoptimal cognition, differences in individual comprehensionconfusion, incapacitation, no common operating picture of the battlefieldautonomic/visceralbrain, nerves, heart, glandsinvoluntary/uncontrollablephysical illness, incapacitation, deathphysical performance degradationmotor functionbrain, nerves, musclestraining conditioned responsesinadequate training, injuryphysical performance degradationmetabolicnutrition/hydrationwater and food suppliesmaintaining health and energy outputinterruption of suppliesphysical and psychological performance degradationpersonal and personnel supporthealth maintenance, medical carehealth maintenance/medical treatment systemsseamless from battlefield to hospitalslack of expertise, supplies, transportation, facilitiesloss of troops to injury or illnessphysical protectionpersonal protection equipmenteffective versus obstructiveimpediments to movement, exposure to elements or enemyphysical performancedegradation, injury or loss of troopsmobilitytransportationtransportation systemavailability and qualityinadequate availabilityisolation, impaired troop movement, vulnerability to attackdisease transmittinginfectious agentsviruses, bacteria, vectors of transmissioncontagious illnessesspread among troops, biological warfareincapacitation, injury or loss of troopshumaninterpersonal, interunit, interservice, and intercultural relationshipsﬁbattlefield buddies,ﬂ squads, platoons, rank hierarchy, and native peoplesinterdependence, efficacy of group performance, barriers due to differences in rank, language and cultural differencesindividual versus group goals and function; lack of cooperation; impediments to communication, verbal and otherwiseconflict, confusion,functional degradation of performance of individuals or groups, offensive/threatening behavior by troops or enemy economicuse of natural, human, and financial resources in financial infrastructure to produce products and servicescapital and operational budgets, human resource management systems, physical plants and equipmentcreation of valueadded products and services, successfully competing with other business networkscompetition, waste, inefficiency, mismanagement, technical obsolescence, governmental regulation effectsinadequacy of funding; personnel supply, support, management, and retention; research budget; facilities and maintenancestrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 strategy for an army center for nstenodeswiredwirelessoffice/enterprise networkhome networkgig/internetmilitary edge networksfig 21figure 21 typical communications and information network topology.users for timely and useful information are met in a manner that is compatible with human cognition. cognitive psychology can contribute to understanding the processes of situational awareness and decision making in networked environments. leaders will direct others via networks, communicating information and their decisions and providing support remotely. therefore, research on social networks and leadership development for the purpose of understanding and optimizing team and leader behaviors in a networked environment (e.g., collaboration) will be critical to the operational success of a networked army. research in social networks can also help the army to identify the skills in personnel that will be necessary for soldiers and leaders to operate in the networked environments of the future, as well as the types and structures of organizations needed. such research will help improve not only the operation of networked systems, but also how to train soldiers to use the systems most effectively in future battleeld scenarios. knowledge of social networks is critical to understanding interactions between and among personnel who are integral to military operationsin units of u.s. and coalition forces, and in indigenous populations. it will also be important for understanding how adversary networks and cells work at the ethnic, strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what nste is needed by the army? 23religious, familial, tribal, and economic levels. detailed understanding of the social structure and communications patterns of adversary forces is essential to intelligence acquisition and analysis, and to the ability to disrupt enemy assets and objectives. analysis of nancial and social as well as command and control (c2) linkages can provide powerful information and tools in counterinsurgency (coin) operations. social network and behavioral modeling research is particularly critical to understanding and predicting the behavior of adversaries under a variety of situations.specic applications of biological and other nonphysicals networks, such as those identied in table 22, are less predictable, but many are likely to have signicance to the army in the longer term. the army should invest selectively in areas that will ensure awareness and understanding of emerging network developments and applications.prioritiescommunications and information network areas continue to represent the highest priority for the army, as they are necessary for the linkage of multiple infrastructure nodes and cover a wide range of military applications. less obvious, perhaps, are the many facets of human performance in networks, ranging from the physiological makeup and function of individual soldiers to the psychological and behavioral performance of multitudes of linked soldiers and other individuals. much of what will be learned from research and study in these vital human areas will trickle down and be applicable to research in network areas involving understanding adversaries and in other network areas involving the biological and social sciences and their applications (see table 22). the army™s support of research efforts in all of these disciplines will have farreaching benets.table 23 groups all network areas of particular importance to the army into four categories. while the categories are broad and somewhat overlapping, it is evident that an integrated approach in all network areas will be essential to support successful development of applicable technologies and capabilities. this integrated approach will require close working relationships between engineers and scientists in computer, behavioral, social science, and other relevant disciplines. the committee assigned priorities 1, 2, or 3 in table 23 based on the potential criticality of the network areas to army missions now and in the foreseeable future. these priorities also indicate the relative value of nste expenditures. thus, continuing efforts in the network areas of communications and information are priority 1 both in terms of potential criticality and relative amount of expenditures. the two categories assigned priority 2 (human performance in networks and adversary understanding) would require a major boost in investment emphasison the order of 2025 percent of the army™s scal and personnel resources for nste. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 strategy for an army center for nstetable 23 network areas and prioritiesprioritynetwork areasimportant applications1communications and informationpredictable performance: fundamental to command and control (c2) systems, logistics, training, etc., for both high and low levels of conflict, including operations at higher echelons down to the individual units and soldiers2human performance in networks improved command decision processes, soldier and team interaction, training, social interactions, etc.2adversary understanding social, cultural, organizational, religious, and economic command and control networks; critical counterinsurgency (coin) interactions; intelligence analysis3nonphysical areas of network science (see table 22)systems biology, neural networks, and economic networksthe assignment of priority 3 in table 23 to efforts in nonphysical areas of network science should not be interpreted as meaning that efforts in such areas should be stopped, or that funding should be dramatically reduced during times of tight budgets. the priority 3 areas are in fact what would differentiate an integrated center for network science, technology, and experimentation from typical networking research centers. for this reason, those charged with establishing and administering an army nstec must actively advocate that the full scope of network science as laid out in the 2005 nrc report network science be pursued. nste s&t investment strategy future science and technology investments for nste should correspond to the priority assignments shown in table 23. these considerations, combined with the need to provide solid scientic foundations for all pertinent network applications, lead to a recommended investment strategy for nste as follows:continue the current army focus on information networks, expanding these activities to address basic understanding and predictability of those networks.develop and fund a plan that will provide the theoretical and scientic foundations for all network science research and applications. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what nste is needed by the army? 25signicantly increase funding and efforts for human performance in networks and adversary understanding.make selected investments in other disciplines, such as sociology, behavioral biology, and neural science, to ensure that the army continually advances its understanding of network science. proposed mission statementbased on the considerations discussed above, the committee proposes that an appropriate mission statement for the army nstec, whose activities would range from basic research to network applications, would include the following elements:strengthen the theoretical underpinnings of network science.conduct basic research on how and why biological and social (nonphysical) networks function, and determine their application to military networks.manage activities in network science research, technology development, and experimentation for the army.focus science and technology (s&t) investments to enable network centric operations and warfare.focus applied s&t to enable social networks important to army operations.enable development of network science applications, and facilitate their transition to army and joint operations.chapter summarywithout a plan to combine and unify nste activities, the army will merely reconstruct the communicationselectronics research, development, and engineering center (cerdec) at apg in its present form and fail to capitalize on the synergies possible with network science research. ultimately, the technical content of army programs in nste should be selected, coordinated, and managed by a center for nste activity, an army nstec, in˚uenced by a highly qualied staff who are specically recruited for this purpose, and by discussions with the primary customers (e.g., program managers (pms)/program executive ofcers (peos), warghters, the army chief information ofcer, and others). there should be a conscious effort to avoid competition with commercial network research activities unless there is a case for efforts to meet special needs. every effort should be made to collaborate with commercial network research organizations in areas of ongoing research. as the military increases its reliance on networkcentric operations and warfare, the army will be pressed to exploit nste to an unprecedented degree. the strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 strategy for an army center for nste2005 nrc report network science identied several areas of network research of interest to the army and assessed value propositions for pursuing network science to achieve army objectives. the committee combined relevant ndings from that report with its own understanding of army requirements to determine an s&t investment strategy and a mission statement for a new center of army nste activity.conclusion 1: table 23 provides a priority list of the network science areas and applications that the committee believes will be most important to the army in the future. these include communications and information; human performance in networks; adversary understanding; and other nonphysical areas of network science, such as systems biology, neural networks, and economic networks. recommendation 1a: the army should base its investment strategy for network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) on the priorities shown in table 23 and develop and fund a plan that:continues the current army focus on information networks, expanding these activities to address basic understanding and predictability of those networks;provides the theoretical and scientic foundations for all network science research and applications;signicantly increases funding and efforts in human performance in networks and adversary understanding; andinvests in other disciplines, such as sociology, behavioral biology, and neural science, to ensure that the army continually advances its understanding of network science.recommendation 1b: the army should immediately increase funding in the critical areas of: predictability of network performance,human performance in networks, andadversary understanding.moreover, the army nste community should continuously consult with the training and doctrine command (tradoc), the army capabilities integration center (arcic), and the program executive ofcer/program manager (peo/pm) of programs of record to identify additional gaps for immediate emphasis.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.what nste is needed by the army? 27recommendation 1c: in order to implement its investment strategy in nste, the army should organize a center for nste (nstec) with a mission to:strengthen the theoretical underpinnings of network science;conduct basic research on how and why biological and social (nonphysical) networks function and determine their applications to military networks;manage activities in network science research, technology development, and experimentation for the army;focus science and technology (s&t) investments to enable networkcentric operations and warfare;focus applied s&t to enable social networks important to army operations; andenable development of network science applications and facilitate their transition to army and joint operations.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.283network science, technology, and experimentation across the army todaythis chapter reviews the different organizations across the army that have a role in nste today. the committee developed and used the following denition for network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) to determine which organizational elements of the army are currently engaged in nste efforts: network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) encompasses all information and information exchange, visualization, collaboration, manipulation, protection, restoration, transport, services, data storage, and application layers. information sources (e.g., sensors) and the processing inherent in them are interfaced to the network, but the sensors and processing per se are not included in the denition, except for cases where the processing is necessarily integral to the network, such as for distributed remote sensors. human use of networks is a critical component of nste. nste organizationsusing the above denition, the committee identied current army organizations having signicant s&t investments in nste efforts in the areas listed in table 23. detailed information on nste funding and personnel resources was requested from these organizations, but the data provided were incomplete and unusable. the committee therefore relied on briengs provided during its informationgathering sessions and on the personal knowledge of its members in preparing the analysis presented in this chapter. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nste across the army today 29currently, nste efforts conducted by the army are primarily in the area of information and communications. much less work is ongoing in human performance in networks and other priority network areas described in chapter 2. figure 31 depicts the principal army organizations currently engaged in nste, and table 31 summarizes the present physical locations for ongoing work in each of the priority network areas. specic organizations and their work are discussed below.information and communicationsnste efforts in information and communications are performed at the army research laboratory (arl), which includes the army research ofce (aro), and at the communicationselectronics research, development, and engineering center (cerdec). most of this work takes place at three major sites: arl, adelphi, maryland; aberdeen proving ground (apg), maryland; and ft. monmouth, new jersey. although the committee was provided with only minimal nancial data, it estimated that in fiscal year 2006, total nste investments in information and communications networks were ~$145 million, with arl responsible for basic and applied research (~$70 million) and cerdec  responsible for applied research, advanced technology development, and experimentation (~$75 million).1army research laboratoryarl is the army™s corporate, or central, laboratory for basic and applied research. its mission is to provide innovative science, technology, and analysis to enable the full spectrum of operations. in general, the army relies on arl for scientic discoveries, technologic advances, and analyses to provide warghters with capabilities to succeed on the battleeld. arl consists of aro and seven directorates. those directly involved in nste are aro, the computational and information sciences directorate (cisd), and the human research and engineering directorate (hred). the hred efforts are discussed in the section below titled ﬁhuman performance in networks.ﬂthe directorate primarily engaged in nste at arl is cisd, which conducts a broad spectrum of research focused on highbandwidth communication, advanced command and control (c2) techniques, battleeld visualization, weather decision aids, and defensive information operations. cisd also addresses scientic developments that would enable modeling, design, analysis, prediction, and control in the performance of a complex network of networksin particular, tactical sensor and communications networks and the overlying decisionmaking networks. 1 j. miller, director, u.s. army research laboratory, ﬁarl research in network science,ﬂ brieng to the committee, september 21, 2006.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 strategy for an army center for nstefigure 31 current army organizations engaged in nste.figure31currentarmyorganizationsengagedinnste.centraltechnicalsupportfacilitywalterreedarmyinstituteofresearchtraininganddoctrinecommandanalysiscenteru.s.armyresearchinstituteforthebehavioralandsocialsciencesotherarmyengineerresearchanddevelopmentcenterinstituteforcollaborativebiotechnologiesu.s.armyresearchdevelopmentandengineeringcommandarmyresearchlaboratorycommunicationselectronicsresearch,development,andengineeringcentercommandandcontroldirectoratespaceandterrestrialcommunicationsdirectorateintelligenceandinformationwarfaredirectoratearmyresearchofficecomputationalandinformationsciencesdirectoratehumanresearchandengineeringdirectorateinstituteforcreativetechnologiessupporttoprogramexecutiveofficer/programmanagersu.s.armyresearchinstituteofenvironmentalmedicinenaticksoldiercenterstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nste across the army today 31table 31 current locations of army nstenetwork areasorganizationcurrent locationinformation andcommunicationsarmy research laboratoryarmy research officearmy research laboratorycomputational and informationsciences directoratecommunicationselectronics research,development, and engineering centerresearch triangle park, nc adelphi, md, and aberdeenproving ground, mdft. monmouth, njhuman  performance  in networksarmy research laboratoryhuman research and engineering directorateu.s. army research institute for thebehavioral and social sciences u.s. army research institute for thebehavioral and social sciences fieldunitnatick soldier centeru.s. army research institute ofenvironmental medicine army engineer research and development centeraberdeen proving ground,mdarlington, vaft. knox, kynatick, manatick, mavicksburg, msadversaryunderstandingarmy research laboratoryhuman research and engineering directorateaberdeen proving ground,mdother network  areas institute for collaborativebiotechnologies (universityaffiliatedresearch center)institute for creative technologies(universityaffiliated research center)communications and networks collaborative technology alliancethe international technology alliancein network and information sciencessanta barbara, camarina del rey, cadistributeddistributedstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32 strategy for an army center for nstearo represents the army™s most longrange view for pursuing s&t advancements in network technology. aro™s mission is to serve as the army sponsor of extramural basic research in the engineering, physical, information, and life sciences. it competitively selects and funds basic research proposals from educational institutions, nonprot organizations, and private industry. the aro research program consists principally of extramural academic research conducted through single investigator efforts, universityafliated research centers, and  specially tailored outreach programs. each approach has its own objectives and set of advantages. the priorities set by aro serve as a means to integrate armywide, longrange planning for research, development, and acquisition.to address network science research, arl has created ve network science grand challenges. these are: 1. develop a fundamental understanding of the performance, scalability, and behavior modeling of secure networks; 2. enable autonomy and selfconguration; 3. develop networks that seamlessly support coalition/joint operations; 4. secure information sharing among different security domains; and5. understand underlying phenomena of decisionmaking networks, while jointly addressing the physical (e.g., mobile ad hoc wireless networks), the social (e.g., people, organizations, cultures), and the cognitive (e.g., perceptions, beliefs, decisions) aspects of networks. in addition to the work of the directorates and aro, arl also has a strong outreach effort with other government activities involved with network science. organizations with which arl interacts include: cerdec in the areas of mobile ad hoc wireless networks (manet), network design tools, security, performance analysis, and experimentation;the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) in the areas of manet networking, sensor networking, and optical and other communications; the army research institute (ari) in the development of collaboration mechanisms; the naval research laboratory (nrl) in manet networking and performance analysis; the u.s. military academy at west point for research in secure networks and social networking; the army engineer research and development center (erdc) in social networking; and the u.s. army intelligence and security command (inscom) in social networking.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nste across the army today 33communicationselectronics research, development, and engineering centerthe cerdec mission is to develop and integrate command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (c4isr) technologies that enable information dominance and decisive lethality for the networked warghter. cerdec™s areas of focus are (1) develop and transition c4isr technologies in support of the global war on terrorism and the department of defense transformation; (2) proactively support the army materiel command (amc) life cycle management commands (lcmcs) and key customers with highly qualied and responsive c4isr engineers; (3) expand system engineering capability (integrated modeling and simulation, architecture, and experimentation) to support current and future force requirements; and (4) leverage army c4isr capabilities for homeland defense. cerdec has about 1,600 scientists and engineers engaged in these missions. an important role of cerdec is the engineering and management support provided to program executive ofcers (peos) and their program managers (pms) in the development, production, and elding of systems. the three cerdec directorates that are the primary s&t leaders for nste are the command and control directorate (c2d), the space and terrestrial communications directorate (s&tcd) and the intelligence and information warfare directorate (i2wd). the c2d mission areas are in battle command, portable and mobile power, platform integration and prototyping, environmental control systems, and navigation. the battle command area has two components concerned with nste: (1) the command and control component, which develops enabling technologies to support and advance the exercise of authority and direction by a properly designated commander over assigned and attached forces in the accomplishment of a mission; and (2) the integrated ground and air command and control platform systems component, which develops tactical command and control platform systems by designing, fabricating, and integrating the c4isr systems into vehicular, watercraft, and dismounted soldier platforms. the s&tcd mission is the focal point for the army™s tactical communications systems and for integrated, secure seamless tactical communications for the digitized battleeld. s&tcd performs research, development, and engineering functions in all aspects of terrestrial, avionic, and spacedependent communications technology. this technology includes adaptive, reliable seamless battleeld communications with full electronic countercountermeasures capability and information security (infosec). s&tcd has the primary responsibility for dod communications, networking, and network security. key areas of investment include information assurance, antennas, mobile networking, and systems engineering. the mission of the i2wd is to ensure information dominance by providing enemy situation awareness, targeting, and electronic combat technology to the warghter. the i2wd provides effective intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (isr) sensors, isr processing, and capabilities for electronic warfare; air/ground survivability (force protection); information operations; and strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34 strategy for an army center for nsteisr modeling and simulation materiel to the u.s. army. it does this through research, development, prototype demonstrations, and rapid transitions of stateoftheart technologies into systems, as well as through development, production, and elding of specied equipment in support of army and national intelligence requirements.nste development efforts at cerdec are focused in the following areas: networkaware adaptive applications,mobile ad hoc networking systems,affordable onthemove satellite solutions,broadband, multiport, omnidirectional antennas,broadband, powerefcient ampliers,sensor management/tasking, including š data compression (especially for sensor data), š onboard processing at the sensor, š automated sensor queuing, andautomated decision aids.importantly, cerdec also addresses the ﬁexperimentationﬂ element of nste. this is accomplished primarily through the command, control, and communications onthemove (c3otm) test bed located at ft. dix, new jersey. this major (~$15 million per year) experimentation effort provides a relevant operational eld experimentation venue to assess and quantify the effectiveness of an individual system or a system of systems. it also enables assessment and quantication of the enhanced combat effectiveness provided by technology insertions to the current force, to the future combat systems (fcs) program, and to other programs of record.2 the c3otm test bed assesses technical performance using objective, surrogate, and simulated systems. it uses operational mission threads in both scripted and unscripted play, and it develops its own test methodologies, assessment metrics, and automated data collection, reduction, and analysis techniques. the facilities available at ft. dix, new jersey, include 42,000 contiguous land acres under a joint basing concept. the test bed features commercially restricted airspace to support unmanned aerial vehicle (uav) operations; nearby naval and supersonic air operations; warren grove bombing range 20 miles south; access to usaf/usn runways, hangars, test facilities and ring ranges; and access to materiel, military vehicles, personnel, and national guard and army reserve units.although the committee did not include research on sensors in its nste denition, the interfaces of sensors to physical networks are fundamental to army nste efforts. sensor research is performed primarily at three sites: ft. belvoir, 2 g. martin, technical director, communicationselectronics research, development, and engineering center, ﬁbrieng to the bast network science,ﬂ brieng to the committee, november 16, 2006.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nste across the army today 35virginia, in the night vision and electronic sensors directorate (nvesd) of cerdec; adelphi, maryland, by the arl cisd and sensors and electron devices directorate (sedd); and, at ft. monmouth, new jersey, by cerdec. human performance in networksthe army has two primary organizations that perform human, behavioral, and social science research and development. these are the human research and engineering directorate of the arl, currently located at apg, and the u.s. army research institute for the behavioral and social sciences, headquartered in arlington, virginia. human research and engineering directoratethe human research and engineering directorate (hred) of arl is the army™s human engineering laboratory and is the principal army organization involved in research on human performance in networks. it conducts broadbased programs of scientic research and technology directed toward optimizing soldier performance and soldiermachine interactions to maximize battleeld effectiveness. one of its major functions is enabling the individual soldier, crew, and battle staff to comprehend and manage the vast quantities of data expected to ˚ow across the digitized battleeld in both automated and degraded support modes. hred has ongoing research in network science and technology in such areas as social networks, control of robotic elements in network environments, human behavior representation in models and simulations, and technology development to improve humancomputer interactions. it is establishing a capability to simulate networkcentric, distributed environments that are cognitively demanding in order to assess situational awareness behaviors.3army research institutethe u.s. army research institute for the behavioral and social sciences (ari), part of the department of the army ofce of the deputy chief of staff for personnel, g1, also conducts research to improve human performance. its mission is to improve soldier, leader, and unit performance through advances in the behavioral and social sciences with a focus on personnel, training, and leader development. ari was funded in fiscal year 2007 to perform research in social networks, and in human collaboration in networks and in social networks. ari™s armored forces field unit, located at fort knox, kentucky, is scheduled to move under the brac in 2011 to partner with network science organizations already 3 r.j. de pontbriand, associate director for research, u.s. army research laboratory, ﬁhuman dimension in network science,ﬂ brieng to the committee, august 23, 2006.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 strategy for an army center for nstein place or moving to apg. in the past, this small unit (fewer than 8 scientists) has conducted advanced development in approaches to training units in digital and networked environments. both hred and ari conduct research in cognitive processes such as decision making and situational awareness that is applicable to the study of human performance in networks. however, the total resources that they have to conduct broad areas of research to support the soldier make up less than 2 percent of the army™s s&t budget. the number of scientic personnel in these organizations is less than 12 percent of the number in cerdec. therefore, without signicant additional resources, it will be extremely difcult for hred and ari to conduct all of the nste necessary to improve human performance in networks.other effortsadditional research on human performance relevant to ntse is ongoing at the natick soldier center and the u.s. army research institute of environmental medicine, both located at natick, massachusetts. the medical research and materiel command laboratories at the walter reed army institute of research facilities in bethesda, maryland, also conduct neuroscience research that is applicable to human performance. adversary understandingrecognition of the importance of adversary understanding to successful military operations is rapidly increasing, but there is relatively little work ongoing other than efforts associated with the immediate training and sensitization of forces deploying to the middle east. research in dynamic network analysis, which involves developing mathematical and behavioral technologies to better understand social networks in organizations, including terrorist networks, is funded through arl cooperative technology agreements (ctas) monitored by hred, the ofce of naval research, and ari. current research in adversary understanding includes improvements in tools to enable more efcient user behavior in locating, understanding, and coding data and in updating analyses as new political, economic, military, social, and infrastructure data are acquired. an example of this research can be found in ﬁdestabilization of covert networksﬂ (carley, 2006). efforts in other network areasthere are multiple nste efforts in network science research ongoing through various ctas, international technology alliances (itas), and universityafliated research centers (uarcs). these include:  arl communications and networks cta: selfconguring wireless strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.nste across the army today 37network technologies that enable secure, scalable, energyefcient, and survivable mobile and sensor networks, currently being funded at $7 million per year.the international technology alliance in network and information sciences (nisita): established by ibm in collaboration with arl and the uk ministry of defense, the nisita furthers research in networkcentric systems to advance the technological capabilities of armed forces engaged in urban warfare and to enhance distributed, secure, and ˚exible decision making to improve coalition operations. it is currently being funded at $7 million to $8 million per year in both the united states and the united kingdom.4institute for collaborative biotechnologies uarc: biologically derived sensors, electronics, and information processing, currently being funded at $6 million per year.institute for creative technologies uarc: immersive environments through full sensory immersion having threedimensional mobility with compelling interactive stories, currently being funded at $10 million per year.modeling and simulation capabilities, which are relevant to nste, are located at apg through the u.s. army materiel systems analysis activity (amsaa), the army research laboratory (arl), and also the tradoc analysis center (trac) in ft. leavenworth, kansas. nste is also being conducted through existing acquisition programs, the most comprehensive being the fcs.chapter summarynetworkenabled operations have proven critical for today™s military and are a central premise for the development of future warghting capabilities. the developmental basis for these operations is ongoing work in network science, technology, and experimentation at arl, cerdec, ari, and multiple other army organizations. conclusion 2: current responsibility for nste is fragmented across several organizations. as the brac relocations to apg occur with concomitant losses in personnel and facilities, the existing nste capabilities will be further divided and eroded, hindering essential progress toward improvements in the army™s ability to conduct networkcentric operations and warfare.recommendation 2: the army should change its organization and coordination of nste efforts to ensure essential support for future warghting operations. 4 j. gowens ii and a. swami, u.s. army research laboratory, ﬁarl research in network science,ﬂ brieng to the committee, august 23, 2006.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.384infrastructure resources necessary for army network science,  technology, and experimentationthis chapter discusses the infrastructure needed for the army to develop a worldclass network science, technology, and experimentation (nste) capability. many of the organizations currently engaged in nste will move to aberdeen proving ground, but the committee recognized that much of the nste infrastructure would continue to be distributed. consequently, the chapter also discusses the advantages and disadvantages of distributed and centralized approaches to organization. all of the network areas shown in table 23 (i.e., communications and information, human performance in networks, adversary understanding, and nonphysical network science research areas) have infrastructure requirements that are necessary to support nste activities. the rst two areas tend to be focused on the development of new capabilities associated with enabling information networks to support networkcentric operations and on the social and human networks involved in decision making. networkcentric operations involve people, processes, and information technologies working together to enable timely and trusted access to and sharing of information, as well as collaboration among those who need it. the global information grid (gig) is the foundation for enabling essential social and human networks that lead to effective and timely decisions. army nste must be capable of supporting development of these emerging complex social/human models.in addition, there is a need to conduct experiments that can improve the understanding of the usability of these new decisionmaking networks in a  manner that will translate into new capabilities. this improved understanding of information technologies and the decisionmaking process will also help the army to develop new capabilities that will deny adversaries similar advantages. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure resources necessary for army nste 39hence, the nste infrastructure being sought by the army must also be capable of supporting experiments for the development of new technologies to disrupt the information and human networks of adversaries. infrastructure framework the infrastructure framework for an army network science, technology, and experimentation center (nstec) must be capable of supporting:development of fundamental network theory and network technologies,assessment of impacts on human performance,integration of new technologies and social networks into capabilities, andexperimentation as a means to test and conrm fundamental theories and models and/or to characterize new technologies and operational concepts while also being capable of promoting training of personnel when applicable. network science theory currently is focused on fundamentals of information theory, decision making, and understanding of network vulnerabilities. these theoretical foundations are based on those elements of networks that technologies can provide and support, as well as on improving the understanding of how social/human networks evolve with respect to new network technologies (e.g., getting humans connected in different waysas an example, consider how teenagers stay continuously connected (ﬁ24/7ﬂ) via wireless cell phones, both synchronous and asynchronous). the 24/7 wireless cell phone is more than just voice, including an everexpanding richness of collaboration and social networking never seen before, as evidenced by new applications of multipoint video, gaming, music, etc.theories of networks and decisionmaking models need experimentation to test or conrm, discard, or modify the principles on which a fundamental understanding of the subject is based. these ﬁnetwork modelsﬂ are essential to characterize how new network technologies will scale with size or degrade due to ﬁblackoutsﬂ and malicious attacks. however, experiments on network models are very sensitive (in a very nonlinear way) to the environment, and innovative approaches will be needed to design an infrastructure that enables live and virtual simulations to be performed at geographically separated laboratories.for some time, there has been recognition that conducting complex network experiments, including social/human behavior, is very difcult in a controlled environment. that is, successfully achieving the integration of interdependent and very mobile/dynamic network technologies and social/human networks is the ﬁachilles™ heelﬂ of successful network experiments. special consideration must be given to the infrastructure testing environment (complex wireless propagation, strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 strategy for an army center for nstemobility, chaotic behavior, etc.) to allow various levels of integration (onetoone systems, multiplesystems, and systemofsystems), and to allow testing of various technical issues, theories, and models. the importance of integration has been highlighted in earlier ﬁdigitizationﬂ efforts by the army, and the essential role of integrating human performance in battle command exercises has been studied in multiple c2 experiments for the future combat systems (fcs) (lickteig et al., 2003). other complexities of the systemofsystems integration environment are discussed in krygiel (1999). development of theory and associated technologies the development of new theories, models, and technologies requires a worldclass environment that will foster innovation and ﬁnetwork thinking.ﬂ a worldclass environment should have a university or campuslike feel with interconnected buildings, libraries, open areas (inside and outside) for discussions, public spaces with wireless internet access, multimedia information displays, conference facilities, and lodging for visitors. stateoftheart collaboration facilities are needed that incorporate best practices from industry and academiasuch as the ﬁsmartﬂ rooms (intelligent agent technology, voice/gesture activated, etc.) present at the mit media lab. there will also be a need for some dedicated facilities for secret, topsecret, and sensitive compartmented information.theoretical research will require extensive network modeling facilities, including a computing infrastructure with supercomputing capabilities. an improved understanding of the complex, largescale, and dynamic nature of human and social network interactions will be advanced through the use of highdelity models that include physical wireless networks, i.e., complex models that will involve very intensive computations. new approaches in areas such as parallel computing, biological computers, and largescale network computing (grid computing) will be required. in addition to the computing infrastructure, the investigation of new networking technologies (e.g., largescale ad hoc networks) places new demands on recongurable network labs (with emphasis on wireless functionality) that can quickly adopt new technologies and easily be adapted to human/social networking.the computing requirements for such research will require an infrastructure that includes a set of dedicated labs (i.e., facilities for sensitive compartmented information, command and control, advancing networking, etc.) that are designed around a controlled environment with human subjects as participants. an nstec would also have to establish laboratories in eld locations with access to soldiers and leaders who can serve as subjects in experiments. these eldlocation laboratories must be dedicated sites that are highly instrumented and allow for the collection of data that can be analyzed and used in developing new models and rening a theoretical understanding of network characteristics and applications.in addition, these dedicated labs would host new information technologies strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure resources necessary for army nste 41(e.g., physical networks, command and control, networked sensors, etc.). some labs, for example, might host a set of technologies dedicated to research on adversary networks. due to the necessary levels of security and nature of this work, these special dedicated labs would require that isolated and secure networks be in place that could quickly improve awareness of vulnerabilities and promote the development of new technologies to deny networkcentric operational capabilities to adversaries. highcapacity (i.e., gigabyte) optical ber and wireless (wifi and next generation 802.xxx systems) networks are key enablers for mobile multipoint and multimedia (data, voice, video, etc.) information transmission. these networks would ensure gig connectivity to the other army and governmental organizations concerned with network advances, such as the army materiel command, department of the army staff, the army training and doctrine command, the army intelligence and security command, the defense information systems agency, and the department of homeland security. an optical ber backbone would enable access to a rich set of network services (including security authentication, data management, collaboration, discovery, etc.) as well as to other nstec facilities and test ranges. all facilities and the computing infrastructure would need to operate through this highcapacity backbone and be interconnected with all associated sites. given the classied nature of some work, these networks would have to be secure and approved for use at different levels of security classication (e.g., secret level, topsecret level, sensitive compartmented information, etc.).human performance in networkscritical nodes in the army networks of today and in the future are the  soldiers and leaders who (1) seek and use complex information from networks; (2) must quickly make decisions based on that information and communicate and collaborate with subordinates, peers, and superiors over the network; and (3) control actions and equipment on other network nodes. in the areas of human performance, the focus of the nste infrastructure framework is on ﬁintellectual capitalﬂ and research that is complementary to network science theory, integration, and experimentation. indeed, the dynamic conguration of the networks per se should be driven by the human need for information and connection necessary to make decisions. four actions are required to ensure that human performance in networks is optimized:1. a substantial increase in ari and hred efforts is needed if research on human performance in networks and adversary understanding is to have any impact. this does not mean a change in emphasis solely to add networkrelated research: both ari and hred have important research missions without the addition of network research, and that other research strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 strategy for an army center for nsteis funded at levels that are barely adequate. the committee believes that the army denitely needs to have more personnel than the roughly 1520 scientists who are currently conducting or scheduled to perform research in behavioral and social science areas related to networks at ari and hred. substantial growth in both personnel and resources is called for, with something on the order of 2025 percent of the army™s scal and personnel resources for nste dedicated to human performance in networks and adversary understanding.2. hire or retrain inhouse scientists in such relevant areas as social networks, decision making and other cognitive processes, behavioral representation and modeling, performance measurement, and neural sciences. 3. require teaming between information, human factors, and behavioral scientists so that network interfaces are compatible with human capabilities and information requirements to promote ˚exible and recongurable networking.4. ensure that the impact of research in information and communication science is measured in terms of how it benets human performance in the network, both in the laboratory and in eld environments. this will require new experimental paradigms and measurement techniques and tools (as described in the section titled ﬁexperimentationﬂ below in this chapter). integration of new technologiesas mentioned earlier, an integration capability that can handle the increasing complexity of interdependent technologies and a scale of experimentation that includes human/social networks is essential. this will call for a network science integration facility (nsif) that should include several key components as follows:a largeopenspace laboratory area to allow the integration of network technologies onto platforms (vehicles, robots, humans, etc.),the ability to accommodate a scaleup of as many as several hundred nodes (i.e., a number representative of the types of networks the army plans to eld; known also as the ﬁsubnet topologyﬂ) in a virtual network with the capability to have a large fraction of the nodes in motion, andfull instrumentation (including for social/human networks) to allow detailed diagnostics of integration and performance issues.the nsif should be connected with other network test beds, such as those of the army future combat systems (fcs) program, and it should be able to exercise control over other network test beds as necessary to expand overall experimentation capabilities. the nsif networks will require signicant networking strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure resources necessary for army nste 43capacity with external networks; indeed, extending the department of defense information systems network (disn) gig into the nsif environment should be a high army priority, regardless of expense.integration with network systems outside the nsif will enable the connection of various elements of research in a manner that allows interoperability and performance issues to be characterized and resolved. in addition to the disn gig, this integration should include the networks of other dod services, federal agencies (intelligence, department of homeland security (dhs), health, local, etc.), and selected coalition/multinational partners. experimentation the dod has long embraced experimentation as a fundamental tool for building capabilities. as in the physical sciences, experimentation is essential in this case for improving fundamental understanding and expanding knowledge in the areas of information and communications, adversary understanding, and human performance in networks. in addition to the necessary infrastructure and tools, successful experimentation requires a culture for ﬁnew system thinking,ﬂ committed leaders (because experimentation is naturally disruptive of the status quo), and skilled personnel. the basic infrastructure and tools needed for the experimentation environment are discussed in boutelle and grasso (1998) and nrc (2004). these include: 1. information and physical infrastructure a. networks b. information repositories c. architecture frameworks d. test facilities and integration capability e. training facilities f. places and platforms 2. tools a.  modeling and simulation b.  prototypes, surrogates, etc. c. articial environments d. data capture and disseminationmost experiments will require networking connectivity and capacity as well as computing power and data storage. in addition, experiments will be dependent on the existence of accepted operational, technical, and system architectures for the integration of assets and their application to scenarios and missions. having data repositories with such information readily available and accessible to other strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 strategy for an army center for nstelocations can ease experiment planning and support the extension of results to other cases or scenarios (nrc, 2004). an instrumented test range requires a physical infrastructure. as discussed earlier, core facilities for such things as simulations, war games, integration and testing, and training must all be provided as part of a distributed test range. the associated facilities must be equipped with the basics of uninterrupted power, good lighting and ventilation, suitable climate control, and adequate space as well as any specialized equipment needed for specic activities. equally critical is the timely availability of networked vehicles across distributed experimental ranges, aircraft, and the various platforms that are integral to the experiments. major elements of an instrumenteddistributed test range for army nste should include:a facility of ~100 nodes, most or all of which can be in motion (representing vehicles, in a typical future army subnet);the cerdec fort dix command, control, and communications onthemove (c3otm) test bed that is fully connected back to an nstec and other army test ranges (e.g., central technical support facility (ctsf) at ft. hood, texas, army fcs at ft. bliss, texas, etc.); andthe ability to conduct ﬁadversary network attacksﬂ and appropriate diagnostics.as the army learned from its earlier experiments in digitization, the integration of the above test ranges will be critical to supporting future experimentation objectives (boutelle and grasso, 1998; krygiel, 1999). the ranges will combine with other components to allow collaboration experiments and a wide exchange of new innovative concepts.1 external network facilities need to include:capability to connect into all elements of nste infrastructure, including ranges and network c2 lab facilities;a network c2 facility for ~50seat xed nodes completely under the control of an nstec;congurable laboratory space (similar to the ctsf at fort hood) to allow for participation by representative command elements (i.e., c2, battle management, squad/company/battalion/brigade, joint/multinational); andability to connect/interact with other external c2 facilities (e.g., fort dix, fort hood, universities, joint experimentation facilities, etc.).ultimately, experiments must support embedded and distance training and learning capabilities via a system that links platforms into a virtual environment 1 a highcapacity and ˚exible external network is necessary to conduct related research and other s&t together.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure resources necessary for army nste 45that will be necessary to provide an appropriate level of realism in live experimentation conducted across a large network. connecting remotely into training systems that are integrated into platforms will help operators and experimental investigators to shift seamlessly between training and experimentation. note that the operators of the units participating in experiments must be aware of such goals and be well trained in their usual roles as well as agile enough to handle new, and networked, surrogate systems and new concepts. the spectrum of experiments to be conducted would include humanintheloop experimentation, prototypes, surrogates, and stimulators. articial environments sometimes would be required. as previously noted, network science experimentation requires new ﬁtoolsﬂ with emphasis on an integrated family of models ranging from customized spreadsheets and war games to highresolution simulations. these tools should include a sophisticated system for data collection and information capture, and they should provide a capability for interpretive analysis so that learning derived through experiments can be put to use in informing decisions about future forces (nrc, 2004). simulation and stimulation facilities, such as those currently at the ctsf at ft. hood and at the national training center (ntc) at ft. irwin, california, are necessary to provide capabilities regarding:forceonforce and counterinsurgency; intelligence via remote sensors (e.g., unattended ground sensors ); andmodeling of complex environments (e.g., urban/town), as well as adversary social networks (e.g., tribal, nancial, political, etc.).table 41 summarizes key nstec infrastructure elements and the features of each element. the table highlights characteristics of the infrastructure necessary to support nste in priority network science areas and to accomplish the mission recommended (see recommendations 1a and 1c in chapter 2). development of the nstec capabilities and infrastructure could be phased over multiple years, and there are several reasons why a phased implementation approach might be the most favorable for the army. foremost is the erratic nature of government funding for the brac, which has already affected the brac timetable. the requisite talents and skills of the leadership team that is needed are likely to be signicantly different for different phases. moreover, the content of the nste r&d portfolio will change as the infrastructure for the center is established and the new organization matures. phase 1 might include infrastructure inherited from the existing brac planning that could later be integrated into the nstec. phase 2 might include the infrastructure needed to ﬁstand upﬂ distinct nstec facilities at a target date, and phase 3 might encompass the infrastructure needed for future growth and modernization due to expected advances in network science knowledge and technology. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 strategy for an army center for nstetable 41 elements of nstec infrastructureelementsfeaturesnstec campus facilitiesinterconnected buildings, libraries, open areas, wifi (wireless internet) access, conference facilitiessmart rooms (intelligent software agent technology, voice/gesture, etc.)secret/topsecret/sensitive compartmented information facilitiesdedicated network innovation labsfully instrumentedhuman performancemobile and c2 networks, networked sensors, etc.adversary networksnetworks and serviceshighcapacity (gb) optical fiber (multiple colors)wireless lan, wifi, and nextgeneration 802.xxxlabs interconnected with conference and demonstration facilitieshighcapacity backbone interconnections to all labsdisn (gigbe) dod network to apgfirewalls, gateways, and security guards (support multilevel security)virtual private network (vpn) servicessecurity services (authentication, access, etc.) computingsupercomputing capabilitiesparallel computing, biological computinginformation technology (it) computing (researchers computers, software, mobile wireless devices, etc.) data storagerobust and secure repositoriessearch engines and accessibilitydata capture and disseminationapplication services and toolsarchitecture framework toolsdod nces (netcentric enterprise services) to include collaboration, security, management, etc.it applications (email, business, human services, etc.) simulation and stimulationforceonforcesensorscomplex environmentsadversary networksartificial environmentsinstrumented and distributed test rangesft. dix c3 onthemove test range modernizationarmy fcs test rangesarmy™s ft. hood central technical support facilityapg test range modernizationstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure resources necessary for army nste 47elementsfeaturesintegration, testing, training, and experimentation facilitiesnetwork science integration facility (nsif)training facilities (10,000 sq. ft.)platforms (20, increasing to 50)prototype fabrication labssurrogateslargeopenspace lab (30,000 sq. ft. growing to 100,000 sq. ft.) network instrumentation: three phasesšscale from 20 nodes to 100 nodes human performance (intellectual capital)communication and collaboration tools (multipoint computer, video, and audio conferencing)intelligent computer software ﬁagentsﬂ to enable enhanced collaboration and improved understanding of human performancetable 41 continuedorganizational elements of an nstecin addition to the infrastructure needed to support a center for nste, a full nste capability will also involve government, industry, and academia, and all three must be considered in determining an organizational approach for an army nstec. the unique contributions of each of these groups are described below.army contributionschapter 3 discusses the nste activities that are meeting current army needs. the primary army organizations engaged in nste are arl (aro, hred, and cisd) for basic research; cerdec (c2d, s&tcd, and c3otm test bed) for applied and advanced research and technology development; and ari for basic, applied, and advanced research. the estimates of annual nste investments in these three organizations are arl, ~$70 million; cerdec, ~$75 million; and ari, ~$2 million, with corresponding stafng. the committee sought more detailed information on the actual funding levels and staff related to nste, but the army was unable to supply usable data. academic (university) contributionsuniversities provide access to stateoftheart research at all levels, including the global level. a steady and continuing relationship with academia can ensure responsiveness to evolving army sponsorship requirements as well as comprehensive understanding of the sponsor™s requirements and problems. it will be strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 strategy for an army center for nsteimportant for an army nstec to engage multiple universities in providing broad and diverse thinking on relevant advances in network science. other contributions made by academia may include:broad access to information, including proprietary data;independence and objectivity;quick response capability; andfreedom from real and/or perceived con˚icts of interest.industry contributionsindustry provides the path most frequently used by the government for transitioning technology to the operating forces. relationships with industry can also provide an nstec with knowledge concerning best commercial practices and costeffective approaches. in addition, industry can provide commercial surrogates and prototypes (e.g., stateoftheart wireless systems and networks), access to largescale system architecture, engineering and integration expertise, models for commercial networks and information systems, general logistics support in experimentation preparation and execution, and commercial tools to aid analysts in interpreting data. other contributions made by industry include:broad access to industry information, including proprietary data;broad access to specialized facilities (e.g., software integration); andsupport for technology transfer agreements between government and industry. scope and structurean nstec would be established to perform s&t in network science, network technology, and network experimentation. as discussed in chapter 3, a considerable amount of nste work, on the order of $150 million annually, is funded by the army today. however, current efforts in network science research are not adequate for army needs, and there are important network areas that are not being addressed by the army s&t program (nrc, 2005). in order to form an nstec, the army would need to consolidate its efforts in network technology and experimentation and combine them with an augmented program of network science research. the importance of networks to military performance is increasing rapidly, and nste deserves substantially increased attention by the s&t community. in the long term, the nstec should become a joint entity serving the needs of all of the u.s. military services in a coherent, collaborative fashion. while addressing the army™s current needs seems to be a practical rst step, a longerstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.infrastructure resources necessary for army nste 49term vision should be maintained by nstec management. this is an important issue that will impact the scale and scope of the research and basic technology efforts in nste.centralized versus distributed facilitiesjust what should an nstec look like? should the emphasis be on an attractive central campus featuring buildings and infrastructure, or is a virtual ﬁcolaboratoryﬂ of distributed activities more appropriate? do the imperatives of existing resources suggest an immediate change or an incremental approach to implementation? one thing is clearšan nstec, to be a worldclass organization and a key contributor to the army™s future success, must attract rstclass talent, and that means providing cuttingedge challenges for top˚ight scientists and engineers, providing them an environment in which to strive and achieve. an obvious but far from optimal version of an nstec would involve merely relocating elements of various existing army organizations to a centralized  governmentoperated location such as aberdeen proving ground. to be effective, any such relocation should involve an attractive physical plant with stateoftheart technical facilities. this alternative could be considerably enhanced by delegating existing special authorities available to the army for utilization by an nstec in areas such as personnel management, acquisition, and other nancial and business practices.the advantages of a distributed (versus centralized) nstec include: access to highly talented and specialized knowledge and expertise in the large eld of network science that can be leveraged globally;costeffective and efcient global access to specialized facilities, such as the mit media lab, microsoft labs, national security agency labs, and operating force experiments (e.g., regional joint forces experiments);access to specialized platforms (e.g., aircraft, ground vehicles, ships, etc.);access to industry and university laboratories and expertise; anddistributed operations that mirror how the army ghts in the eld. the disadvantages of a distributed (versus centralized) nstec include:increased management overhead due to many distributed moving parts;increased operating expenses (external networks, management, etc.);information sharing across a large distributed environment involving data repositories and content staging cost and complexity; andincreased security risks.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 strategy for an army center for nste chapter summarythere are key elements of infrastructure that will be essential to the creation of a center for nste. current and ongoing nste activities in the army provide a rm basis for the infrastructure requirements that would be needed to establish an nstec. the key elements of the required infrastructure are listed in table 41.options for physical realization of an nstec range from the extremes of a centralized facility in a single location to fully distributed facilities using networked connectivity. there are advantages to both; but regardless of which is selected, there will be important needs for contributions from academia and industry, which will require interconnections to many locations. conclusion 3a: the extensive infrastructure needed to support army nste requirements will be developed initially from the facilities of existing organizations and will require a special planning effort to synchronize with brac relocations already in progress. conclusion 3b: the magnitude and diversity of the required infrastructure suggest a phased implementation approach to establish an army nstec. a plan to develop nste capabilities and infrastructure could be phased over multiple years, beginning with the reorganization of existing and relocated facilities and ending with the establishment of a worldclass center for network science, technology, and experimentation. an adequate plan will involve leadership with the appropriate talent and vision for all phases, especially as the content of the nste r&d portfolio matures.conclusion 3c: based on army needs, the nstec should be a hybrid operation consisting of two or three centralized facilities having interconnectivity to a variety of distributed supporting elements.recommendation 3: the army should plan and fund for nste infrastructure resources that provide for (1) ˚exible congurations of network experiments and integration, both internally and externally; (2) facility designs that enhance and encourage academic and industry partnerships; and (3) an environment with worldclass experimental capabilities and a campuslike atmosphere to attract truly talented people. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.515goals, models, and  alternatives for an nstecthis chapter discusses organizational goals, operating models, and other issues considered by the committee that bear on the development of alternatives for establishing an army center for nste. the committee recognized that the potential creation of an nstec would realistically occur in an environment of existing organizations and resources, legal constraints, and plans in progress. however, the committee believed that merely yielding to what seemed a likely or inevitable course of development strictly based on these circumstances was not the most useful perspective from which to conduct its study. whatever model is used, basic organizational goals for an army nstec should be kept in focus. organizational goalsdecisions involved in setting the best organizational structure should be grounded in a clear set of goals that take into account and balance historical experience and current conditions, while allowing some ˚exibility in dealing with changing conditions in the future as fundamental understanding of networks increases and innovations in network applications emerge. at its core, the organization must be able to attract (i.e., compete for) and wisely use the intelligence and talents of scientists and researchers; adequately partner with the creativity and innovation of the private sector (including industry and academia) concerning the application of network structures; and deliver results that meet the special needs of military operations. the organization must be able to achieve each of the above well into the future under uncertain economic, political, and social conditions, and unrelenting technological change. this section explains in greater detail the core goals and their implications.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 strategy for an army center for nsteattracting and retaining human talentwhen assessing the needs of highly qualied people, several issues require attention. studies suggest that the most important factor in attracting and retaining talented technical professionals is challenging work in the eld of their chosen endeavor. in the long term, several unknowns directly related to the emerging eld of network science impact the kinds of work incentives that can be offered. these unknowns include: 1. whether network science as a eld of study will connect sufciently with industry objectives so that increasing job opportunities and work challenges arise that attract the best young minds; 2. whether network sciences will evolve so that new skills and abilities emerge that support more learning opportunities and thus career longevity; 3. whether network science as a eld of work will evolve in a stable pattern (as opposed to ts and starts that lead to career instability); and4. whether new professions, occupations, credentials, and job specialties will emerge in the eld of network science that t well within the federal governmental system.the answers to these unknowns will determine whether the army is in a position to support longterm careers in network science and thus get the technical and militaryrelated results needed from an nstec. if network science develops in a manner that successfully addresses the unknowns listed above, then the army will be well positioned to deal with more traditional key issues such as developing management so that good management is the norm and is supportive of a positive work atmosphere; offering continuously available attractive job benets; using innovative organizational structures; and managing to encourage a team orientation to research work so that strong career relationships emerge.in the near term, the incentives needed to compete for qualied people may be within the army™s reach. they include competitive salaries and benets; policies supportive of rewards and recognition; attractive work/life balance in jobs; familyfriendly policies; opportunities for educational advancement; attractive onsite amenities; and ˚exibility in work culture (˚exible dress and environment). for exceptionally qualied people, other incentives come into play and may be more difcult for the army (or any federal lab) to offer due to legal constraints. these incentives include competitive salaries and housing assistance in highcost areas of the country; rstclass relocation assistance; and support for child education. finally, incentives that promote diversity in terms of race, ethnicity, national origin, and culture, including assistance with immigration issues, may be important to members of the workforce now and likely even more so in the future.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 53partnering with industry and academiathere is a long history of federal laboratories and research connecting with and partnering with private industry and academia. this experience can suggest ways by which the organizational goals of an nstec could be fullled, e.g., by enabling new network science applications for the military. as with the computer and biological sciences, the creative and innovative lead in exploiting network science clearly exists in private industry and academia. the private sector has been responsible for bringing most of the practical network science applications, especially computer and communications network technologies, into the service of both consumers and the military. without access to the talents and resources of private industry, it would be impossible to stay on the leading edge of network science applications, much less continually and economically create special versions of such applications suited for military applications. while history provides examples of successful collaborations between government and the private sector, the nstec approach to partnership should be multidimensional and not limited to standard models. the participating parties and forms of collaboration will depend on the types of research undertaken. for example, a project involving engineering improvements to eld wireless capabilities of current communications networks would benet from industry involvement. other types of projects require other strengths. an experimental exploration of how to make timely decisions utilizing massive data sets from largescale data fusion test facilities would have to involve leadingedge academic efforts in data fusion, social networking, and modeling. this would allow wellframed questions to be examined such that predictive (and therefore practically useful) results could be obtained. other types of projects, e.g., dening how both large and small military units could utilize advanced network communications capabilities to improve command and control, might involve partnering with industry or academia or both in combination.an army nstec must be prepared to exploit the most relevant research capabilities wherever they might be found. this requirement will involve structuring a wide variety of partnership arrangements, from simple to complex, based on determining the directions of research with high potential payoff. collaborations need to be nurtured that combine the knowledge and competencies of both the academic and the industrial world, encouraging partnerships in the development of future military capabilities.meeting special military needsthe growth of network science and applications will fuel the global availability of network technologies in the consumer market, in turn leading to competitiondriven technological innovation. these products and services will sometimes have direct military applications for networkcentric warfare; however, in many cases strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 strategy for an army center for nstethey will have to be modied for military use. a core organizational goal for an nstec would be to develop these special applications quickly and economically. similarly, advances tailored to military needs will require vision and focus, as well as unprecedented agility in coordinating diverse efforts. in this regard, it will be particularly important for an nstec to leverage industry efforts and to avoid duplicative investments in technology development.one highly successful model of government and industry collaboration dates back to the pioneering days of aviation. specialized facilities (primarily wind  tunnels) of the national advisory commission on aeronautics (naca) were made available to industry to test and evaluate industry developments. this arrangement created a natural forum for government and industry experts to interact to their mutual benet. the worldclass facilities and infrastructure of an nstec may prove attractive to industry for its own experimentation and demonstration purposes. this in turn could create a forum for productive interchanges between nstec researchers and the broader community of network scientists.the primary aims of collaboration and partnering between the military and private industry are access to technology and intelligent people, as well as the sharing of research and development costs. secondary but also important reasons concern local economic development (including jobs) and support of education (especially higher education). such collaboration helps in sustaining longterm u.s. global economic and technological competitiveness. all of these aspects are relevant for the general advancement of network science. thus, making collaboration between people on both sides (private and government) easy, and making technology transfer between industry and the government as smooth as possible, should be viewed as primary goals for an nstec organization.private industry most likely will not be in a position to readily leverage benets from governmentsponsored research in network science, especially that which may be critical or essential to invention or innovation for military purposes. the pace of development of commercial products for the marketplace is much too fast to depend on governmentfunded research. therefore, it might be necessary to provide incentives for business to collaborate with government in such instances.effective incentives for collaboration might include easier technology transfer; programs that simultaneously foster local economic development; technical and nancial support to private enterprise (especially for smaller businesses); access to laboratory facilities for industry research and testing; and programs that support local education and thus contribute to increasing the talent pool.  collaboration with industry can also be assured through strong mandates and reward systems for collaboration within the labs, clear congressional and administration support for governmentindustry collaboration, and funding support within the labs.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 55operating models for nstec governancethe operating model chosen for nstec governance should be capable of addressing the following key elements: bringing the best and brightest minds to bear on the networking problems confronting the military; ensuring incentives for motivating the workforce;minimizing the effects of technological obsolescence on personnel and research equipment and infrastructure;establishing effective collaboration throughout the department of defense (dod) and with other agencies of government, the private sector, and internationally;enhancing joint service/combined operations networking; and adopting technology, management approaches, and business practices that optimize or smooth the path for the ˚ow of technology into elded military capabilities.box 51 shows that these goals are consistent with criteria developed by the rand corporation to assess optimal operating models for military r&d laboratories (owen et al., 2001).structurean army nstec should have strong and effective management, be supported by stateoftheart infrastructure, and be attractive to top˚ight scientists and technologists. the leadership of an nstec should be supportive of the technical interests of an excellent workforce, foster a spirit of innovation, and be proactive in advancing the leading edge of network technology. policies should be adopted that support:longterm career development and stability to make work at the nstec an attractive career step for up to 5 years;management development for proven managerial talent;an expeditious hiring process; opportunities for creativity on the job;use of innovative organizational approaches; competitive salaries/benets; praise/reward/recognition policies; familyfriendly policies; educational advancement; and a ˚exible work culture; andattractive stateoftheart facilities and onsite amenities.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56 strategy for an army center for nstebox 51 key attributes of an army  network science, technology, and experimentation centerł understand and inuence the army™s longterm vision in order to maintain military technological superiority.ł plan and direct a research program to implement the army vision.ł inuence and leverage commercial technology/system developments.ł conduct highquality, revolutionary governmentfunded research, development, engineering, and analysis in key advanced technologies/systems.ł conduct highquality, comprehensive, evolutionary governmentfunded research, development, engineering, and analysis.ł perform the ﬁsmartbuyerﬂ function for current and future materiel acquisitions.ł plan and direct the integration of technologies into current and future weapon systems.ł evolve as necessary to effectively and ef˚ciently achieve mission goals.source: adapted from owen et al., 2001.to compete at the highest levels, the army should additionally consider incentives such as the following:housing and relocation assistance; support for child education; programs to address workforce diversity in terms of race, ethnicity, national origin, and culture; andprovision for a budget commitment to the top 1020 percent of recruits for capital equipment as part of the hiring process, thereby allowing recruits to select equipment in an arrangement analogous to a university ﬁstartup packageﬂ model.special authoritiesif all or part of the nstec will be a governmentowned, governmentoperated laboratory or network of laboratories staffed primarily by a civil service workforce, full advantage must be taken of existing management ˚exibilities afforded by special authorities, particularly those in the areas of personnel and strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 57procurement.1 as a prerequisite to taking advantage of these ˚exibilities, nstec leadership must encourage line managers and affected staff ofcers (including contracting and personnel ofcials) at all levels to use such nontraditional  methods when appropriate, and make available specic training for doing so.the value of ˚exible personnel management and procurement techniques is not necessarily immediately obvious, at least to federal insiders. as some may observe, most of the federal government usually operates by using standard legal authorities to conduct its business, which may lead one to ask: why do anything different? the simple answer is that many organizations get by on substandard management systems and practices; unless challenged to be top˚ight or worldclass organizations, they will not necessarily recognize the need to do things differently. personnelif an army nstec is to perform worldclass research and technology development, it will have to be a worldclass organization with worldclass talent. these ﬁbest and brightestﬂ have many career opportunities available to them and are much less likely than lesstalented candidates to wait through the monthslong hiring process that is often standard in the federal government. the traditional federal personnel hiring sequenceš(1) classify a position, (2) recruit candidates, (3) evaluate candidates, and (4) make an offeršis simply not the optimal system for an organization such as that being envisioned for an nstec. instead, a system whereby the best and brightest talent among network science technologists are being constantly sought is preferred, e.g., via an ongoing competitive procedure for appointments. rather than lling an already classied position, an alternative sequence on a much shorter time scale will often be appropriate, such as, for example, (1) identifying a highly qualied candidate in a key area of network science, (2) creating a position attractive to the candidate and the nstec, and (3) making an offer. such a sequence can be completed in weeks or even days rather than months and is an approach that has been used successfully by the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa). the full extent of authority available to create alternative personnel systems within the dod has often been underutilized either by inaction at dod top levels, or by the inability of responsible human resources professionals to fully embrace nontraditional concepts (coffey et al., 2003; deyoung, 2003).2 in 2008, 1 maximizing available existing special authorities is an alternative for army laboratory governance referred to as ﬁbaseline plusﬂ (owen et al., 2001).2 letter from j. lieberman, j.m. inhofe, m.l. landrieu, j. bingaman, e.m. kennedy, b. nelson, and j. mccain, to donald rumsfeld, secretary, united states department of defense, highlighting ﬁour concerns with the department of defense™s efforts to recruit and retain top˚ight scientic and engineering talent for its laboratories,ﬂ in a press release dated august 5, 2002. additionally, the head of the darpa human resources directorate told a member of the committee of the apparent inability of some other dod human resources specialists to comprehend the darpa approach.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 strategy for an army center for nstethe national security personnel system (nsps) might become applicable to dod organizations performing nste. there is no reason to believe, however, that the nsps will afford an nstec, or any other laboratory organizations, more ˚exibility than is already available to them. arguably, the nsps may be viewed as a step backward from alternative approaches.3 meanwhile, the dod plan to implement the nsps has been partially thwarted because key elements of the nsps have been permanently enjoined by court action (usdc, 2006). for the most part, statutes authorizing laboratory demonstration projects and similar projects allow ˚exibility within existing federal pay levels (most commonly used are ﬁpay bandsﬂ), but do not necessarily authorize federal employees to be paid at competitive rates in circumstances where job market rates exceed federal limits. however, authority to exceed normal federal pay limits does exist under at least two available authorities, but only for limited terms. one authority is the intergovernmental personnel act (ipa), which allows personnel from eligible organizations (typically universities) to come to the federal government and act as federal employees for 2 to 4 years while being paid by their sending institution. the federal government reimburses the sending institution in whole or part for the expense of the employee™s salary and benets. the second authority (known as the ﬁexperimental personnel authorityﬂ) was pioneered by darpa but is available to any designated dod laboratory. terms are up to 4 or 6 years.  salary and bonuses for specially qualied scientists and engineers may considerably exceed normal federal pay limits.4 such termlimited employment arrangements can generate a continued ˚ow of ﬁnew bloodﬂ (and more pertinently, new ideas) into the organization. procurementas with the federal personnel system, the federal procurement system seems to function adequately, and its weaknesses may not be immediately apparent. the federal procurement system is very extensive and involves a variety of players ranging from congress and the president to a myriad of contracting ofcers, contract administrators, inspectors, auditors, and others. moreover, it is complex, involving laws; formal and informal regulations, guidance, and standards; court and administrative decisions; and its own lore. this complexity has led 3 for example, since 1980, a number of the laboratory demonstration projects under various  authorities have often achieved a noteworthy degree of success using alternative approaches to staffing requirements.4 the ipa is found at title 5 usc 33713376; the ﬁexperimental personnel authorityﬂ was originally authorized by sec. 1101 of p.l. 105261 and extended by sec. 1116, p.l. 108136 (see title 5 usc 3104 note). if the army nstec were to become a worldclass organization and present challenging technical problems to the scientists and engineers employed there, it might not be necessary to match the private sector job market dollarfordollar in order to attract outstanding talent. however, nancial compensation so low as to require a signicant sacrice on the part of potential employees will undoubtedly have an adverse effect. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 59observers to make such comments as, ﬁif someone were asked to come up with a contracting system for the federal government, it is inconceivable that a reasonable person or committee of reasonable people could come up with our current systemﬂ (nagle, 1992, p. 519). additionally, the effects of the regulatory nature of the federal procurement system have been aptly described by one expert in the following terms: a body of laws, regulations, and practices has developed that control the many daily procurement actions between dod and its suppliers. although each of these may have a valid historic rationale, the result is that there are only a few rms skilled in conducting defense business, and they may be totally isolated from, and uncompetitive with, their commercial counterparts. even rms that operate in both military and commercial worlds are forced to separate the two parts of their operations. . . . other commercial rms simply refuse to accept r&d contracts from dod because of their specialized rules. (gansler, 1996, pp. 2324)5 having separate procedural business practices for defense industry projects and the broader commercial sector presents realworld problems. in areas such as network science, where cuttingedge research is being conducted by nondefense rms, means must be found by which these separate ways of conducting business can be bridged. means for overcoming other barriers that exist between commercial rms seeking entry to the federal procurement system and defense contractors likewise must be found. a key role for an organization such as an nstec will be to form relationships or partnerships with both the nondefense sector (commercial industry and academia) and the defense industry to help bridge the gap. how an nstec could conduct its business would be critical to that effort. standard contracting vehicles used in government laboratory r&d contracting include the procurement contract (typically a costreimbursement type contract), assistance instruments (grants and cooperative agreements), and the cooperative research and development agreement (crada). these are used respectively to (1) acquire goods and services for the direct benet and use of the government, (2) stimulate and support private sector activities that have a governmental purpose, and (3) transfer government technology to the private sector and involve the private sector in government r&d. however, the statutory purpose and approved uses of these contracting vehicles were not necessarily intended to be applicable to multiple objectives on the part of the government, nor were they necessarily designed for complex transactions involving multiple parties. the standard procurement contracting authorities can be used intelligently 5 the situation described by gansler more than 10 years ago has worsened. there are barely half a dozen large contractors capable of performing the role of system integrator (prime contractor) on major defense procurement programs. the isolation of the defense industry from the broader commercial sector continues at other levels as well.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60 strategy for an army center for nsteand ˚exibly, but layers of bureaucracy, excessive oversight, and certain in˚exible rules often deter their innovative and optimal use. government intellectual property rules, government cost and accounting standards, and the complexity of government regulations can limit the willingness of private sector parties to participate in government r&d programs. there are, however, a number of statutes that permit government research, prototype development, and acquisition for experimental purposes to be done outside the purview of the basic laws and regulations that traditionally are used for government procurement.6to perform contract research or carry out prototype projects, an army nstec should make routine use of these ﬁother transactionsﬂ authorities in preference to using standard authorities.7 these authorities allow, or in certain circumstances require, cost sharing. cost sharing and recovery of funds should be considered in projects that have potential commercial implications as well as military payoffs.8 costs that are recovered under these authorities can be used to fund additional research. cost recovery should not be a primary goal of any project, but it should not be overlooked. note also that signal equipment (a key element of communications networks) can be acquired in experimental quantities outside the normal procurement statutes.9in order for an nstec to make full use of the special acquisition techniques inherent in these statutes, it is essential that dod and the army delegate adequate authority. other than reporting requirements, any existing dod and army limitations on the use of these authorities should be lifted, and the nstec should be allowed to experiment and innovate to the full extent consistent with the statutes themselves. any funds recovered under these statutes should become available to the nstec.a number of dod organizations have already made effective use of the special acquisition authorities referred to above. for example, these authorities have been used to support research projects, especially those involving consortia of diverse rms, government agencies, and organizations. useful examples are available from darpa and the army research laboratory consortia. this form of contracting has the potential to be particularly attractive to commercial rms due to its simplicity, ˚exibility in crafting intellectual property provisions, and the avoidance of costreimbursement contracting.6 primary statutes in this regard include ﬁresearch projects: transactions other than contracts and grantsﬂ (title 10 usc 2371); ﬁsection 845ﬂ prototyping (title 10 usc 2371 note); and ﬁprocurement for experimental purposesﬂ (title 10 usc 2373).7 despite the statutory requirements related to these authorities, their ﬁroutineﬂ use is indeed possible to support r&d projects given an understanding of what is actually involved in research or prototype development.8 costsharing contracts (far 16.303) and cost sharing or recoupments (far 35.003) are both possible using standard procurement contracts. cost recovery under title 10 usc 2371 is more ˚exible than recoupment and not limited to the total amount of the government investment.9 the authority under title 10 usc 2373 to purchase ordnance, chemical, and aeronautical supplies may also prove useful.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 61major prototype projects conducted by a number of dod agencies under section 845 of title 10 usc 2371 provide additional examples of the potential of alternative acquisition approaches. prototyping is an important ﬁtry before you buyﬂ approach to acquisition. such an approach is probably more important in the area of network science than in many other areas. the army should advocate that congress remove legislative restrictions added to the prototyping authority in recent years.10 the use of special acquisition authorities is not an end in itself. an nstec would have to develop complementary policies and utilize ˚exible acquisition approaches to help implement such policies. it would also need to develop policies that implement ˚exible approaches to produce real effects. these include:developing working relationships using the infrastructure networks to establish continual teaming with key players including universities, industry, networks of program executive ofcers, program managers, and joint networks;developing capital equipment policy and planning that renews equipment on a timescale consistent with the fast pace of technological advances;incentivizing participation by all contributors through shared results and recognition of the value of their connection with and enhancement of the nstec;focusing attention on a ﬁtry before you buyﬂ approach to prototyping;establishing close relationships with the central technical support facility (ctsf), the army capabilities integration center (arcic), and other technology transition organizations and crafting these relationships to the advantage of the army at large;conducting deliberate and wellplanned funding of target activities; andseeking army and dod agreement to modify the acquisition cycle to t the needs of networks (as distinguished from platforms).governance and business attributesthe potential for improvements in the governance and business practices of federal laboratories has been repeatedly studied over the decades (coffey et al., 2003; bement, 1980; deutch, 1987). the pressure for federal laboratories to operate more efciently and effectively has led to calls for laboratory reform or reinvention and more recently has been driven by consolidation, closure, realignment, and personnel downsizing dating from the end of the cold war. a fairly clear lesson from previous studies is that for an nstec to operate effectively 10 prototype projects (section 845, title 10 usc 2371 note) conducted outside the federal acquisition regulations are useful both to bring commercial rms into defense acquisition programs and to allow traditional defense contractors to become more ﬁcommerciallikeﬂ and innovate outside the current system. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62 strategy for an army center for nsteand efciently, its governance and business practices cannot follow the model of a governmentowned, governmentoperated laboratory subject to personnel, procurement, and other government bureaucratic systems, nor will minor adjustments to a ﬁbusiness as usualﬂ approach be sufcient.two highly credible reports on the subject of laboratory governance, one general and one specic to the army, contain similar ndings (coffey et al., 2003; owen et al., 2001). both studies conclude that the most effective models, given all considerations, are either governmentowned, contractoroperated (goco); a federal government corporation (fgc); or a federally funded research and development center (ffrdc). examples of each are the livermore national laboratory (goco), the tennessee valley authority (fgc), and the mit lincoln laboratory (ffrdc).11 a comparative analysis of these three forms is provided in table 51. the goco and ffrdc operating models have long histories of successfully conducting research and development (r&d). over the years, however, there has been a gradual increase in regulation that has constrained their independence and innovation in adopting best practices in business and management. within the department of defense, ffrdcs are subject to increasing constraints, and few new ffrdcs have been formed in recent years. a number of new uarcs have been created. uarcs are similar to ffrdcs in many ways but are subject to less regulation. an example of a uarc with a long history of success is the johns hopkins university applied physics laboratory in laurel, maryland. this laboratory actually started as an ffrdc but later lost that status and was subsequently chartered as a uarc.a fgc that is legislatively established by congress with its own charter may be the best approach to creating a worldclass nstec. however, since there is no existing example of an fgc chartered specically to perform r&d, such an approach would be experimental in nature and involve risks that may be inappropriate for an undertaking so closely aligned with dod transformation and successful army operations.as useful as the ffrdc model has been in the past, the increasing constraints placed on ffrdcs, and the reluctance of dod to push for the creation of new ffrdcs, limits its attractiveness as a model for an nstec. the uarc may, however, be considered a more viable model.the goco also provides a possible model for an nstec. within the department of energy, the goco national laboratories are administered and receive government oversight through management and operations contracts (far sub11 the terminology used in the cited reports and adopted here is not necessarily universally used or mutually exclusive. the committee nds the terminology used, combined with the examples, useful for this report. it should be noted that many goco (and some ffrdc) facilities are not laboratories. as far as the committee is aware, no fgc has research and development as its primary mission. other models not cited in coffey et al. (2003) or owen et al. (2001), such as the universityafliated research centers (uarcs), have many similarities to the models cited.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 63table 51 comparative analysis adapted from rand edelphi exercise assessment criteria governmentowned/contractoroperated(goco)federally fundedresearch anddevelopmentcenter (ffrdc) federal governmentcorporation (fgc)understand and influence the army™s longterm visiongoodexcellentgoodplan and direct a research programexcellentexcellentexcellentinfluence and leverage commercial technologygoodgoodexcellentconduct revolutionary research, development, test, and evaluation in key areasgoodexcellentgoodconduct comprehensive evolutionary research, development, test, and evaluationgoodexcellentexcellentperform the ﬁsmart buyerﬂ functiongoodexcellentexcellentplan and direct the integration of technologiesexcellentexcellentexcellentevolve the organizationgoodexcellentgoodnote: ﬁgoodﬂ and ﬁexcellentﬂ ratings adapted from original 15 rating scale.source: adapted from owen et al., 2001.part 17.6), as does the nasa jet propulsion laboratory. this is not necessarily the only way to provide oversight, but it constitutes a convenient model for consideration of the governmentcontractor relationship. if it is predetermined to select a university or nonprot organization as the operating contractor, the contract could be awarded noncompetitively (far 6.3023); otherwise, competitive procedures could be used. absent legislative relief, any conversion from functions now performed by government civilian employees to functions performed by contract would require compliance with laws and regulations governing such conversions, primarily by ofce of management and budget (omb) circular a76 (omb, 1999). the nancial cost and difculty of complying with all the rules governing conversion from a government to contractor performance model resulted in the naval strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64 strategy for an army center for nsteresearch laboratory rejecting a plan to convert to nongovernment performance in the 1990s (coffey et al., 2003). creation of an nstec by conversion of existing civilservice functions (as opposed to creating a new organizational entity from scratch) might make the contract approach (goco, ffrdc, or uarc) far less attractive in practice than in theory. whether existing models (fgc, goco, ffrdc, or uarc) are practical or not, they do provide insight into the attributes that an nstec should have as a worldclass science and technology organization. these include ˚exibility in personnel policies, in particular, hiring practices, competitive compensation, and personnel incentives. flexible business practices and funding approaches are required to avoid technological obsolescence and ensure that needed research and experimental equipment can be acquired in a timely fashion. flexible contracting approaches are required to ensure that key business relationships and effective collaboration can occur.command relationships and leadershipin addition to the form of governance, an nstec must have adequate visibility and independence provided by respected leadership and key relationships. an nstec director should be respected for technical expertise as well as management ability, and the nstec should report directly to the army™s research, development, and engineering command (rdecom) and have an organizational status equivalent to that of cerdec and arl. this will facilitate the transition of personnel and functions to the new organization and ensure adequate status for coordinating all army nste activities with other r&d agencies and joint activities.given that organizations likely to be incorporated in an nstec are affected by brac, and many decisions regarding disposition and relocation have already been made, it is essential that an nstec director be appointed as soon as possible. the appointed director should play a primary role in the brac planning and execution process and in organizing initial elements of the nstec. the urgency is such that it may be appropriate to appoint the nstec director immediately pending the establishment of the nstec in consonance with overall brac planning.  ideally, the nstec director would combine varied strengths including (1) those needed to shepherd the nstec through the complex management challenges of brac implementation while creating an essentially new organizational entity and capability incorporating many preexisting parts and (2) the technical insights and judgment to establish an nstec research portfolio and attract top˚ight researchers to join the nstec. as the nstec becomes established and evolves, the relative importance of these strengths will shift from the rst to the second. it may be that the necessary strengths cannot be found in a single execustrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 65tive and that consideration should be given to forming a management team that incorporates the necessary strengths.12alternativesan obvious but far from optimal version of an nstec would involve merely relocating elements of various existing army organizations to a centralized governmentoperated location such as aberdeen proving ground. another alternative would involve chartering a completely new nongovernment organization, such as an fgc, goco, uarc, or ffrdc, with government funding and under army supervision. maximum ˚exibility might be obtained by legislative authorization of a specially chartered fgc, but the time involved and experimental nature of this approach might make one of the other types of organizations attractive as an initial step. the physical attributes of this organization could be varied from centralized to distributed; it could recruit its workforce from current army organizations affected by brac as well as from a broader workforce market. a variation on this alternative might be to charter an existing or new uarc or ffrdc to serve as the core of an nstec.another alternative could combine the best features of the two alternatives mentioned above. that is, a new or existing nongovernmental organization would be chartered. it might be located on leased land at aberdeen proving ground or at a different location. it could recruit from current experienced government employees as well as the private sector. in addition, existing government organizations could be combined either physically or as a virtual organization to make a government cadre for the nstec. an element of the government organization could manage the nongovernment wing of the nstec as well as be an operating agency for part of the nstec™s work.the nal selection from the alternatives should focus on pursuing the goals discussed in this chapter and on utilizing ˚exible business and operating methods consistent with achieving the nstec mission recommended in chapter 2.recommended strategygiven the foregoing discussion, the committee believes that chartering a new or existing uarc or ffrdc (hereafter referred to as uarc/ffrdc) to serve as the core of an nstec would be the most effective course of action. it should be feasible to establish the core uarc/ffrdc so as to allow ˚exibility 12 historic examples include teams such as leslie groves and robert oppenheimer of the manhattan project. also, in nasa at the inception of project apollo, nasa administrator james webb had a background as an aggressive manager in both government and industry and was known to be politically savvy while his deputy, hugh dryden, had a technical background and a long history with nasa™s predecessor organization. in the nasa case, the supporting team of werner von braun, samuel phillips, george mueller, and robert gilruth was outstanding.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66 strategy for an army center for nstein the early days of the overall nstec establishment and also allow the core to continue as the nstec evolves in future years. in order to play such a role in an evolutionary environment, the core uarc/ffrdc needs to have a broad charter in nste from the outset.the nstec uarc/ffrdc could be established at any appropriate location or locations and then be relocated at or in proximity to aberdeen proving ground as circumstances warrant. in its early days, the uarc/ffrdc could perform a ﬁgap llerﬂ role when (1) existing army resources fail to match key elements of the nstec mission or (2) army organizational elements involved in brac relocations lose the expertise of key personnel who choose not to relocate.the target date for ft. monmouth to close is september 2011, and actions regarding budget shifts in accord with the government™s planning, programming, and budget execution system will need to occur with the submission of the fiscal year 2009 budget. to meet the timelines for implementation will require making budgetary shifts of existing funds to phase in the uarc/ffrdc capability. in the longterm evolution of an nstec, it may make sense for the core uarc/ffrdc to take over performance of much of the nstec mission. whatever the ultimate mix of government and nongovernmental performance responsibilities, the core uarc/ffrdc must be closely integrated with the army™s mission needs in network science. personnel interchanges and colocation of army and uarc/ffrdc personnel should occur routinely. the core uarc/ffrdc must retain ˚exibility in acquiring facilities and research equipment as a key means of avoiding technological obsolescence over time. the use of an independent advisory board could also be considered to provide feedback on nstec currency and performance. the nstec as a whole should be some mix of distributed and centralized facilities, starting with 1 to 3 physical centers connected to a variety of remote facilities. the degree of distribution or centralization should be driven by mission needs and effectiveness in achieving research results rather than be predetermined. the committee believes that the alternative of creating a uarc/ffrdc that addresses some but not all nstec mission areas at the core of an nstec organization makes more sense than creating a new uarc/ffrdc to immediately displace all existing army efforts in nste.the committee also believes that establishing a uarc/ffrdc as a core element in an nstec is better than retaining only the civil service laboratory model of governance and operations. initially at least, it seems highly likely that much of what becomes the nstec will be constituted as a civil service laboratory. those parts of the nstec that retain that form must be chartered to take full advantage of the special authorities discussed in this chapter. the least attractive alternative for an nstec is a businessasusual civil service laboratory.figure 51 illustrates the nstec organization with a uarc/ffrdc core that the committee recommends. at the outset, all relevant existing work would become the responsibility of the proposed nstec. within the nstec, the core strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.goals, models, and alternatives for an nstec 67figure 51 recommended nstec organization. (acronyms are dened on pages xvixviii of the front matter.)s1 and 51r01028network scienceuarc/ffrdc would begin by lling current gaps in s&t and would take responsibility for efforts that cannot be performed due to qualied technical staff deciding not to move to apg.chapter summaryprevious comparative analyses of prospective models for army research organizations have narrowed the eld of consideration for an nstec to governmentowned, contractoroperated (goco), federally funded research and development center (ffrdc), and federal government corporation (fgc) operating strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68 strategy for an army center for nstemodels. the army has a wealth of experience with a variation of the ffrdc known as the universityafliated research center (uarc). conclusion 4: the uarc/ffrdc operating model has emerged in recent years as a ˚exible and productive model capable of integrating commercial and military r&d development for the army. the uarc/ffrdc is also superior to other operating models, because it allows ongoing access to a broad range of expertise, talent, and innovation while efciently using government resources.recommendation 4: the army should establish a new uarc/ffrdc (or  expand an existing uarc/ffrdc) to serve as the core of an overall army nstec organization. the coordination and implementation of nste for the army will require extraordinary leadership at a level commensurate with the importance of networkcentric operations in the future. the new organization would alter existing  boundaries of responsibility for the various nste functions, and the scope of responsibilities is equivalent to that of the present research, development, and engineering centers (rdecs). for this reason, a director for all nste activities should be assigned immediately to assist with planning and establishment of the recommended nstec organization and core shown in figure 51. the nstec director should be provided with a supporting management team to assure the availability of expertise in all the management and technical disciplines necessary to carry out the complex process of transitioning existing organizations to an nstec and incisively establishing and managing the nste research portfolio. conclusion 5: an nstec organization must exhibit a high degree of ˚exibility in personnel policies that will enable it to become a worldclass leader in network research and development. establishment and evolution of the nstec will require exceptional leadership.recommendation 5a: the army strategy for nste should be to establish an nstec organization with a uarc/ffrdc core as shown in figure 51.recommendation 5b: the army should immediately designate a director to establish an army nstec at aberdeen proving ground (maryland). the nstec director should report to the u.s. army research, development, and engineering command (rdecom) at a level equivalent to the arl and rdec directors. all nste funding and resources should be assigned to this individual. recommendation 5c: for the nstec to be able to accomplish the mission envisioned, the army should designate at least two deputy directors: one for technology and another for human performance/adversary understanding. this action will ensure that the large number of cerdec engineers does not overwhelm research and development efforts in human performance and adversary understanding.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.69referencesbement, a.l. 1980. report of the dod laboratory management task force. washington, d.c.:  ofce of the deputy under secretary of defense (research and advanced technology).boutelle, s., and a. grasso. 1998. a case study: the central technical support facility. army rdd&a (now army acquisition, logistics & technology (al&t)): pp. 3033.carley, k. 2006. destabilization of covert networks. computational and mathematical organization theory 12(1): 5166.coffey, t., k.w. lackie, and m.l. marshall. 2003. alternative governance: a tool for military laboratory reform. defense horizons. available at http://www.ndu.edu/inss/defhor/dh34/dh34.htm. accessed april 6, 2007.deutch, j. 1987. report of the 1987 dsb summer study on technology base management. washington, d.c.: defense science board.deyoung, d. 2003. the silence of the labs. defense horizons. available at http://www.ndu.edu/inss/defhor/dh21/dh21.htm. accessed april 6, 2007.gansler, j.s. 1996. defense conversion. cambridge, mass.: mit press.garstka, j., and d. alberts. 2004. network centric operations: conceptual framework version 2.0. vienna, va.: evidencebased research, inc.krygiel, a. 1999. behind the wizard™s curtain: an integration environment for system of systems. washington, d.c.: national defense university press.lickteig, c.w., w.r. sanders, p.j. durlach, j.w. lussier, and t.j. carnahan. 2003. human performance essential to battle command: report on four future combat systems command and control (fcs c2) experiments. army research institute report 1812. alexandria, va.: u.s. army research institute for the behavioral and social sciences.nagle, j.f. 1992. a history of government contracting. washington, d.c.: george washington university.national research council (nrc). 2004. the role of experimentation in building future naval forces. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.nrc. 2005. network science. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.ofce of management and budget (omb). 1999. circular no. a76. washington, d.c.: executive ofce of the president.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70 strategy for an army center for nsteowen, d., k.p. horn, c. wong, and b.j. held. 2001. db347a, applicability of alternative organizational models to army laboratories: a preliminary edelphi analysis. santa monica, calif.: rand.united states district court (usdc) for the district of columbia. 2006. civil number 052183: american federation of government employees, aflcio, et al. v. donald h. rumsfeld, secretary, united states department of defense, et al.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesstrategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.73appendix acommittee meetingsaugust 2324, 2006, washington, d.c.using networks to advance the army network science, technology and experimentation center. john parmentola, director, research and laboratory management, ofce of the deputy assistant secretary of the army (research and technology).dealing with the unexpected: a critical challenge for dod. david alberts, director, research and strategic planning, ofce of assistant secretary of defense (c3i).arl research in network science. anathram swami, army research laboratory (arl), u.s. army.whither a science of networks? j. christopher ramming, program manager, defense advanced research projects agency (darpa).toward new and better protocols for wireless networking.j. christopher ramming, program manager, defense advanced research projects agency (darpa).brac update (unofcial observations).pete cahill, senior principal analyst and program manager, brtrc, ofce of research and laboratory management, assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics and technology) [asa(alt)].strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74 strategy for an army center for nstehuman dimension in network science. rene de pontbriand, human research and engineering directorate (hred), army research laboratory (arl), u.s. army.september 2122, 2006, washington, d.c.strategies for a network science, technology, and experimentation center. gary p. martin, director, communicationselectronics research, development and engineering center (cerdec).army capabilities integration center. john kincaid, deputy chief, science and technology division, u.s. army training and doctrine command, capabilities developments directorate, army capabilities integration center (arcic).arcic gaps process. john kincaid, deputy chief, science and technology division, u.s. army training and doctrine command, capabilities developments directorate, army capabilities integration center (arcic).fcs (bct) program overview to network science, technology, and experimentation (nste). mg charles a. cartwright, program manager, future combat systems (brigade combat team), program executive ofce (peo), u.s. army.strategies for a network science, technology, and experimentation center. gary p. martin, director, communicationselectronics research, development and engineering center (cerdec).battle command requirements and technical challenges. gary p. martin, director, communicationselectronics research, development and engineering center (cerdec).transforming through brac 2005: rdat&e at apg. craig college, deputy assistant chief of staff for installation management headquarters, u.s. army.arl research in network science. john m. miller, director, army research laboratory (arl), u.s. army.arl brac 91 relocation lessons learned. john pellegrino, director, sensors and electron devices directorate (sedd), army research laboratory (arl), u.s. army.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix a 75da g6/cio views on network science, technology, and experimentation (ntse).vern bettencourt, deputy, chief information ofcer/g6, ofce of the secretary of the army, u.s. army.communicationselectronics life cycle management command (ce lcmc). mg michael mazzucchi, commanding general, communicationselectronics command (cecom); program executive ofcer for command, control, communicationstactical (peo c3t), u.s. army.rand™s organizational design research for army r&d. bruce held, director, force development and technology program, rand arroyo center.november 1516, 2006, washington, d.c.presentation of nste data. pete cahill, senior principal analyst and program manager, brtrc, ofce of research and laboratory management, assistant secretary of the army (acquisition, logistics and technology) [asa(alt)].army materiel command/army corps of engineers planning for brac at aberdeen proving ground. judy wettig, director, apg brac transition team, and john koss, contractor, mcfa planning.discuss parallel asb study. (via audio teleconference.)joe braddock, former chair, army science board; currently trustee of the potomac and aztec foundations.defense information systems agency perspective on nste. ed siomacco, deputy program director, netcentric enterprise services program ofce, defense information systems agency (disa).brieng to the bast network sciences. gary martin, director, communicationselectronics research, development and engineering center (cerdec).strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76 strategy for an army center for nstejanuary 1617, 2007, irvine, californiano briengs.february 1415, 2007, washington, d.c.no briengs.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.77appendix bbiographical sketches of  committee membersverne l. (larry) lynn (nae), chair, is an independent consultant to industry and the department of defense (dod). mr. lynn is retired director of the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa), the principal agency within dod for research, development, and demonstration of concepts, devices, and systems for advanced military capabilities. he also served in dod as the deputy undersecretary of defense for advanced technology and was vice president and chief operating ofcer for the atlantic aerospace electronics corporation. mr. lynn has authored over 40 technical publications in the areas of military surveillance and weapons systems, and he has extensive knowledge of military organization and operations for research, development, and acquisition. he is a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers and serves on the defense science board. raj k. aggarwal is vice president of global technology at the rockwell collins corporation. he is a former director of research and technology for alliant techsystems, inc., and a director of advanced programs for honeywell, inc. dr. aggarwal received a b.s. degree in physics (with honors) and b.s. and m.s. degrees in electrical and communications engineering from delhi university in delhi, india. he received his ph.d. in electrical engineering from purdue university. he is a member of the board on army science and technology (bast) and served previously on the nrc committee on unmanned ground vehicle technology. dr. aggarwal has knowledge of research and development organizational models in industry as well as experience with dod research, development, and acquisition.strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78 strategy for an army center for nstea. michael andrews ii is vice president and chief technology ofcer of l3 communications, where he guides the company™s longterm r&d initiatives. prior to joining l3 in june 2003, he served as deputy assistant secretary of research and technology/chief scientist for the united states army, a position he held since 1998. andrews was instrumental in the development of the future combat systems and realigning army s&t toward future force capabilities. prior to coming to the army in 1997, dr. andrews held a variety of leadership positions at rockwell international. he has produced over 50 technical articles and has several patents in infrared sensors, materials, and signal processors. he is a member of the naval research advisory committee, was a member of the national research council™s committee on review of the national nanotechnology initiative, was an advisor to the defense science board task force on roles and authorities for the ddr&e, and is an advisor to the dsb summer study on 21st century strategic technology vectors. dr. andrews is a recipient of various honors, including the u.s. army™s meritorious civilian service award, the presidential rank award, rockwell™s engineer of the year award, selection as a fellow of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers, the university of illinois distinguished alumnus award, the spie™s defense & security 2005 honoree of the year, and a career prole in the april 2002 ieee spectrum magazine. dr. andrews received his b.s. and m.s. in electrical engineering from the university of oklahoma and his ph.d. in electrical engineering from the university of illinois.richard l. dunn is an independent consultant and senior fellow at the university of maryland. he conducts research in national security operations and is an expert in the analysis of laws, policies, and practices that impact the effective implementation of technology. he served as the rst general counsel for the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa), where he pioneered efforts in conducting prototype projects outside normal dod contracting statutes. he also served as counsel to the nasa space commercialization task force and as a staff judge advocate (legal ofcer) in the u.s. air force. mr. dunn™s degrees include a b.a. cum laude from the university of new hampshire, a j.d. from the university of maryland, and an ll.m. with highest honors from george washington university. gerald harris, a senior consultant with the global business network, develops global scenarios for longterm development of the electric power industry. he is a former director of business planning for the pacic gas and electric company and a published expert in the eld of scenario planning to support potential investment strategies. mr. harris has led scenario projects linking planning goals to r&d objectives for companies in diverse elds, including oil and natural gas, engineering and construction, and information technology. he received his b.a. degree in economics from morehouse college, where he graduated phi beta kappa, and an m.b.a. in nance and business economics from the university of chicago. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendix b 79jason f. providakes is executive director at the mitre corporation, managing programs for theater and strategic systems with enterprisewide implications across the dod, including the global information grid. dr. providakes was chief engineer for the mitrewashington c3 center, where he managed technology development and integration, and he is former executive director of the mitre army program. he has published extensively in the eld of overthehorizon radar and serves as a member of the army darpa senior advisory group and the army science board. dr. providakes received his b.s. degree from worcester polytechnical institute and his m.s. and ph.d. degrees from cornell university, all in electrical engineering.zita m. simutis is retired director of the army research institute (ari) for the behavioral and social sciences, where she served in positions ranging from research psychologist to technical director to chief psychologist of the army over a 30year career. at ari, she was responsible for directing and managing longterm research as well as shortterm studies involving applied personnel performance and training. she has authored numerous articles on training, leader development, and soldiercomputer interfaces. dr. simutis received her b.s. degree in psychology from the university of illinois and m.a. and ph.d. degrees in experimental psychology from the university of connecticut. w. david sincoskie (nae) is vice president of the network systems research laboratory at telcordia. he is former executive director of the computer networking research department at bellcore, where he managed projects on the aurora gigabit test bed, ipv6, ip over atm, nsfnet, and broadband service control. dr. sincoskie coauthored the rst specications for local atm, and he pioneered the use of packet switching technology in broadband networking. he is a member of the national academy of engineering and received the ieee fred w. ellersick prize paper award in 2003. dr. sincoskie serves on the nrc board on army science and technology. he received b.e.e., m.e.e., and ph.d. degrees in electrical engineering from the university of delaware. ronald l. smith is in private practice and is a clinical associate professor in the university of nevada school of medicine. he is a former neurobiologist at the nasa ames research center and was a postdoctoral fellow at the ucla brain research institute. he currently serves on the joint independent science panel on chemical and biological defense and has reviewed research involving modeling and simulation and operations research for the department of the army. dr. smith received his m.a. and ph.d. degrees in anatomy (neuroscience) from the university of california at san francisco and his m.d. degree from the autonomous university of ciudad juárez, mexico. strategy for an army center for network science, technology, and experimentationcopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.