detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/12112innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in anew world (collected studies)386 pages | 6 x 9 | hardbackisbn 9780309386005 | doi 10.17226/12112jeffrey t. macher and david c. mowery, editors; committee on the competitivenessand workforce needs of u.s. industry; board on science, technology, andeconomic policy; policy and global affairs; national research councilinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.jeffrey t. macher and david c. mowery, editorscommittee on the competitiveness and workforce needs of u.s. industryboard on science, technology, and economic policypolicy and global affairsinnovation in global industriesu.s. firms competing in a new worldcollected studiesinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by contract/grant no. sb 134106z0011, to #2 between the national academy of sciences and the technology administration of the u.s. department of commerce; contract/grant no. slon 20051018 between the national academy of sciences and the alfred p. sloan foundation; and contract/grant no. p116z05283 between the national academy of sciences and the u. s. department of education. any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number13: 9780309116312international standard book number10: 0309116317library of congress catalog card number: 2008926521limited copies are available from:board on science, technology, and economic policynational research council500 fifth street, n.w., keck center 574, washington, d.c. 20001phone: (202) 3342200fax: (202) 3341505email: step@nas.educover: the cover design depicts a possible far distant future conguration bringing nearly all of the earth™s land mass into a single supercontinent, including merging the americas into asia.copyright 2008 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americainnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprot, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientic and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientic and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. charles m. vest is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientic and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. charles m. vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orginnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on competitiveness and workforce needs of u.s. industrydavid t. morgenthaler, chairfounding partner, morgenthaler venturesdavid c. mowery, vicechairwilliam a. & betty h. hasler professor of new enterprise developmentuniversity of california at berkeleyashish aroraprofessor of economics and public  policyheinz school, carnegie mellon universitynicholas m. donofrioexecutive vice president, innovation  and technologyibm corporationkenneth s. flammdean rusk chair in international affairslyndon b. johnson school of public affairsuniversity of texas at austinrichard b. freemanherbert ascherman professor of economicsharvard universitymary l. gooddonaghey university professor and  dean, donaghey college of  information science and systems engineeringuniversity of arkansas at little rockkent h. hughesdirector, program on science, technology, america and the global economywoodrow wilson international center for scholarsdevesh kapurdirectorcenter for the advanced study of indiauniversity of pennsylvaniathomas r. pickeringvicechairman, hills and companyu.s. career ambassador (retired)annalee saxeniandean and professor, school of information and professor, department of city and regional planninguniversity of california at berkeleydenis f. simonprovost and vicepresident for academic affairs, levin graduate institute of international relations and commercestate university of new yorkrichard p. suttmeierprofessor of political science and director, asian studies programuniversity of oregoninnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viproject staffstephen a. merrillstudy directormahendra shunmoogamprogram associatecynthia getnerfinancial associateinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiboard on science, technology, and economic policyedward e. penhoetinterim chairmandirector, alta partnerstimothy f. bresnahanlandau professor in technology and the economystanford universitylewis w. colemanpresidentdreamworks animationkenneth s. flammprofessor and dean rusk chair in international affairslyndon b. johnson school of public affairsuniversity of texas at austinralph e. gomorypresident emeritusalfred p. sloan foundationmary l. gooddonaghey university professor and dean, donaghey college of information science and systems engineeringuniversity of arkansas at little rockamory houghton, jr.former member of congressdavid t. morgenthalerfounding partnermorgenthaler venturesjoseph p. newhousejohn d. macarthur professor of health policy and management director, division of health policy research and educationharvard universityarati prabhakargeneral partneru.s. venture partnerswilliam j. raduchelindependent director and investorjack w. schulerchairmanventana medical systems, inc.alan wm. wolffpartnerdewey & leboeuf llpexofcio membersralph j. ciceronepresidentnational academy of sciencescharles m. vestpresidentnational academy of engineeringharvey v. finebergpresidentinstitute of medicineinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiistep staffstephen a. merrillexecutive directorcharles w. wessnerprogram directorsujai j. shivakumarsenior program ofcerdavid e. dierksheideprogram ofcermahendra shunmoogamprogram associatejeffrey c. mcculloughprogram associatecynthia a. getnerfinancial associateinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ix preface and acknowledgmentsin 1999 the national academies™ board on science, technology, and economic policy (step) released a series of industry studies analyzing the sources of competitive resurgence from the 1980s to the 1990s of many u.s.based rms in a variety of manufacturing and service sectors. these studies, published under the title u.s. industry in 2000: studies in competitive performance, included steel, chemicals, metal working, trucking, grocery retailing, retail banking, computing, semiconductors, hard disk drives, apparel, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnology.the general picture of stronger performance in the midtolate 1990s than in the early 1990s was attributed to a variety of factors including heavy investment in applications of information technology, supportive public policies, openness to innovation, and changes in supplier and customer relationships. vigorous foreign competition forced costcutting changes in manufacturing processes, organization, and strategy but then receded, making the performance of u.s. industries look even better. as none of these favorable conditions could be assumed to be permanent, the collected studies persuasively made the point that u.s. industries™ superior performance is not guaranteed to continue.in late 2005 the step board decided to reprise the study, focusing on the acceleration in global sourcing of innovation and emergence of new locations of research capacity, new sources of skilled technical workers, and the implications of these developments for u.s. businesses and workforce. although the current study involves several of the same industriesšin particular, semiconductors, personal computing, nancial services, pharmaceuticals, and biotechnologyšthe overall selection shifted markedly toward technologyintensive producing, supporting, or using sectors to include software, ˚at panel displays, solid state lighting, logistics, and venture capital nance. the group of industries examined does not represent innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.x preface and acknowledgmentsa carefully selected sample representative of the economy as a whole. rather, it re˚ects a decision to again capitalize on the work of universitybased multidisciplinary research teams studying economic performance and technological change at the industry level. most of these groups were formed and supported under the industry centers program of the alfred p. sloan foundation.to help integrate this work, the board again asked david c. mowery, professor at the haas school of business at the university of california at berkeley, to develop a general framework for analyzing changes in the structure of innovation over the past 10 to 15 years. mowery in turn recruited jeffrey t. macher, associate professor, mcdonough school of business, georgetown university, to assist in this effort and coedit the resulting volume. the chapters in this volume were drafted independently by individual authors, and their ndings and any policy recommendations do not represent a consensus among all of the contributors to the volume. they also do not necessarily represent the opinions and views of the committee on competitiveness and workforce needs of u.s. industry, the step board, the national academies, or the sponsoring organizations.in the course of their work, the editors and chapter authors participated in two public workshops in washington, d.c. the rst, on april 19, 2006, reviewed their preliminary ndings with industry representatives and other analysts including irving wladawskyberger, ibm corporation; jack gill, vanguard ventures and harvard medical school; richard s. golaszewski, gra, inc.; jeffrey d. tew, general motors; jerome h. grossman, liongate corporation and harvard university; gordon w. day, optoelectronic industry development association; timothy j. sturgeon, massachusetts institute of technology; charles w. wade, technology forecasters, inc.; richard b. freeman, harvard university; nancy hauge, k12; harold salzman, the urban institute; and navi radjou, forrester research, inc.a year later a second workshop was held, on april 20, 2007, to try to anticipate trends over the next several years in three broad sectors encompassing most of the industries being studiedšinformation and computing technology, biopharmaceuticals, and nance. speakers in addition to committee members and authors included undersecretary robert c. cresanti, commerce department™s technology administration; barry jaruzelski, booz allen hamilton; robert d. atkinson, information technology and innovation foundation; alex soojungkim pang, institute for the future; bhaskar chakravorti, mckinsey and company; david moschella, leading edge forum; michael e. fawkes, hewlettpackard company; anna d. barker, national cancer institute; thomas r. cech, howard hughes medical institute; joseph jasinski, health care life science, ibm; andy lee, pzer inc.; t. l. stebbins, canaccord adams, inc.; karen g. mills, solera capital; and alex j. pollock, american enterprise institute.as the editors state in their summary introduction to this collection, despite the emergence of robust r&d and innovative capabilities in east, southeast, and innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.preface and acknowledgments xisouth asia, and concerted efforts to develop them in other parts of the world, patterns of innovation are highly variable across industries and across rms within industries. many industries and some rms within nearly all industries retain leadingedge capacity in the united states. the ˚at panel display sector, in which innovative activity for the most part has followed production abroad, is not as yet the norm. this is no reason for complacency about the outlook for the future, however. empiricallybased analyses such as those in this volume are inevitably backwardlooking. even recently issued patents generally represent lings two to ve years back and r&d investments considerably earlier. although not pessimistic overall, our authors compellingly document the rapidity of contemporary industrial change and shifts in competitive advantage. for that reason alone, innovation deserves more sustained public policy attention than it has been receiving.the step board is grateful to the authors, the editors, and the workshop participants as well as to the sponsors of this activityšthe alfred p. sloan foundation, the u.s. department of education, and the technology administration of the u.s. department of commerce.this collection has been reviewed in draft from by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national academies™ report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making the published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report: suma athreye, brunel university; maryann feldman, university of toronto; jeffrey furman, boston university; bronwyn hall, university of california at berkeley; megan macgarvie, boston university; deepak somaya, university of maryland; jerry thursby, emory university; and philip webre, congressional budget ofce.although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report, nor did they see the nal draft of the report before its release. responsibility for the nal content of this report rests entirely with the individual authors.david t. morgenthaler, chairstephen a. merrill, study directorinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiii  contentsintroduction 1 jeffrey t. macher and david c. mowery 1 personal computing 19 jason dedrick and kenneth l. kraemer 2 software 53 ashish arora, chris forman, and jiwoong yoon 3 semiconductors 101 jeffrey t. macher, david c. mowery, and alberto di minin 4 flat panel displays 141 jeffrey a. hart 5 lighting 163 susan w. sanderson, kenneth l. simons, judith l. walls, and  yinyi lai,  6 pharmaceuticals 207 iain m. cockburn 7 biotechnology 231 raine hermans, alicia löfer, and scott sterninnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiv contents 8 logistics 273 anuradha nagarajan and chelsea c. white iii 9 venture capital 313 martin kenney, martin haemmig, and w. richard goe10 financial services 341 ravi aroninnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1  introductionjeffrey t. machergeorgetown universitydavid c. moweryuniversity of california at berkeleythe causes and consequences for u.s. competitiveness and living standards of innovation by foreign nations and rms have been longstanding topics of scholarly and policy debate within the united states. during the 1960s and 1970s, much of this debate focused on u.s. multinational rms™ investment in offshore research and development (r&d) and production facilities, most of which were located in other industrial economies. concern was expressed that the transfer of technology by u.s. corporations through their offshore r&d and manufacturing investments would contribute to the growth of foreign competitors in these and other industries and reduce domestic employment opportunities. the debates of the 1980s and early 1990s adopted a slightly different tone, emphasizing the growth of foreign competitors in industries such as automobiles and semiconductors whose innovative performance and highquality products threatened the viability of u.s. rms (including multinational u.s. rms) and entire industrial sectors. these debates were concerned less with the offshore transfer of u.s. technological capabilities than with the threat posed by foreign rms™ competitive strengths.a previous volume (u.s. industry in 2000: studies in competitive performance) released by the national academies™ board on science, technology, and economic policy in 1999 argued that much of the pessimism of the 1980s and 1990s over u.s. industrial competitiveness proved to be exaggerated or misplaced. u.s. rms in a number of industries developed new business models and new products, which enabled them to address competitive threats with considerable success. in some cases, the responses of u.s. rms relied on their position within a large domestic market of innovative users who proved to be important sources for new ideas and products. in other cases, improvements in u.s. cominnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.2 innovation in global industriespetitive and innovative performance relied on the robust domestic ﬁr&d infrastructureﬂ comprising industrial, governmental, and university research facilities, much of which had beneted from large federal investments spanning the post1945 period. u.s. rms and consumers alike also beneted from lowcost imports of some products, such as personal computers and components that were critical inputs for the innovation and restructuring processes described in this volume.a more recent wave of concern over u.s. competitive prospects in the 21st century combines elements of all of these previous debates. the actions of many u.s. rms (not all of which can be considered multinational by any conventional denition) to ﬁoutsourceﬂ activities formerly undertaken by u.s.based professional, scientic, and engineering employees have raised widespread popular concerns over the erosion of employment opportunities in occupations and industries (including many service industries) that formerly were minimally exposed to foreign competition. at the same time, the growth of innovative and manufacturing capabilities in countries such as china, india, south korea, and taiwan has raised concerns over new sources of competition for u.s. rms. a 2006 study of u.s. competitiveness and innovative performance phrased these concerns as follows:. . . the committee is deeply concerned that the scientic and technological building blocks critical to our economic leadership are eroding at a time when many other nations are gathering strength. we strongly believe that a worldwide strengthening will benet the world™s economyšparticularly in the creation of jobs in countries that are far less welloff than the united states. but we are worried about the future prosperity of the united states. although many people assume that the united states will always be a world leader in science and technology, this may not continue to be the case inasmuch as great minds and ideas exist throughout the world. we fear the abruptness with which a lead in science and technology can be lostšand the difculty of recovering a lead once lost, if indeed it can be regained at all. (national research council, 2006, executive summary, p. 2)1a central issue in the long debate over u.s. competitiveness that is brie˚y summarized above is the processes through which industrial rms in the united states and other economies create innovative new products and processes. what has changed in the global and u.s. domestic economies to transform the near euphoria in popular evaluations of u.s. economic and innovative performance during the ﬁnew economyﬂ of the late 1990s to the concerns expressed by 1 a similar sentiment may be found in freeman (2005): ﬁbut the us will also face economic difculties as its technological superiority erodes. what is good for the world is not inevitably good for the u.s. the group facing the biggest danger from the loss of america™s technological edge are workers whose living standards depend critically on america™s technological superiority. the decline in monopoly rents from being the lead country will make it harder for the us to raise wages and benets to workers. the big winners from the spread of technology will be workers in developing countries, and the rms that employ them, including many u.s. multinational corporationsﬂ (p. 27).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 3the blueribbon panel cited above? in particular, what characteristics of the innovationrelated activities of u.s. and nonu.s. rms have changed since the late 1990s so signicantly to trigger these concerns? on the other hand, recognizing that many elements of this debate are not new but have been widely shared since the 1960s, what aspects have not changed in the innovationrelated competition in which u.s. and foreign rms nd themselves engaged? how well are scholars or policy makers able to measure any such change at a sufciently negrained level of analysis to inform such debates? finally, what are the implications for public policy of change in the structure (especially globalization) of u.s. rms™ innovationrelated activities? this volume examines these questions by providing detailed studies of structural change in the innovation process in 10 manufacturing and service industries.any study of issues related to innovation and competitiveness must address the widely held view that ﬁrms compete, nations don™t.ﬂ in other words, the innovationrelated and employment consequences of global competition are the result of privatesector investment and management decisionsšpublic policy is of little importance. just as it distorts reality to claim that international economic competition is solely a matter of competition among governments, the claim that private managers™ decisions are all that matter is also an oversimplication, particularly in light of the evidence presented in many of the chapters in this volume. the international performance of rms, including multinationals, is affected by policy and other economic conditions in their home countries. and this link is especially strong for rms™ innovationrelated activities, which rely on a complex infrastructure of public and private institutions devoted to knowledge creation and transmission, personnel training, and other activities. indeed, one of the most striking ndings in many of the chapters in this volume is the extent to which the inventive activities of rms in many knowledgeintensive industries remain concentrated in their home countries. simply put, both rms and nations matter.the step board studyrecognizing that the debate over the international transfer of technological and innovative capabilities and potential loss of u.s. competitiveness is a longrunning one, the science, technology, and economic policy (step) board of the national academies undertook a study in 20062007 of the changes in the structure of the innovation process that are associated with shifting perceptions of the competitive outlook for u.s. rms and domestic employment, especially in professional and engineering occupations.the step board study examined 10 industries: personal computers, software, semiconductors, ˚at panel displays, lighting, pharmaceuticals, biotechnology, logistics, venture capital, and nancial services. the choice of industries re˚ected several factors: (1) coverage of knowledgeintensive industries that have been the focus of many expressions of concern over waning u.s. technological strength; (2) inclusion of service industries, which historically have received little innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.4 innovation in global industriesattention in debates over foreign competition and innovation; and (3) the willingness of scholars who have conducted extensive research on these industries to examine the issues of change in the structure and globalization of innovationrelated activities. re˚ecting the study organizers™ interest in highlighting similarities and differences across industrylevel studies, we drew on scholars afliated with the industry centers established with initial nancial support from the alfred p. sloan foundation.the following is a summary of the ndings of each industry study.personal computingthe personal computer (pc) industry now operates as a global network of independent suppliers of systems, components, peripherals, and software. although the pace of innovation in the industry is rapid, its character now is largely incremental because of the dominance of the ﬁwintelﬂ pc architectural standard. one important future challenge is the integration of the pc with the proliferating array of consumer devices that ﬁorbit the userﬂ and provide computing and communication capability (e.g., pdas, phones, music players).the global division of innovationrelated activities within the industry is characterized as follows: componentlevel r&d (concept design and product planning) is performed in the united states and japan; applied r&d and development of new platforms (particularly notebook computers) take place in taiwan; and product development for mature products (mainly desktop computers) and a majority of production and sustaining engineering are performed in china.u.s. pc rms have beneted from the international division of labor in innovation that has supported rapid innovation and quicker integration of new technologies into new products. the growing demand for smaller, more mobile products plays to u.s. rms™ strengths in product architecture and early stage development. the shift in production activities away from the united states has pulled new product development activities to asia, but design jobs, which are relatively few in number, are expected to remain largely in the united states.softwareu.s. rms dominate global trade in both packaged software products and software services, although their leadership position is weakening in software services. important nonu.s. providers of software services are located in india (software services), ireland (software logistics, localization, and development), and israel (product development and r&d). despite some change in the location of leading providers of software services, there has been relatively little change in the location of new software product development. inventive software development activity (at least as measured by patents) is concentrated in the united states and is controlled by u.s. rms. some inventive activity by u.s. rms has innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 5shifted abroad but represents a relatively small share of the overall inventive activity of u.s. rms.the importance of repeated interaction between software developers and users is especially important in the early stages of complex projects, and the enormous size and sophistication of the u.s. market for software and services means that the united states is likely to retain its dominant role in this industry for some time to come. nonetheless, some software development activities will continue to move to offshore sites characterized by lower labor costs and highquality manpower. the chapter highlights the importance for the future u.s. software industry of federal support for computer science r&d in industry and academia in the face of continued upgrading of the capabilities of offshore sites for r&d and product development.semiconductorssignicant structural change occurred in the u.s. semiconductor industry during the 1990s. among the most important changes were shifts in markets for semiconductor component applications, changes in the location of production and geographic structure of markets for semiconductor components, and increased vertical specialization in industry structure. despite these changes, the contributions of ﬁoffshoreﬂ sites to u.s. semiconductor rms™ innovationrelated activities remain surprisingly modest. for example, process r&d remains predominantly ﬁhomeboundﬂšconcentrated in global semiconductor rms™ home countries. the patenting activity of u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor rms alike is similarly dominated by domestic inventive activity. the innovationrelated activities of global rms in this industry remain remarkably ﬁnonglobalized,ﬂ even in the face of greater international ˚ows of capital and technology, farreaching change in the structure of semiconductor manufacturing, and signicant shifts in the structure of demand.the vertically specialized industry structure that now characterizes the semiconductor industry has enabled u.s. rms specializing in design and marketing of semiconductor components to access global production networks and grow rapidly. nevertheless, continued growth in production capacity and design capabilities in southeast asia is likely to result in expanded offshore product design and development activity by u.s. rms and the entry of new rms based in this region.flat panel displaysthe ˚at panel display industry originated in the united states, but productionrelated activities quickly migrated to japan, followed by korea and taiwan, and now are expanding in china. innovation in the ˚at panel display industry has been driven by periodic shifts to larger ﬁform factorsﬂ (i.e., larger screens), which affect the design of new products and new manufacturing processes. innovative innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.6 innovation in global industriesactivity has tended to follow production investment in the industry because of the high demand for process innovation. the migration of production away from the united states means that u.s. rms play a limited but important role in the innovation process, primarily as suppliers of specialized components (e.g., glass substrates). the innovationrelated activities of these u.s. rms remain concentrated in the united states, although all of these rms have invested in offshore r&d and related activities that are located near major customers.lightingthe structure, characteristics, and location of innovation in lighting contrast with those of predecessor lighting technologies. the traditional lighting industry, which relied on incandescent, gasdischarge, and ˚uorescent technologies, was dominated by a threerm oligopoly (ge, philips, and osram) based in the united states and europe. all three rms still operate global production networks for the manufacture of traditional lighting products, but they face increased competition from lowcost southeast asian producers in traditional lighting products. moreover, the growth of markets for lighting technologies based on lightemitting diodes (leds) has begun to transform the competitive balance of the industry. the three dominant rms were slow to enter the led market and have subsequently utilized joint ventures and acquisitions for technological catchup, but they have failed to achieve market dominance in this technology.lighting innovation, which historically was dominated by the u.s. and european r&d facilities of the leading rms, has shifted to southeast asia. an analysis of patenting in lighting indicates that japanese and u.s. rms hold modest leadership positions in inventive activity, but their lead is shrinking as taiwanese and other southeast asian companies improve their r&d capabilities. most global rms have established asianbased manufacturing, engineering, and r&d operations, principally in japan and taiwan. the lighting industry also has developed a vertically specialized structure, with rms specializing in r&d, production, packaging, and other functions within the value chain.pharmaceuticalsthe structure of the u.s. pharmaceutical industry has been transformed since 1990 by the rise of biotechnology and intensied competition from global generic manufacturers. innovative activity in the industry (measured in terms of industrynanced r&d investment and patenting) is concentrated in the united states, some european union countries, and japan. u.s. pharmaceutical rms have been leading investors in offshore r&d, which has been concentrated in highincome economies, since the 1980s. important economic factors, such as localized knowledge spillovers, intellectual property protection, and government policies related to price regulation, state procurement of drugs, and health and innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 7safety regulation, have helped to reinforce this geographic concentration of innovative activity. nonetheless, increasing vertical specialization within the industry, as well as improvements in the scientic and engineering capabilities of nations such as india, has been associated with shifting some innovationrelated activities to offshore sites. thus far, the innovationrelated activities that have experienced some movement include manufacturing process innovation and clinical trials management.in some respects, the trends in offshore movement of pharmaceutical r&d resemble those in the u.s. software industry in the early 1990s. u.s. rms continue to dominate the innovative efforts of the industry, a position that has been reinforced considerably by large public investments in biomedical r&d in academic and government research facilities. the u.s. market is also an attractive site for product innovations, given the minimal price controls that characterize it at present.biotechnologyalthough it has attracted a great deal of attention from policy makers, investors, and entrepreneurs, the u.s. biotechnology industry employs a relatively small number of individuals overall, and even fewer scientists and engineers. the industry consists of several distinct segments that span biomedical, industrial, and agricultural biotechnology. development of the industry has been dominated by biomedical applications, for which prices and prots tend to be greatest. the biomedical segment is concentrated in particular regions in the united states and western europe, re˚ecting the importance of the interaction of biomedical biotechnology rms with sciencebased university research. although many countries around the world now ﬁhostﬂ a biotechnology industry (of varying importance), biotechnology activity within most of these nations is often centered in a single metropolitan area. nevertheless, an increasing number of distinct locations in the united states and an increasing number of countries support modest to signicant biotechnology activity.vertical specialization has played an important role in the development of the biomedical segment in particular, since many new rms in this segment serve as ﬁresearch boutiques,ﬂ conducting r&d in new drugs that are subsequently developed for commercial purposes by larger pharmaceutical rms. the biotechnology industry itself has experienced considerable vertical specialization, and (as in other industries examined in this volume) the development of a vertically specialized structure has tended to support the globalization of innovationrelated activities. based on its large academic and public biomedical r&d infrastructure, however, the united states remains the dominant location for advanced r&d and product development in the industry, and the growth of offshore r&d and related activities is likely to have a minor impact on u.s. employment in this industry for the foreseeable future.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.8 innovation in global industrieslogisticsthe logistics industry manages the planning and control of the ˚ow and storage of goods, services, and related information between the point of production and the point of consumption. the industry has expanded rapidly since 1990, in parallel with the globalization of manufacturing, and now includes a large number of specialized rms. innovation in logistics frequently occurs in response to new customer requirements, and this process in many respects resembles the ﬁcoinventionﬂ activity that typies innovation in computer software. advances in supporting technologies, such as information technology and communications, are another important source of innovation in logistics.close interaction between the developers and users of logistics services is essential to innovation, and the global spread of logistics networks has been associated with growth in the offshore innovationrelated activities of u.s. and nonu.s. logistics rms. nevertheless, analysis of logisticsrelated patents indicates that u.s. logistics rms specializing in information technology (it)related software and services remain dominant within the industry. as the logistics industry develops a more global structure, the role of governments in creating and enforcing intellectual property protection, in reducing trade barriers and standardizing import rules, and in supporting the training of managers, engineers, and technicians capable of furthering innovation will grow in importance.venture capitalthe venture capital (vc) ﬁindustryﬂ in its modern form emerged in the united states during the post1945 period. although the industry now operates globally, u.s. rms remain dominant. globalization of the vc industry has occurred through crossborder partnerships, the establishment by u.s. vc rms of overseas ofces, and expansion within the united states by foreign vc rms. this process is likely to continue as countries develop clusters of technological expertise that attract the attention and investments of vc rms throughout the global economy, as multinational corporations acquire more foreign startups, and as nancial markets throughout the world develop sufciently to support the liquidation by venture capitalists of their investments. indeed, in some important respects, globalization of innovation in vc re˚ects the growth of innovationrelated entrepreneurship in other economies.the primary focus of investments by u.s. and nonu.s. vc rms has been the it sector, including semiconductor, computer software, computer hardware, and related industries. indeed, the historic strength and innovative dynamism of the u.s. it sector is one factor behind u.s. vc rms™ dominant position in the industry. although the globalization of vc has not had negative consequences for the u.s. innovation system, u.s. vc rms will continue to expand their offshore activities and support the creation of foreign startups that compete directly innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 9against u.s. rms in the it and other hightechnology sectors. the effect of these investments will be strongly in˚uenced by most economies™ evolving regulatory and legal systems.financial servicesthe rapid expansion in offshore investment in business process support by u.s. nancial services rms has led to increased innovation within these offshore locations by subsidiaries of u.s. rms as well as independent providers of specialized services. the growth of vertical specialization within the global nancial services industry also has affected the structure of innovationrelated activities. there are strong complementarities between process and product innovation in this industry, but the offshore movement (mainly to asian countries) of ﬁbackofceﬂ functions has supported increased offshore innovation in these processing functions. firms based in highincome markets such as the united states and europe remain the primary sources of productoriented ﬁcustomerfacingﬂ innovations, but marketmediated interaction between end users and providers is less important to the process innovation activities of many of these offshore sites.what has changed since 1990?these summaries of structural change in the innovationrelated activities of the industries examined in the volume highlight four broader trends: (1) the growth of innovative capabilities in a number of foreign nations that 30 years ago were classied as ﬁdeveloping economies,ﬂ (2) the growth of sophisticated manufacturing and servicesproduction activities in these and other economies, (3) the growth of demand for cuttingedge technologies (particularly in it) in markets outside of the united states, and (4) the growth of ﬁvertical specializationﬂ in many knowledgeintensive industries. a discussion of each of these trends follows.improved innovative capabilities in new regions of the global economythe rst and perhaps most important of these trends is the growth of innovative capabilities in countries such as china, india, taiwan, and south korea, none of which were active in r&d or product development for global markets during the 1960s and 1970s. in some of these countries, indigenous rms or subsidiaries of foreign rms are performing fundamental research. in most of them, improvements in innovative capabilities have enhanced the ability of these countries to contribute to the design and development of advanced products, including those in servicebased industries such as nancial services and logistics. particularly in india and china, advances in regional innovative capabilities have been associated with growth in domestic scientic and engineering workforces.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.10 innovation in global industrieswith the important exception of india, whose role in the production of software and services has assuredly expanded, the transformation of these countries™ innovative capabilities has been linked to growth in the domestic manufacture (in some cases, in foreignowned facilities) of products for global markets in industries ranging from pcs to automobiles. and just as has been true of innovation in the industrial economies, the growth in innovationrelated activities within countries such as india, china, and taiwan has been associated with regional concentration and agglomerationšbangalore, shanghai, and hsinchu are examples of regional ﬁhightechnologyﬂ agglomerations in india, china, and taiwan, respectively.expansion of production activities outside of the united statesa second factor in the transformation of the innovation processes in the industries discussed in this volume is the expansion of production activities outside of the united states in these and other regions. the extent and timing of this expansion of offshore production vary among industries (e.g., offshore production is hardly a new feature of the automobile industry, but is less important in biotechnology). in a number of industries, however, ranging from semiconductors to ˚at panel displays and pcs, u.s. rms rely on sites outside of the united states (through ownership or contracts) for a growing share of their production requirements. much of this offshore expansion in manufacturing activity has occurred in asia and southeast asia, particularly in china, taiwan, and south korea. in the ˚at panel display industry, growth in asian production by u.s. rms and the entry into production by asian rms have ﬁpulledﬂ many innovationrelated activities (e.g., process innovation) to asian sites. increased offshore manufacturing by u.s. semiconductor rms, by contrast, has had more modest consequences for the location of innovationrelated activities. there is little evidence of shifts to offshore locations in the patenting activities of u.s. (or nonu.s.) semiconductor rms, and no evidence of offshore shifts in the location of processinnovation activities of u.s. semiconductor rms.growth in global ﬁproduction networksﬂ in many of the industries discussed in this volume has provided a powerful impetus for the expansion of logistics that has in turn spurred and depended on signicant innovation in the logistics industry. expanding offshore production and productdevelopment networks in industries such as semiconductors and software also has accelerated growth in foreign nations™ vc industries.the changing prole of demand for advanced products in foreign marketsyet another in˚uence on the movement of product design and development activities away from the united states in industries such as software, semiconinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 11ductors, and pcs is interregional shifts in the scope and sophistication of consumer demand. consumer markets for wireless and digital devices in countries such as south korea, for example, are growing more rapidly than are similar markets in the united states. equally important is the fact that many consumers in these markets (including rms producing advanced electronicsystems products) demand more advanced applications than is true of consumers elsewhere in the global economy. users play a crucial role in demanding and in some cases developing or ﬁcoinventingﬂ new applications in the aforementioned industries, as well as in logistics. firms seeking to exploit and develop new applications for these dynamic userdriven markets typically must locate a portion of their product development and design activities within these markets. in industries such as semiconductors, u.s. rms™ offshore design activities rely on close contacts with local rms who design and produce the new consumer products that incorporate advanced semiconductor components.the ﬁproduct cycleﬂ model that in˚uenced academic analysis of u.s. rms™ offshore manufacturing and r&d activities during the 1960s (vernon, 1966) posited that u.s. rms developed and introduced their most advanced products within their domestic market before marketing and (eventually) manufacturing these products offshore. although product demand in a number of the industries examined in this volume remains important, several of the most advanced markets in these industries now are located in foreign economies and, therefore, attract increased investment by u.s. rms seeking to develop advanced products. in effect, the product cycle has been reversed, with important implications for the location by u.s. rms of their product development activities.increased ﬁvertical specializationﬂstructural change in the industries examined in this volume has in˚uenced the shifting structure and location of innovationrelated activities. perhaps the most pervasive and important type of structural change, one that is observed in industries ranging from pcs to pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, is vertical specializationšthe development of an industry structure populated by rms that specialize in one or a limited set of activities who contract with other rms that specialize in different activities within the industry. for example, one group of rms in the pharmaceutical industry now focuses on drug discovery and contracts with other rms for drug development (e.g., clinical trials) and postapproval marketing. in semiconductors, manufacturing ﬁfoundriesﬂ collaborate on a contractual basis with ﬁfablessﬂ semiconductor rms that specialize in design and marketing of semiconductor components. this type of contractbased collaboration among specialized rms differs considerably from the operations of rms that are vertically integrated in all functions ranging from r&d through manufacturing to marketing.in many industries, vertical specialization has developed in parallel with (and innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.12 innovation in global industriesin many cases has accelerated) global shifts in production activities. the manufacturing specialists in semiconductors are largely located in asia, whereas fabless semiconductor rms remain largely based in the united states. similarly, the systems architecture, software operating systems, and semiconductor components within pcs are designed in the united states, but almost all production activity is located offshore and managed by rms not afliated with the u.s. semiconductor or software enterprises. moreover, the offshore manufacturers of pcs rely on specialized suppliers of components ranging from disk drives to displays.vertical specialization thus far has had varied effects on the location of innovationrelated activities in the industries discussed in this volume. although ˚at panel display production is located almost entirely outside of the united states, u.s. rms retain important roles in technology development (including investing in u.s.based r&d) as suppliers of specialized inputs and equipment. in pcs, vertical specialization has been associated with the geographic separation of manufacturing from highlevel design activities. although some semiconductor design activities have migrated to the east asian sites where the bulk of specialized semiconductor producers are located, u.s. sites retain an important role in advanced design activities. the location of u.s. pharmaceuticals and biotechnology r&d does not appear to have shifted in response to growing offshore drug production and marketing activities.in some industries, the factors determining the location of advanced r&d activities seem to differ signicantly from those in˚uencing the location of manufacturing. in semiconductors and pharmaceuticals, vertical specialization has supported the formation of new u.s.based rms whose business models rely on collaboration with offshore manufacturers. vertical specialization also has aided the growth of innovation and globalization in nancial services and logistics by facilitating the complex web of transactions that underpin the structure of these industries. but in other industries, such as lighting, shifts in the location of production have had signicant implications for the location of innovationrelated activities.what has not changed?although many aspects of the innovation process in the industries examined in this volume (as well as many others) have undergone signicant change since 1990, the broad economic and policy challenges associated with such structural change have changed little. in most of these industries, u.s.based rms continue to perform the majority of their (most advanced) r&d within the united states. inventive activity, as measured by the location of inventors for u.s. patents led by u.s.based rms, remains remarkably ﬁhomeboundﬂ in industries such as biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, semiconductors, and software.22 indeed, patentbased indicators suggest that the inventive activity of foreignbased rms in these industries also remains concentrated in their home countries.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 13nevertheless, in other industries, a growing share of the r&d and inventive activity at the technological frontier now appears to be located outside of the united states. in the lighting and ˚at panel display industries, nonu.s. rms and nations have become more prominent innovators since 1990. moreover, even within industries such as software or semiconductors, in which the inventive activity of u.s.based rms appears to be concentrated in the united states, a substantial (and poorly measured) portion of the design and development of new products has moved offshore, either to exploit lower labor costs or to collaborate more closely with innovative users. as we noted earlier, however, the ability to exploit offshore innovative talent has supported the entry and growth of numerous u.s. rms pursuing new business models and technology strategies.thus, economic change has affected the structure of the innovation process in all of the industries studied. the characteristics of structural change in virtually all of these industries resemble those emphasized in the analyses of u.s. competitiveness highlighted earlier: industries and activities in which u.s. workers (dened in this case to include scientists and engineers) add less value are the most vulnerable to foreign competition and the most likely ones to move to foreign sites. the improved capabilities of scientists and engineers in many of these foreign locations, the identity of these locations themselves, and the changing outlook of demand and growth in the u.s. and foreign markets, however, may be causing more rapid shifts in competitive advantage and affecting a broader range of activities, including innovationrelated activities, than in earlier decades. nevertheless, the fundamental conclusion remains unchanged: for u.s. rms, consumers, and workers to prot from the expanding opportunities in the global economy, their innovative and productivity performance must continue to improve; the u.s. economy must remain open to in˚ows of goods, technology, and capital; and the infrastructure underpinning the domestic u.s. r&d ﬁsystemﬂ must remain highly innovative and attractive as a site for investment by u.s. and nonu.s. rms alike.another important element of continuity that contemporary analyses of innovation and globalization share with earlier discussions of this topic is the poor quality of the data on which they rely. as the previous step board study (u.s. industry in 2000) noted, restructuring in the domestic and international r&d systems means that conventional r&d investment data are less reliable as a guide to structural change in the innovation process. the r&d investment data collected by the national science foundation (nsf) and other public statistical agencies in the united states and other industrial economies arguably do not include a number of the activities (e.g., product design, or spending by rms on acquisitions as a means of gaining access to new technologies or capabilities) that play a central role in the innovation process of the 21st century. moreover, the nsf data provide limited information on the international dimensions of r&d investment by u.s. and nonu.s. rms. these problems with the r&d investment data have been the subject of a number of studies by the step board, the national research council, and other expert panels, but the fact remains that much of the innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.14 innovation in global industriesanalysis of globalization in the innovation process is hampered by limited, dated, and imperfect data and indicators. these data limitations are especially serious for servicebased industries, which have expanded their investment in r&d and offshore production signicantly since 1990.a number of the chapters in this volume rely on patent data to supplement the limited r&d investment data available for their industry. patent data have a number of advantages, including their disaggregation into specic technology classes, and their reporting of both the assignment and geographic location of the patent owner(s). nevertheless, patents have important disadvantages as well. they measure inventive activity, which is an important input to the overall process of commercial innovation, but do not measure the output of the innovation process. the coverage by patents of even inventive activity within different industries and technology classes also varies, as does their commercial and economic value among elds of invention. equally important is the fact that the grant of a patent follows a period of review of the patent application that typically takes at least 18 months and frequently requires 3 to 5 years. therefore, patent data provide a ﬁretrospectiveﬂ measure of inventive activity occurring as many as 5 years ago, and this inventive activity itself results from investments in r&d and other activities made still earlier. although patent data represent a valuable additional set of indicators of innovationrelated activities in a much more complex global economic environment, their limitations must be kept in mind.yet another area in which the quality of available data makes it difcult to draw denitive conclusions is the effects on domestic scientic and engineering employment from the globalization of innovationrelated activities that is occurring in many of these industries. data on industrywide employment trends for scientists and engineers in many of these industries (e.g., logistics, venture capital, pcs, software) do not exist, re˚ecting the complex structure of the industries and the outdated structure of publicly available data on industry employment. moreover, the central topic of these chapters is not shifts in the location of these industries but shifts in the location of specic functions within these industries. and many of the trends described in these chapters (e.g., greater reliance on advanced information and communications technologies, vertical specialization) facilitate the geographic separation of different activities within industries, rather than the relocation of entire industries.33 the distinction is an important one, since the gloomy predictions made by freeman (2005) and others assume that the united states will lose its historic dominance in knowledgeintensive industries as a result of the growing technological and scientic capabilities and workforce in nations such as india and china. what these chapters indicate is that some specic functions (e.g., product manufacture, software coding, product development) may shift to offshore locations. but these shifts need not pull other knowledgeintensive activities in their wake, and in some cases (as in semiconductors) these shifts in location create opportunities for the growth of new rms in the united states. the freeman predictions cannot be dismissed, although branstetter and foley (2007) present a more skeptical view of the current level of mne r&d and innovation within china. nevertheless, the trends described in innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 15the chapters in this volume on semiconductors, software, and pcs all conclude that the employment consequences for scientists and engineers from the restructuring of innovationrelated activities thus far are modest and not clearly negative or positive. indeed, leading u.s. rms in these itrelated industries consistently complain about the lack of sufcient immigration visas to hire foreignborn engineers needed to address shortages (lohr, 2007).4 it is also difcult if not impossible to separate the ﬁcontributions,ﬂ negative or positive, to scientic and engineering employment of the globalization of an industry™s innovationrelated activities from myriad other factors.overall, therefore, the data underpinning the conclusions of all of the chapters in this volume provide a clearer understanding of the past than they do of the future. although the nature of the innovation process is such that the nearterm future is not likely to differ radically from the recent past, the fact remains that the data underpinning detailed industry studies such as these provide a limited foundation for forecasts.policy issues and challengesthe fundamental challenges for policy created by the processes of globalization described in this volume have changed little from those described in studies of this topic that date back to the 1960s and 1970s. to preserve and expand employment in the functions and professions that benet from the globalization of innovation, the united states must sustain the high levels of innovative performance that have supported the competitiveness of u.s. industry and have made the united states a major destination for r&d investment from foreign rms. among other things, this goal means that support for the ﬁr&d infrastructureﬂ that decades of public and private investment have created must be strengthened. this volume re˚ect a different process of economic change. indeed, it is highly plausible that stronger scientic and engineering capabilities in india and china will produce effects similar to those observed after japanese and european ﬁconvergenceﬂ with u.s. levels of innovationrelated expertise, as bhagwati et al. (2004) point out: ﬁwhen the revival of europe and japan brought their skill levels closer to those of the united states, the gains from trade induced by ‚factor endowment differences™ were increasingly replaced by gains from ‚intraindustry™ trade; for example, the united states now specializes in highend chips such as pentium, while leaving more standard semiconductor chips to foreign producers. similarly, we can condently expect ‚intraservice™ and ‚intraindustry™ trade to grow between the united states on the one hand and india and china on the other as the latter acquire more skillsﬂ (p. 108). alternatively (and equally plausibly), one may observe growth in ﬁintrafunctionﬂ trade within such activities as new product development, based on the same factors. 4 h1b visas are given to foreign workers with hightechnology skills or in specialty occupations by the citizenship and immigration services agency. u.s. companies seek h1b visas on behalf of foreign scientists and engineers to ll hiring shortfalls, but congress mandates that the agency cap the number of visas granted to 65,000. some claim that u.s. h1b visa policies are counterproductive and detrimental to u.s. technological and economic competitiveness, while others see them as critical to protecting domestic workers. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.16 innovation in global industriesthis infrastructure has supported investment and innovation by u.s. and foreign rms in the industries examined in this volume, as well as others, and has yielded great benets to u.s. consumers.other developing and developed countries now recognize the importance of such an infrastructure and, in many respects, are emulating u.s. policies by making similar public and private investments. a failure by the united states to maintain its commitment to the strength and quality of its public and private r&d infrastructure could limit the benets for u.s. citizens of the globalization of innovationrelated activities described in this volume. here, as elsewhere, the competitive dynamics should not be seen as a ﬁzerosumﬂ competitionšu.s. citizens benet from higher levels of r&d investment by foreign governments, just as foreign citizens have beneted from u.s. public r&d investment. but the mobility of innovationrelated activities means that the united states must remain an attractive site for these activities by u.s. and nonu.s. rms in order to maintain employment opportunities for skilled personnel.beyond sustaining this infrastructure, however, public policies must ensure that government r&d investments yield the highest possible public returns. achieving this goal means that universityindustry research collaboration should be supported by public policy, without imperiling the critical role of u.s. universities as educational institutions that produce worldclass scientists and engineers. any obstacles to such collaboration imposed by shortsighted university patenting and licensing policies also should be reviewed critically by university administrators, industry managers, and policy makers.5 as thursby and thursby (2006) note, one of the most important in˚uences on the location of multinational corporations™ advanced scientic research facilities is proximity and access to university researchers. u.s. universities, like u.s. rms, face growing competition from foreign institutions for industrysupported collaborative r&d and must adjust their policies toward intellectual property management accordingly. policies that limit federal support for academic research on politically sensitive topics such as embryonic stem cells also reduce the attractiveness of u.s. universities as research collaborators and therefore weaken the ﬁmagnetic forceﬂ of these important institutional assets for r&d investment in the united states from foreign sources.users of advanced technologies play an important role in innovation in many of the industries examined in this volume, especially those in the it sector. prox5 ﬁlargely as a result of the lack of federal funding for research, american universities have become extremely aggressive in their attempts to raise funding from large corporations. . . . large us based corporations have become so disheartened and disgusted with the situation they are now working with foreign universities, especially the elite institutions in france, russia and china, which are more than willing to offer extremely favorable intellectual property termsﬂ (testimony before the subcommittee on science, technology, and space, u.s. senate commerce committee of r. stanley williams, september 17, 2002; statement reproduced at http://www.memagazine.org/contents/current/webonly/webex319.html; accessed april 2, 2005).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.introduction 17imity to sophisticated users is an important factor in the decisions of u.s. rms to locate a portion of their innovationrelated activities offshore. an important part of the r&d infrastructure that attracts (or retains) investment in innovationrelated activities supports userdriven applications in advanced technologies. one of the most celebrated recent examples of investment in such infrastructure was the public investment in the computernetworking infrastructure (originally referred to as arpanet) that laid the foundations for the internet. u.s. policy supported public and private investments in the networking technology and infrastructure, and u.s. trade policy encouraged widespread imports and adoption by users of lowcost desktop computing hardware. these policies helped create a large domestic ﬁtestbedﬂ for demanding users of computing technology to develop new applications, which in turn helped propel the explosive growth during the 1990s of commercial investment in internetrelated rms (mowery and simcoe, 2002).one contemporary (and closely related) equivalent to the computernetworking infrastructure of the arpanet and nsfnet is broadband communications technology, which remains less widely available in the united states than in other (notably nordic) nations (turner, 2006). moreover, differences in such access between urban and rural users depress the size of the domestic market for advanced applications developed on this testbed by innovative users. broadband access is an indispensable foundation for continued growth in the userdriven innovation that now is prominent in many of these industries. in this area, as well as others affecting the viability of userled innovation, public policy and private investment should support the development of widely accessible testbeds for sophisticated users to develop new applications and business models. such an infrastructure could support the development of new rms and industries from domestic sources, investments in related elds from foreign rms, and continued innovation and growth in the u.s. economy.the broader process of economic globalization, of which the restructuring of innovationrelated activities is one part, is on the whole benecial for the united states. consumers benet from higherquality, lowercost, and more innovative products; employees benet from the ability to exploit their skills in a global rather than a domestic market; rms benet from lower costs and economies of specialization through vertical specialization and increased collaboration; and the processes of trade liberalization can have benecial political consequences for international relations as well. in addition, of course, literally millions of nonu.s. citizens benet from the expanded economic opportunities in their home nations provided by the process of economic globalization.nevertheless, the distributional consequences of trade liberalization and globalization are signicant, and, in a democracy, the political effects of worker displacement and ˚at or declining wages can intensify resistance to trade liberalization. these concerns are affected much more by relocation of manufacturing and services employment, rather than by change in the structure of innovationinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.18 innovation in global industriesrelated activities, and raise issues that go far beyond the focus of the studies in this volume. nevertheless, in the absence of more effective policies within the united states to address the legitimate concerns and needs of the domestic economic ﬁlosersﬂ from globalization, political resistance to policies seeking to further liberalize international ˚ows of trade and investment seems likely to grow. and such political resistance has the potential to undercut the globalization in innovationrelated activities that has proven highly benecial to u.s. and nonu.s. citizens alike.acknowledgmentsresearch for this chapter was supported by the alfred p. sloan foundation, the ewing m. kauffman foundation, and the andrew w. mellon foundation. a portion of david mowery™s research was supported by the national science foundation (ses0531184).referencesbhagwati, j., a. panagariya, and t. n. srinavasan. (2004). the muddles over outsourcing. journal of economic perspectives 18(4):93114.branstetter, l., and c. f. foley. (2007). facts and fallacies about u.s. fdi in china. national bureau of economic research working paper #13470.freeman, r. b. (2005). does globalization of the scientic/engineering workforce threaten u.s. economic leadership. national bureau of economics working paper 11457, pp. 147.lohr, s. (2007). parsing the truths about visas for tech workers. new york times. april 15.mowery, d. c., and t. s. simcoe. (2002). is the internet a u.s. invention?šan economic and technological history of computer networking. research policy 31:13691387.national academy of sciences, national academy of engineering, institute of medicine. committee on prospering in the global economy of the 21st century. (2006). rising above the gathering storm: energizing and employing america for a brighter economic future. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.thursby, j., and m. thursby. (2006). where is the new science in corporate r&d. science 314: 15471548.turner, s. d. (2006). broadband reality check ii: the truth behind america™s digital decline. consumers union 144.vernon, r. (1966). international investment and international trade in the product cycle. quarterly journal of economics 80:190207.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.19 1 personal computingjason dedrickuniversity of california at irvinekenneth l. kraemeruniversity of california at irvineintroductionaugust 2006 marked the 25th anniversary of the release of the original ibm personal computer (pc), the product that dened the standards around which a vast new industry formed. unlike the vertically integrated mainframe industry, the pc industry consisted of a global network of independent suppliers of systems, components, peripherals, and software (grove, 1999; dedrick and kraemer, 1998). the key factor shaping the industry™s structure was the design of the ibm pc as a modular, open system with standard interfaces, which allowed many newcomers to enter the market by specializing in one industry segment and developing innovations that could be integrated into any ibmcompatible system. it also permitted producers of parts, components, and systems to achieve global economies of scale as most of the world adopted the ibm standard. in time, desktop pcs were joined by portable laptop/notebook pcs and pc servers as the industry innovated on this common standard.today, the core personal computing industry includes not only traditional desktop and laptop pcs and pc servers but also smart handheld devices such as personal digital assistants (pdas) and smart phones. this core industry is supported by a large number of component suppliers, manufacturing services and logistics providers, distributors, retailers, service specialists, and others. these companies also support other segments of the electronics industry, and so are counted here not as part of the pc industry but as part of its overall production and innovation network. this network not only supports innovation in the core industry segments but also provides the necessary infrastructure for innovations innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.20 innovation in global industriesin newer product categories such as ultramobile pcs, mp3 players (e.g., the ipod), and smart phones.worldwide revenues for the core pc industry totaled $235 billion in 2005: $191 billion in desktop and portable pcs, $28 billion in pc servers, and $16 billion in smart handheld devices (idc, 2006a). in addition, pc software accounts for about half of the packaged software industry, whose 2006 sales were $225 billion, and pc use also drives sales of information technology (it) services and of other hardware such as storage, peripherals, and networking equipment (idc, 2006c).the pc has undergone considerable innovation and change since it was rst introduced. the traditional pc is no longer expected to be the sole locus of innovation in the future, but simply one of many devices ﬁorbiting the userﬂ (economist, 2006). communications devices (phones, pdas) have acquired computing capabilities and people now send email with a blackberry or download music on a mobile phone. digital photos can be transferred from a camera to a pc and uploaded to a website, transferred directly to a printer, or shot and emailed with a mobile phone. and although the traditional desktop and laptop pc is becoming less central to all computing activities, over 225 million pcs were sold in 2006 and the pc is often the rst place to nd innovations that may migrate later to other devices.as important as product innovation has been, equally important is the steady price declines in recent years, which have brought pcs within the reach of more of the world™s population. emerging markets such as china and india are growing much faster than the more mature developed markets, and pc makers have begun to focus on innovation that addresses the needs of those markets at low prices. globalization of production has been credited for making computer hardware 10 to 30 percent cheaper than it would be otherwise (mann, 2003). the availability of ever cheaper, smaller, and more powerful hardware has continued to expand the market and has stimulated ongoing innovation in hardware, software, and services.although globalization has been a major factor in the growth and innovation of the pc industry, it raises issues for u.s. companies, government and other institutions, and workers. u.s. pc makers are struggling to eke out a prot in an environment of falling prices and intense international competition. government policy issues include tax incentives, antitrust, immigration, and market access. universities must ensure that they are training people with the skills that industry needs, and workers must invest their own time and money to acquire those skills even as more highly skilled knowledge work is moved offshore.the impacts of globalization have been debated extensively. an optimistic view is that u.s. rms are outsourcing and offshoring lowerend manufacturing and routine engineering work, freeing resources to focus on more dynamic innovation that will sustain protability and create new jobs in the united states. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 21a more pessimistic view is that innovation will follow manufacturing offshore, leaving u.s. rms uncompetitive and draining the united states of the innovation that drives growth and employment (kotkin and friedman, 2004).while macrolevel data can be useful in analyzing the impacts of globalization, trends and impacts can be easier to spot at the industry level, especially when looking at more dynamic industries where change is happening faster. personal computing is one such industry. therefore, this chapter examines the globalization of innovation in the pc industry, its causes, its impacts, and its strategy and policy implications. the focus is mainly on innovationrelated activities in u.s.branded pc companies set in their global context; it is not an analysis of pc companies in other economies such as japan, taiwan, or china, although it brings them in as part of the global supply chain and the competitive context.this chapter is a factbased analysis grounded in over 200 personal interviews with industry executives in the united states and asia, data from the international data corporation (idc), taiwan™s market intelligence center, reed electronics research and other sources, published empirical research, and our study of the industry for over 20 years.we nd that the global division of innovationrelated activities can be characterized as follows: componentlevel research and development (r&d), concept design, and product planning are performed mostly in the united states and japan; applied r&d and development of new platforms mostly take place in taiwan; and product development for mature products and a majority of production and sustaining engineering are performed in china.u.s. pc rms have beneted from this international division of labor, which has supported rapid innovation and quicker integration of new technologies into their products. the growing demand for smaller, more mobile products plays to u.s. rms™ strengths in product architecture and earlystage development. their bigger problem is earning prots from innovation in an industry dominated by microsoft and intel, who capture very high prot margins thanks to their control of key standards. from the perspective of u.s. knowledge workers, the situation is more mixed. the shift in production away from the united states has pulled many new product development jobs to asia, whereas design and earlystage development work has remained largely in the united states. still, the new jobs created by the industry™s growth are largely outside of the united states. finally, consumers in the united states have been clear beneciaries of the very low cost structure that globalization has produced in pcs as average selling prices have been reduced continually.following this introduction, the structure of this chapter is as follows. the section ﬁinnovation in the industryﬂ analyzes the nature of innovation in pcs and how production and innovation are organized across the value network. ﬁchanging international structure of demand and supplyﬂ describes international trends in pc demand and production. the fourth section, ﬁglobalization of innovation,ﬂ innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.22 innovation in global industriesreviews the global structure of innovation in the pc industry and the factors driving globalization. ﬁimplications of globalization of innovationﬂ considers the implications of the foregoing trends for rm strategy and u.s. national policy.innovation in the industrythe pc industry has introduced many innovations in its 25year history. product innovation includes the creation of new product categories such as notebook pcs and pdas, as well as the creation of new product platforms such as multimedia pcs and wireless ﬁmobilityﬂ notebooks. the scope and outcome of product innovation in pcs is shaped by the presence of global architectural standards set originally by ibm and now largely controlled by microsoft and intel. common interface standards enable innovators to reach a global market with standard product lines; thus, economies of scale can be achieved to support investments in product development and manufacturing capacity. this is different from other industries, such as mobile phones or video games, in which multiple incompatible standards exist. an example of the benets of standardization is the acceptance of 802.11 as a common standard, which spurred the introduction of wireless networking as a standard feature on notebook pcs. on the other hand, standardization battles can constrain innovation because pc makers are reluctant to incorporate technologies before a standard is set, as is the case with secondgeneration dvd technology.when pc makers do innovate, they face hard choices in trying to capture prots from their innovations. one alternative is to incorporate the innovation only in their own products to differentiate their pcs from those of competitors, but there is a question of whether they can convince customers to pay for the differentiation and also whether customers will want to adopt a nonstandard technology. another is to license the technology broadly, which might bring in license fees and even establish the technology as an industry standard, but which will eliminate product differentiation. one current example is hewlettpackard™s (hp™s) personal media drive (pmd), a portable hard drive that slides into a special slot in hp media center pcs. hp incorporated the special slot into some of its own products, while letting customers connect the pmd to competitors™ pcs using a slower usb connection, thus differentiating hp™s pcs. by contrast, hp has licensed its lightscribe technology, for labeling dvds and cds, to other pc makers. in either case, it can be difcult to translate innovation into prots sufcient to justify the r&d effort.despite these challenges, which may discourage more fundamental product innovation, pc makers are pushed to incremental innovation by component makers (such as for semiconductors, storage, or power supply) who introduce frequent changes in their products (faster speed, greater capacity, smaller form factor, longer life) in efforts to gain greater market share within their industry sector. they also are pushed by consumers who want the latest technologies. pc innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 23makers feel they have to adopt these oftenincremental changes rather than risk being left behind by a competitor that does adopt.as a result, pc makers have tended to concentrate on operational efciency, marketing, and distribution rather than trying to use product differentiation as a source of sustainable competitive advantage (porter, 1996). product innovation at the system level tends to be incremental and emphasizes developing slightly different products for narrowly dened market niches, such as pc gamers who demand high performance or business travelers who desire ultralight notebooks, rather than more distinctively innovative products.1 instead, most product innovation occurs upstream in components and software, which are then incorporated by pc makers.consistent with the emphasis on efciency and distribution, the industry has introduced business process innovations such as outsourced manufacturing, using the internet as a direct sales channel, vendormanaged inventory, thirdparty logistics, and buildtoorder (bto) production. at the plant level, some rms have replaced assembly lines with small production cells to facilitate bto production and have adopted process improvements such as reducing the number of steps and improving quality in nal assembly. they also have employed a range of information technologies such as shop ˚oor management systems, bar coding, and automated software downloads to improve manufacturing performance (kraemer et al., 2000). however, while early adoption of these innovations beneted some companies, particularly dell inc., competing pc makers have since adopted these and other process innovations and closed the gap on key measures such as inventory turnover and time to market for new products (dedrick and kraemer, 2005). today, most companies use a mix of buildtoforecast and bto processes that is optimal for their targeted markets. the result is greater efciency in the industry as a whole, but the biggest benets have not gone to the pc makers. they have mostly gone to consumers in the form of lower prices, and to microsoft and intel, as software and microprocessors account for an ever greater share of the total cost of a pc.2to understand innovation in the industry, it is important to look at the structure of the innovation network, the innovation processes, the key personal computing products, and interdependencies among innovation processes, products, and the structure of the network.1 an exception is apple, which emphasizes attractive design and close integration of hardware and proprietary software in its products. while this has been very successful in its ipod line, apple™s market share in pcs is under 4 percent worldwide, so it is unclear that its innovative pcs have done more than satisfy a small core of mac users who are willing to pay a premium for its products. by adopting intel processors for all of its products, apple has abandoned its proprietary hardware platform in favor of global economies of scale and greater compatibility with windows pcs.2 even these two face challenges: intel from amd and microsoft from linux in one product category (servers).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.24 innovation in global industriesthe innovation networkthe pc industry™s innovation network consists of component makers, contract manufacturers (cms) and original design manufacturers (odms), branded pc rms, distributors, and resellers (figure 1).3the industry can be characterized as horizontally specialized, with the branded rms as the ﬁsystem integratorsﬂ doing design and outsourcing development and production to cms or odms. there are less than a dozen globally competitive pc makers and many smaller local assemblers, supported by another dozen major cms and odms. there are several major suppliers of most key components (e.g., motherboards, hard drives, displays, optical drives, memory, and batteries). farther upstream in the supply chain, there are several thousand suppliers of less expensive parts and components, most of which are small and mediumsized rms. distribution is mostly decentralized and local, although there are a few large distributors who operate internationally such as ingram micro, tech data, and arrow electronics. our main focus in this chapter is on the branded pc vendors and odms who collaborate to bring new products to market using components from upstream suppliers.most r&d is done upstream in the industryšby the suppliers of microprocessors, software, peripherals, and components. this innovation is global in the sense that there are major component makers in the united states (microprocessors, graphics, memory, hard drives, networking, software), japan (liquid crystal displays [lcds], memory, hard drives, batteries), korea (lcds, memory), and taiwan (lcds, memory, optical drives, power supply, various peripherals). however, although some companies have set up r&d labs around the world, most r&d is still done in the home country. some pc makers such as hp, toshiba, sony, and samsung also make components and peripherals, but these are generally done in separate business units who sell to competing pc makers as well as their internal pc units.the pace of this upstream innovation is a major factor shaping innovation by branded pc vendors who innovate through ﬁsystems integration.ﬂ the pc vendors identify new product markets and design systems that incorporate new technologies to serve those markets. for instance, pc makers identied mobile pc users who want network access without having to plug into a phone line or local area network. this capability was made possible when wireless networking technologies such as wifi were introduced by component makers. it was then up to pc makers to incorporate the technology into their products. more impor3 the terms contract manufacturer and original design manufacturer are used commonly, but not always consistently, in the electronics industry. contract manufacturers provide a range of manufacturing services, including subassembly, nal assembly, logistics, and even customer service. original design manufacturer is a term coined in taiwan when its contract manufacturers began to offer product design and engineering as well as manufacturing of notebooks, motherboards, and other products.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 25pc industry1.epsproduct innovationcustomer relations component supplierscontract manufacturers/odmsdirectpc vendorsindirectdistributorscomponent supplierscomponent supplierscomponent supplierscustomersr& ddesignengineering manufacturingassemblydistributionsales, serviceactivitiescomponents, subassemblies, boxbuildscomplete systemsresellersoperationsfigure 1 the pc industry innovation network. source: adapted from curry and kenney (1999).tant, they had to introduce a new technology at a time when the infrastructure to support wireless networking was nearly nonexistent, hoping that this would create the impetus for rms and consumers to invest in wireless networks. apple initially jumped in by incorporating 802.11 wireless technology in all of its notebooks, and was soon followed by other pc makers. soon, wireless networks were available in ofces, homes, schools, airports, and coffee shops around the world. apple™s early decision was very risky, as there were few networks available, but taking the risk helped to create the market for them.the creation of new markets by pc makers, in turn, can shape the direction of upstream innovation in components. for wireless notebooks, pc vendors had to decide which networking standard(s) to incorporate as well as nd components with low power consumption, longer battery life, and light weight. available components seldom meet all these needs, so the lead pc vendors each developed their own product roadmaps, which signal to the component suppliers where the rm is headed, the target markets and expected volumes, and the price and performance of components needed to succeed. by doing so, they provided advance knowledge to the upstream suppliers who could respond in terms of feasibility, aggregate demand across pc vendors, plan for the coming changes, and inform their own suppliers. these pc maker roadmaps, which are different from those innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.26 innovation in global industriesprovided by intel and microsoft to the pc makers, are essential to knowledge integration along the supply chain.innovation processesproduct innovation in the industry occurs through two broad processesšr&d and new product development. r&d is an ongoing activity that generates knowledge that can be applied to multiple products. new product development is a multistage process of design, development, and production that creates physical products for target markets.4 although conceptually distinct, there is often a close interaction between the two in practice. new product development integrates knowledge developed by r&d, and r&d is often called on to solve a specic problem in product development. given that most r&d is done upstream by the component suppliers, the process of knowledge integration occurs between the supplier and the pc maker. the focus is on knowledge needed to integrate a standard component, but occasionally it involves customization or even more intensive joint development. this is especially the case when an entirely new product is being created, such as the wireless notebook that requires integration of communication technologies, or in the case of a new product category such as the apple ipod.products and innovation activitiesalthough new form factors are emerging, desktops and notebooks remain the leading products in the industry, with important differences between them that affect innovation activities. for desktops, product innovation mainly centers on conventional systems integrationšincorporating new parts, components, and software into a system and ensuring that they work together. the system is largely standardized with respect to components, parts, and interfaces. so innovation involves the selection of components to be included for different target markets (e.g., home, ofce, game, ﬁvalueﬂ or ﬁpowerﬂ user). most use a standard full tower or midtower chassis with industrial design applied mainly to the bezel (face) to re˚ect a certain brand image. a few newer models aimed at consumers™ living rooms have moved away from the ﬁbeige boxﬂ to smaller and more stylish designs with unique chassis and industrial designs. pc vendors generally keep concept design and product planning inhouse for close control over brand image, user interface, features, cost, and quality. outsourcing of physical development has occurred in a series of steps since the mid1990sšrst motherboard design, then mechanical design, system test, and nally software build and validation. 4 a detailed discussion of these phases and the activities within each is provided by dedrick and kraemer (2006b).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 27intel facilitated this trend by providing support and reference designs to odms who develop motherboards and full systems.for notebooks, innovation involves highlevel system integration with complex mechanical, electrical, and software challenges. design of such a small form factor presents special challenges with respect to heat dissipation, electromagnetic interference, and power consumption, while the need for portability requires greater ruggedness. although components such as disk drives and ˚at panels are mostly standardized, notebooks involve many custom parts. for example, to t the modular components within the notebook chassis, the motherboard and battery pack may have to be customized for each notebook model. the chassis and other mechanical parts require custom tooling.pc vendors usually keep notebook design inhouse but coordinate physical development jointly with the odm because there is a strong interdependency between the physical product development and manufacturing. it is critical that product development take manufacturability into account from the beginning; otherwise a product may be developed that cannot be produced at the necessary volume, cost, or quality. most notebook pcs are designed to be built in a particular assembly plant with specic manufacturing process requirements. as a result, product development and nal assembly are almost always handled by one company. in some cases, this means the pc maker keeps both inhouse. in most cases it means outsourcing both development and manufacturing of each model to a single odm.thus, the interdependencies of pc form factors and new product development (npd) activities have led to different organizational arrangements for desktops and notebooks (figure 2). because desktops are less complex and more standardized, a complete product specication can be handed off for development and production to odms, or a fully developed product can be turned over to a cm for manufacturing. however, because of their greater complexity and customization, notebooks tend to be designed and developed jointly by the pc vendors and odms.pc industry2.epsr&ddesigndevelopmentproductionnotebookms/intel,componentspcvendorsodmsdesktopms/intel,componentspcvendorscms/odmsnew product developmentfigure 2 organization of innovation for desktops and notebooks.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.28 innovation in global industriesas a result of the interdependencies in notebook pc development, leading pc makers hp and dell have set up design centers in taiwan to work closely with odms, whereas others frequently send staff from the united states. the odms may divide product development and manufacturing between taiwan and china but keep very close interaction between the two locations. for desktops, it is easier to separate development and manufacturing geographically as well as across rm boundaries.changing international structure of demand and supplytrends in demandpc demand has been shifting steadily for over a decade toward smaller, more integrated, and more communicationsoriented products. the global demand for pcs is changing in terms of form factor, commercial versus consumer markets, and regional consumption. portable devices (laptops and notebooks) are the fastest growing form factor, totaling 32 percent of unit demand in 2005 compared to just 10 percent in 1990 (figure 3), and are expected to exceed desktops in the next 5 years (idc, 2006b). other portable devices such as smart phones have seen rapid growth as well. this means that there will be more demand for complex pc industry3.eps01020304050607080901001990199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005percentage desktopsportablesfigure 3 global demand for desktops and portables, 19902005 (percent of units sold). source: juliussen (2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 29innovation in concept, design, and engineering in the future and that coordination among these stages will have to become closer.continued price and performance gains in key components as well as the shift of production to lowercost locations have driven prices lower, expanding overall demand for pcs. one impact is in consumer markets, whose share of the total market increased from 28 to 38 percent between 1994 and 2005 (figure 4). another impact is in emerging country markets where economic growth is providing the income to afford these evercheaper pcs. although north and south america are still the biggest market in the world, followed by europe, the middle east, and africa (emea), the asiapacic region is the fastestgrowing market (figure 5). the united states is the single largest market, with 61 million units shipped in 2005, but fastgrowing china has surpassed japan as the second biggest market.pc industry4.eps01020304050607080199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005ww consumer ww commercial percentagefigure 4 global pc consumption by commercial/consumer markets (percent of units sold). source: idc (2006d).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.30 innovation in global industriespc industry5.eps051015202530354045501990199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005percentage the americasemeaasiapacificfigure 5 global pc consumption by region, 19902005 (percent of units sold). source: juliussen (2006).geographic location of productionwith desktop pcs, nal assembly by the branded vendors historically was located close to enduser demand because of logistics (they are too heavy to ship affordably by air) and greater customization for national or regional markets. major pc vendors such as ibm, compaq, hp, apple, and gateway initially had their own production facilities in each world region, but they later outsourced production to cms such as sci, flextronics, solectron, mitac, and foxconn (the registered trade name of hon hai precision industry co.), starting in the late 1990s. dell kept nal assembly inhouse, but it outsourced base unit production, including chassis with cables, connectors, drive bays, fans, and power supplies. japanese and asian vendors generally kept production inhouse.as the branded pc vendors moved offshore and then outsourced, there was a shift in the location of production from the americas and emea to the asiapacic region (figure 6). initially, production was spread throughout east asia in japan, malaysia, singapore, taiwan, and korea. production of desktop base units and various components and subassemblies by taiwanese companies shifted to the pearl river delta in southern china, but nal assembly was usually done regionally: in the united states and mexico for the americas, in ireland innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 31pc industry6.eps050,000100,000150,000200,000250,0001985198719891991199319951997199920012003us$ millionsthe americasemeaasia pacificand scotland for emea and malaysia, and in taiwan and china for the asiapacic region.5some u.s. companies outsourced notebook production to japanese, taiwanese, and korean manufacturers but eventually shifted mostly to taiwanese odms. in 2001, the taiwanese government changed investment limitations for taiwanese rms and the notebook industry moved en masse to the yangtze river delta near shanghai.6 japanese rms such as toshiba moved their own notebook production to the region to take advantage of the supply base, but they also outsourced much of their production. chinese rms such as lenovo used these same supply bases for their own production and outsourced some as well.75 these locations are now changing once again. for example, dell is moving nal assembly and suppliers to poland for emea; both dell and hp are encouraging their cms to move to india for the asia region; and dell is setting up nal assembly in india.6 some notebook odms and suppliers moved to the area as early as 1998 so there was already a supply base when most of the industry moved. for example, asustek had 300 employees in china in 1999 and 45,000 by 2005 (einhorn, 2005).7 this was the case with the ibm pc company and lenovo both before and after their integration.figure 6 computer hardware production by region, 19852004. 2004 data are a forecast. the graph includes parts and subassemblies such as base units that are specically produced for use in computer equipment. source: reed electronics research (2005).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.32 innovation in global industriesby 2005 china was the single largest producer of pcs and computer equipment in the world. although the production facilities were located in china, they were mostly owned and managed by taiwanese rms, such as honhai/foxconn and mitac for desktops, and quanta, compal, wistron, and inventec for notebooks.8 the supply chain was also composed largely of taiwanese rms. foxconn has a huge facility in shenzhen that employs over 100,000 workers and produces base units and complete systems for nearly every branded pc vendor, while also assembling products such as game consoles and ipods and making components such as cables, connectors, chassis, and motherboards. taiwanese odms produced 85 percent of all notebooks in the world in 2005 (table 1), mostly in the shanghai/suzhou region of china.in the past, the location of nal assembly was driven by the need for proximity to demand in the united states and europe but now appears to be driven by growing demand in asia as well as by the growing capability of rms to exploit lower costs for labor, land, and facilities, the availability of costeffective skilled labor, and government incentives in china.9 for instance, lowcost sea shipment of standard (not bto) desktop pcs from china to the united states, supported by more sophisticated demand forecasting and planning tools, allows pc makers to build a 3week shipment time into the new product introduction cycle. notebooks can be economically shipped by air, so even bto production can be centralized in asia. also, with most of the supply chain in asia, it can be cheaper to assemble there and minimize shipment time for components because the supply base is concentrated there.globalization of innovationthe location of npd activities by the branded pc rms is driven by the product and process interdependencies discussed earlier, the capabilities and relative costs of different locations, and relational factors that tend to ﬁpullﬂ innovation outside the pc vendor or offshore. the relative capabilities and costs of u.s. rms and those in other countries have resulted in a new global division of labor: highervalue architectural design and business management, along with associated ﬁdynamicﬂ and analytical engineering work, is done in the united states, whereas the development and manufacturing of the physical product, along with the more routine, ﬁtransactionalﬂ product and process engineering, is done in taiwan and increasingly in china. the result is that both component and system innovation is increasingly global, but u.s. rms continue to play leading roles in both.8 after ibm sold its pc division to lenovo, only dell (among the u.s. pc companies) had its own nal assembly plant in china. dell™s largest assembly site in asia is still in penang, malaysia.9 dell is the only u.s. pc maker who still assembles desktop pcs in the united states; most nal assembly of notebooks is centralized in malaysia. the subassemblies come from the pearl river delta (desktops) and the yangtze river delta (notebooks) in china. dell also does nal assembly in china and other major markets.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 33capabilities and costthe design of desktops and notebooks involves understanding markets and customer demand, as well as technology trends, anticipating how customer demand and technology trends are converging, and coordinating mixed teams of marketing people and technologists. it requires people with skills and experience in highlevel architectural design, with the associated dynamic engineering skills, industrial design, and business and product management.10 in terms of proximity, it is important to be located in leading markets where new technologies are developed and adopted rst.development for desktops or notebooks involves more routine, transactional product and process engineering. therefore, it requires people with mechanical, electrical, and software engineering skills and technical project management experience. in addition, notebook development requires specialized skills in thermal and electromagnetic interference, shock and vibration, power management, materials, radiofrequency, and software. these require a combination of formal training and experience working in a particular engineering specialty, as well as working on the specic product type.such knowledge and skill levels vary signicantly in different locations due to at least three factors: (1) historical industrial development leading to creation of specialized skills, (2) output of educational systems, and (3) the nature of demand, including market scale and the extent to which the local or regional market may be described as cutting edge, with demanding and innovative customers.in the united states, there are business skills such as market intelligence and product management that are hard to nd elsewhere. there are also leading industrial design rms that specialize in small electronic products such as notebooks and cell phones, and strong software and highlevel engineering skills. these skills are taught in universities, invested in by leading domestic rms in the industry, and honed through proximity to leadingedge users.in japan, there are industrial designers that are very good at designing for the japanese market, but who also have experience designing for global markets. japanese engineering teams have deep skills in design and development, with specialties such as miniaturization that have developed to meet japanese demand for small, lightweight products. japan also is very strong in process engineering and manufacturing operations, thanks to its historical and continued emphasis on manufacturing.in taiwan, mechanical and electrical engineers are available with strong 10 geref and wadhwa (2006) distinguish between dynamic and transactional engineers, a classication that we nd useful in characterizing the engineering workforces in different countries based on our interviews. dynamic engineers are capable of abstract thinking and highlevel problem solving using scientic knowledge and are able to work in teams and work across international borders. these engineers have at least 4year degrees in engineering and are leaders in innovation. transactional engineers have engineering fundamentals but not the skill to apply this knowledge to larger problems. they usually have less than 4year degrees and are responsible for rote engineering tasks.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.34 innovation in global industriespractical experience as well as formal training. taiwan™s historical specialization in the pc industry, and with notebooks in particular, has created a pool of engineers with a great depth of knowledge of these products. taiwan also has strong process and manufacturing skills. these have developed over time as taiwanese rms have taken on greater responsibilities in pc development and manufacturing. taiwan mostly lacks marketing skills and industrial design skills that would allow it to take over the concept and product planning stages, because of its focus on original equipment manufacturer/odm production rather than development of branded products.china has many welltrained mechanical and electrical engineers, but most lack the handson skills that come with experience. industrial design is weak, and marketing and business skills are very underdeveloped. a large number of engineers are produced each year, but quality varies greatly by university. according to one interviewee, china™s engineers ﬁwork perfectly at doing what they have been told, but cannot think about what needs to be done; they lack both creativity and motivation. they are good at legacy systems, but not new things; they can™t handle ‚what if™ situations.ﬂin comparing cost across countries, the average salary for electronics engineers in all industries in the united states is about $80,000, compared to $60,000 in japan, $20,000 in taiwan, and under $10,000 in china (dedrick and kraemer, 2006b). obviously there are cost advantages to moving engineering to china, but differences in productivity related to education and experience can negate the direct cost differences. also, it is reported that engineering salaries are rising quickly in china, especially in industry clusters such as the shanghai/suzhou area, as multinationals and taiwanese rms compete with domestic companies for talent. the willingness of multinationals to pay higher salaries gives them access to more experienced engineers and graduates of top universities, but turnover rates are high.based on a survey of taiwanese pc and electronics rms, lu and liu (2004) found that the main reason these companies were moving r&d (primarily development) to china was the availability of welleducated and costeffective local engineers. this nding is supported by our own interviews with taiwanese companies. as taiwan™s supply of engineers has failed to keep up with demand, the attraction of a large pool of engineers with both linguistic and geographical proximity has been strong. this has enabled taiwanese engineers to concentrate on more advanced development activities while lowervalue activities such as board layout and software testing have moved to china.the new global division of laborthis con˚uence of product and process interdependencies with changing capabilities and costs in different locations has led to a new global division of labor (figure 7). in 1990, the entire npd process was located in the united states (and innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 35japan) in large vertically integrated companies like ibm, hp, digital equipment corporation, and toshiba, or pc specialists like apple, compaq, and dell, which handled virtually all elements of systemlevel design and integration. by 2000, only design remained in the united states, while development and manufacturing of notebooks was outsourced mainly to taiwan and manufacturing of desktops outsourced to major world regions. japanese pc rms still kept npd inhouse, at least for highervalue products.in 2006, the u.s. position was unchanged. however, pc vendors like hp and dell had set up design centers in taiwan to manage npd for some products (usually more mature product lines). locating design in taiwan allows closer coordination with cms and odms and potentially speeds up npd, allowing better quality control and problem resolution. they also use these design centers to transfer knowledge to the odms and to train locally hired hardware and software engineers to take on more project management and advanced development activities. this division of labor is similar for notebooks and desktops, although some u.s. companies keep desktop development in the united states and then outsource manufacturing to asia. however, desktop development is being shifted to taiwanese odms in many cases.the next critical development was the rapid shift of production to mainland china. encouraged by u.s. pc vendors, taiwanese manufacturers had moved the production of desktops and many components and subassemblies to the pearl pc industry7.epsunited statesjapantaiwanchinaunited statesjapan19902006designdevelopmentmfg.concept productplanningdesign reviewpilot prod.massprod.sust.support2000united statesjapantaiwantypeprotofigure 7 new global division of labor in the pc industry.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.36 innovation in global industriesriver delta near hong kong in the 1990s. even more dramatic was the shift of notebook production to the shanghai/suzhou area after 2000. many taiwanese suppliers to the notebook industry had moved to china before 2001. when the taiwanese government lifted its restrictions on notebook production in china, the odms and the rest of their local suppliers moved nearly all of their production to the mainland (dedrick and kraemer, 2006a).in response to u.s. pc makers outsourcing production to taiwanese odms in china, the japanese pc makers also shifted signicant production to china, both through their own subsidiaries and through outsourcing to the taiwanese odms. this further illustrates the compelling economics of the production bases in china as japanese rms have previously tended to keep production inhouse, either in japan or in southeast asia.china™s expanding role as a locus of innovationas a result of ﬁproduction pullﬂ as well as the large pool of lowercost engineering skills, there is an ongoing shift of product development activities from taiwan to china. during our interviews with notebook makers in taiwan and china, one major odm told us that they did all of their board layout and most packaging design in china, while doing mechanical engineering and software engineering in taiwan. they were in the process of training people in their electronic engineering methods in china in order to move more development there. as one manager said, ﬁchina is a gold mine of human resources, but if you don™t get in and train them you won™t be able to take advantage of it.ﬂit is expected that more of the npd process and the associated engineering tests will be conducted in china by many notebook makers (dedrick and kraemer, 2006a). these will be relocated from taiwan and, in some cases, japan. the shift of product development to china is distinguished not only by which activities have moved or are moving, but also by the type of products that are being developed. some odms are moving product updates to china. however, the development of completely new products and platforms is still done by the odms in taiwan, or by pc makers such as lenovo (for thinkpad notebooks) and toshiba in japan. more recent interviews with taiwanese companies suggest that they are hesitant to move these activities to china. this is due in part to the high turnover rate of engineers in china, which makes it hard to create cohesive development teams and also raises the risk of intellectual property loss. also, unless intellectual property protections are strengthened, china is not likely to become a center for advanced componentlevel r&d (e.g., in microprocessors, lcds, or wireless technologies).a nearterm division of labor for product development is likely to be as follows: componentlevel r&d, concept design, and product planning in the united states and japan; applied r&d and development of new platforms in taiwan; and product development for mature products, and nearly all production innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 37and sustaining engineering,11 in china. it is difcult to estimate how long this division of labor will last. a recent study of taiwanese manufacturers (li, 2006) shows that the rapid growth of lowmargin outsourcing business from foreign multinational corporations has provided taiwanese rms with the resources and motivation to invest more in r&d to develop greater technology expertise and capture more highvalue design work. as the odms™ expertise grows, multinational corporations have greater incentive to outsource more design activities to further lower costs. li also shows that taiwanese rms are attempting to capture value from their innovation efforts by ling for more patents. so the shift from taiwan to china may be slowing but the shift from the united states to taiwan could continue.in addition, taiwanese manufacturers such as acer, asus, benq, dlink, and liteon have developed their own brandname pcs, motherboards, monitors, networking equipment, smart phones, and other products. acer and asus brands have captured 14.1 percent of the world market for notebooks (digitimes, 2006), whereas dlink has become the top seller of wireless routers for the consumer market. as these companies enhance their r&d, design, and marketing capabilities, u.s. companies may nd taiwan to be a source of competition as well as cooperation.as china gains experience, it is still possible that the odms will shift more of the development process and newer products there, but, unless it becomes a key nal market for pcs, it is not likely to capture the marketdriven functions of concept design and product planning. as of now, china™s pc market is still only about onethird the size of the u.s. market and does not have leadingedge users who are dening what features and standards are developed for the global market. however, as china™s pc market continues to grow, and its users become more demanding, it may become the leading market at least for the asiapacic region, and denition and planning of products suitable for the region may be done there. finally, while chinese brands remain minor players in the global pc industry for the most part, this may change. chinese companies such as lenovo, huawei, and haier are already leading brands at home and are expanding to international markets for pcs, network equipment, and other electronics products. 11 sustaining engineering is the second of two phases in production; the rst is mass production. mass production involves the physical manufacturing of a product in large volumes. it requires manufacturing engineers to manage and plan the production process and test facilities and quality engineers to continually improve product and process quality. over time, these engineers come to know the product extremely well and are best positioned to provide sustaining engineering support that was previously provided by the original product development teams. sustaining engineering deals with changes that occur because of new chips, failing or endoflife components, or improved components. each change must be evaluated in terms of its implications for system performance and assembly, and incorporated into the production process. the sustaining engineers also provide the highest level of technical support when problems occur during use during a product™s 2 to 3year warranty period.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.38 innovation in global industrieslenovo™s acquisition of ibm™s pc business has put it directly in competition with hp and dell around the world, while huawei uses its relationship with 3com to access technology and markets and compete with cisco and others. these companies can use the supply base of taiwanese and foreign companies in china to match the multinationals on cost, develop products that t the local market, and then target other emerging markets where innovations developed for the chinese market are likely to be attractive.measurement of the globalization of innovationmeasuring the globalization of innovation is more difcult than measuring globalization of manufacturing, which can be captured in national production, trade, and foreign investment accounts. innovation might be indirectly measured by r&d spending and employees, patents, and new product introductions. while some public data on these measures are available, often the data are not sufciently disaggregated at the rm level so that they can be tied to a product line such as pcs. this is especially true of multidivision rms such as hp, fujitsu, toshiba, hitachi, samsung, and sony. also, rmlevel data do not show the extent to which r&d or other innovative activity is carried out in the home country or other locations.given these difculties, an alternative approach is to measure the innovation effort by the cms and odms who are doing much of the manufacturing in the industry. the share of global notebook shipments produced by taiwanese odms rose from 40 percent in 1998 to 85 percent in 2005 (table 1). since manufacturing and development are usually outsourced together, this suggests that the share of offshore product development activity has increased proportionately. this trend is supported by data showing that r&d spending by taiwanese odms and cms increased signicantly from 2000 to 2005 (table 2), as did the proportion of employees with ph.d. and master™s degrees in these rms. however, most of this r&d spending is on the development side rather than the research side.also, reiterating a point made earlier that most innovation is done by upstream component makers, the r&d spending by the odms and cms, as well as nearly all of the pc makers, is minor in comparison to that of upstream suppliers. for example, table 3 shows that in 2005 some of the lead pc makers12 spent 1.4 percent of revenues on r&d on average (weighted), the leading odms and cms spent 1.3 percent, and the upstream suppliers, which is where innovation occurs in the pc industry, spent an average of 11.8 percent, or nearly nine times greater than the pc makers, odms, and cms.12 we could not get public estimates of r&d investment for the pc divisions of large multidivision companies such as hp, fujitsu, toshiba, sony, and nec, so they are excluded from the table.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 39table 1 taiwanese notebook industry share of global shipments, 1998200519981999200020012002200320042005shipments volume (thousands)a6,0889,70312,70814,16118,38025,23833,34050,500global market by volume (thousands)15,61019,81624,43725,74730,03337,85746,11059,411taiwan™s share of global market volume40%49%52%55%61%66%72%85% ashipments by taiwanbased rms, regardless of location of production.sources: for 19982004, mic (2005); for 2005, digitimes (2006).table 2 r&d investment by taiwanese odms and cms (million u.s. dollars)company name200020012002200320042005quanta27.1338.3654.5574.3192.56102.36compal24.7744.6962.1170.2178.78wistron61.1255.0668.9472.49asustek computer31.9740.5753.1465.8797.38128.57mitac24.3724.7025.2832.6636.9046.62inventec30.7525.1427.3839.4248.56arima13.4212.7414.8515.0019.6016.71ecs3.587.2021.0314.9812.7411.00first international computer (fic)28.2110.9146.7244.58clevo8.718.108.979.2810.2810.05twinhead7.245.311.100.310.430.47uniwill7.278.209.8911.1511.5512.48foxconn (honhai)32.4358.1464.4566.69128.78132.86subtotals239.85239.37433.17491.42549.37660.95note: blank cells occur where data was not available in annual reports or elsewhere.source: annual reports of the companies.industrylevel drivers of globalization of innovationthe globalization of innovation in the pc industry has been driven primarily by economic factors and secondarily by relational factors that involve interdependencies of activities, as well as social networks that often in˚uence the choice of suppliers or location. examples of relational factors include the close interdependence between development and manufacturing of notebook pcs, and the ﬁguanxiﬂ social networks that link taiwanese rms and managers.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.40 innovation in global industriestable 3 r&d investment as percent of firm revenues, 2005pc makersr&d as % of revenuetaiwan odms & cmsr&d as % of revenuecomponent suppliersr&d as % of revenuedell0.9quanta1.1microsoft15.5apple3.8compal1.4intel13.3gatewayn.a.wistron1.6amd19.6lenovo1.7asustek1.7ati technology14.7acer0.1mitac2.0seagate (hdd)8.5inventec1.4western digital (hdd)6.6arimaa2.8maxtor (hdd)7.5ecsa1.6chunghwa (displays)3.4fican.a.tatung (displays)2.6clevoa4.2au optronics (displays)2.2twinheada0.2molex (cables/connectors)5.2uniwilla1.6delta (power supply)4.8honhai1.0creative (sound cards)6.7total rm revenues (millions)$92,535$76,191$128,773r&d (% of revenues) for selected rms (weighted)1.41.311.8note: large multidivision pc makers like hp, toshiba, sony, fujitsu, and nec are omitted because r&d investment is not available by division. avalue calculated from data in company annual reports.source: electronic business top 300 (2006), unless otherwise indicated.regarding economic factors, the manufacturing of desktops was primarily pushed offshore to major world regions to reduce production cost, and secondarily for proximity to markets. manufacturing was then outsourced to cms as most pc makers looked to further cut costs and concentrate on product design, branding, sales, and marketing. these cms are currently moving to new locations within each region (eastern europe for emea, mexico for north america, and china for asiapacic)šonce again to reduce costs. as noted earlier, for innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 41standard buildtostock desktops, production is increasingly done in china for the u.s. market, because lowcost shipping by sea is viable when fast order turnaround is not necessary.cost was also the key factor for notebooks, where both development and manufacturing were outsourced or offshored almost from the beginningšrst to japan, then to taiwan, and currently to china. japan™s capabilities with development and manufacturing of small form factors provided an initial pull, but lower costs, development of strong indigenous engineering capabilities, and the fact that taiwanese rms were considered less likely to compete directly with u.s. rms resulted in u.s. pc vendors shifting to taiwan. in turn, taiwan has moved manufacturing to china for lowercost labor, and manufacturing is now pulling some development activities to china as well. taiwan is trying to expand its role in r&d, design, and other highvalue activities, and pc vendors have facilitated this through continued outsourcing and by setting up design centers in taiwan.regarding relational factors in the pc industry, it appears that once production moves to a lowcost location, it will pull some higherlevel activities to it. reinforcing our ndings about production pulling knowledge work, lu and liu (2004) found that the second major location factor for r&d (after access to lowcost engineers) is proximity to the manufacturing site. this is particularly true for notebook pcs given the importance of designformanufacturability. for example, production engineering and sustaining engineering clearly benet from proximity to manufacturing, because production problems can be addressed immediately on the factory ˚oor and engineering changes in existing products can be tested in production models from the assembly line. it also makes sense to move pilot production to china rather than to maintain an assembly line in taiwan just for this purpose. then the question arises whether to move the expensive test equipment from taiwan to china. if so, then there is more reason to relocate the design review and prototype processes as well.beyond proximity considerations in manufacturing, there is a relational ﬁpullﬂ from the odms. they often bundle development with manufacturing in order to win contracts. but once the odm has a contract, the relationship creates incentives for the pc maker to work with the same odm for future upgrades and enhancements to the product. in addition, there is a great deal of tacit knowledge created in the development process that is known only by the odm, which creates a further pull. finally, the close linkage of development activities to manufacturing and the feedback to design from manufacturing has created linkages that favor continuing the odm relationships.the concentration of product development and manufacturing in taiwan and china has reduced cost and accelerated new product innovation, driving down average unit prices, and helping to expand markets. for example, the worldwide average unit price for a pc and monitor has declined markedly over the past 15 years (figure 8), with desktops and notebooks selling at an average of under $1,100 and $1,400, respectively, in the united states in 2005, and many models innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.42 innovation in global industriespc industry8.eps00.511.522.533.544.51990199119921993199419951996199719981999200020012002200320042005us$ (in thousands)desktopsportablesfigure 8 average unit price, desktops and notebooks, 19902005. source: juliussen (2006).available for well under $1,000. of course, when adjusted for quality improvements, the price decline is much more dramatic. moreover, the price differences between the united states and other regions have declined so that there is now effectively one world price.beyond cost reduction, the globalization of innovation also has been driven by a desire to develop a better understanding of the needs of big emerging markets such as china, india, and brazil to enable the right versioning of existing products. some pc vendors and odms (as well as other suppliers like amd, intel, and microsoft) are seeking new markets in lessdeveloped economies by developing new pcs with much lower price points while also tailoring the technologies to the more extreme environments of these countries. these new product concepts include the onelaptopperchild design, intel™s classmate pc, and asus™s eeepc. while previous efforts to develop verylowcost pcs for developing countries have failed, pc makers and others continue to experiment with new designs.implications of globalization of innovationthe globalization of innovation has led to a new global division of labor as described earlier. this new international structure of the pc industry has implicainnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 43tions for rm competitiveness and strategy, location of innovation, employment, and u.s. policy.implications for u.s. firm competitivenessoverall, the changes in the industry appear not to have hurt the competitiveness of u.s. rms. u.s. companies dominate key components such as microprocessors, graphics and other chips, and hard drives, and pc vendors dell, hp, and apple hold nearly 40 percent of the world market for pcs. u.s. rms are still unquestioned leaders in operating systems and packaged applications. on the other hand, asian rms are leaders in displays, memory, power supplies, batteries, motherboards, optical drives, and other components and peripherals. asia has some leading pc brands such as lenovo, toshiba, acer,13 and sony, and taiwan™s cms and odms increasingly compete with u.s. contract manufacturers for outsourced development and manufacturing. on another measure of rm competitiveness, the largest share of industry prots ˚ows to u.s. companies, particularly microsoft and intel, but also to apple, dell, hp, and to component makers such as nvidia, ti, and broadcom. the protability of most japanese and asian companies is generally lower.implications for firm strategyfor branded pc vendors, the international innovation network described earlier enables faster product cycles with quicker integration of new technologies because the taiwanese companies are good at fast turnaround and there is a good supply of costeffective engineers in taiwan and china to handle more models, changes, and upgrades. it has increased consumer choice, helped grow the market, and for a long time was advantageous for dell because its direct model gave it an advantage in getting those products to the business customer. but now that most rms are efcient in minimizing inventory and getting new products into the market, the fast product cycles could be seen as an expensive race to the bottom that no pc vendor or component supplier really wins (except intel and microsoft).14 some pc vendors complain that component innovation is too fast, 13 acer, which has been a successful taiwanese branded company, purchased gateway computer and packard bell in october 2007.14 as desktop pcs in particular have become commoditized, business model innovations such as direct sales, bto, and justintime inventory have provided temporary advantage in the industry. they provided an initial advantage to dell and gateway, who were the rst to adopt direct sales, but gateway stumbled badly and dell™s efciency advantage has been reduced as other pc vendors have gone to direct bto sales. the dell model also has proved less successful in overseas markets where direct sales are less popular than in the united states. the most important impact of past business model innovation has been a general improvement in the efciency of the industry as a whole, as most vendors have adopted these practices.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.44 innovation in global industriesand they feel pressured to introduce too many products for too small markets. for example, one major pc vendor introduces around 1,000 different consumer desktop skus (stockkeeping units) in one year globally (dedrick and kraemer, 2006b). a question raised by more than one company that we have interviewed is whether the cost of managing so many products might outweigh the benets of being able to offer products that more closely match the needs of customers.beyond desktop and notebook pcs, the growing demand for new products that are smaller, are more mobile, and integrate new functions is bringing new innovation and new players into the personal computing industry. hit products such as rim™s blackberry and palm™s treo have been developed by rms with no traditional pc business, while apple™s ipod was developed on an entirely different platform from the macintosh computer line. such radical or architectural product innovation (henderson and clark, 1990; utterback, 1990) has important differences from the incremental model of development as illustrated in table 4. the scale and scope of global collaboration is often greater for radical innovation, as existing technologies are adapted to new uses and new technologies are developed. as a result, there is greater need for joint development with partners, while key technologies (particularly software) are developed internally and the entire process is shaped by strong central vision, integration, and control.an example of the nature of radical innovation is the ipod, which was developed by apple in collaboration with many external partners in multiple geographic locations. apple used its internal capabilities to create a closely integrated hardware and software design, while relying on outside partners for both standard and custom components, and for manufacturing. for instance, apple used a reference design and worked jointly with portalplayer to develop the microchip that controlled the ipod™s basic functionality. it worked with others for additional chips (e.g., united kingdom™s wolfson microelectronics for the digitaltoanalog sound chip; new yorkbased linear technology for power management chips; californiabased broadcom for a video decoder chip); with toshiba for the 1.8inch hard drive; and with taiwan™s inventec for manufacturing (murtha et al., forthcoming).apple designed the system architecture that affected critical features such as sound quality and power consumption and developed the distinctive industrial design of the ipod; it developed most of the ipod and itunes software inhouse or adapted others™ software. apple tightly managed the whole process, coordinating closely with outside partners so that it could design the ipod, and its manufacturer and suppliers could concurrently prepare the tooling and supply chain for largevolume manufacturing, and bring it to market in 8 months. as put by the ipod™s lead engineer, ﬁtoday, there is too much complexity in products for one person or organization to understand. you need a team of internal and external resources working with you to conceive, design, and implement new productsﬂ (murtha et al., forthcoming). the resulting design process is much different from innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 45table 4 features of incremental and radical innovationdesigndevelopmentproductionradicalinnovation (ipod, iphone, treo)š set system architecture, sometimes building on external reference designš strong central vision and industrial designš tightly control all aspects of npdš develop key software internallyš integrate hardware, software, even services (e.g., itunes, itms)š design or license complementary assets (sw, content) and distribution systemš collaborate closely with a few key partners for core componentsš collaborate with many partners in multiple geographiesš collaborate with partners of partnersš get partners to adapt existing technologies to proprietary architectureoutsourced to cm or odmincremental innovation (desktops, notebooks)š innovate on wintel architectureš control product planning, brand image, marketing, concept design internallyš internal or outsourced industrial designš hw and sw are modularš leverage existing complementary resources and distributionš collaborate with one established odm in one geographyš outsource detailed physical design, test, and software built within standard architectureoutsourced to odmthat in pcs, with more internal development and much closer interaction with key component suppliers.finally, for the ipod to be successful in the market, apple created a new business model that integrated hardware, software, and online content delivery. it developed itunes software to collect and manage content on a pc or mac and easily transfer that content to the ipod. it also developed the online itunes music store and tightly integrated that with the itunes application. apple licensed content from all the major music labels and subsequently from the audio book, movie, and television industries, and established pricing and digital rights models that were attractive to consumers. the result was a u.s. market share of over 70 percent in both the personal music player and the music download markets.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.46 innovation in global industriesgiven that such design innovation has the potential for creating differentiation in products and gaining competitive advantage, the strategies of at least some branded pc rms are likely to focus more on creating new product platforms. however, examples such as the ipod, treo, and blackberry suggest that radical innovation requires a different process of new product development. as illustrated by our earlier discussion of these innovations, elements of the process include leveraging a rm™s unique internal capabilities with those of external partners; working closely with external partners in multiple geographies; engaging in a global search for technologies that can be adapted and integrated into new products; maintaining tight architectural and managerial control over the process; and possibly introducing new business models to provide complementary content and services.this kind of process is far removed from the incremental innovation within a wellestablished product architecture and the mature market of the wintel pc world. as a result, it has been more diversied companies such as samsung and sony, wireless specialists such as nokia, as well as many startups that are trying to innovate with new product platforms that mix communications, entertainment, and computing capabilities in smaller form factors. in these cases, rms have worked with outside partners to exploit external sources of knowledge while keeping their own innovative activities mostly inhouse and close to their home base.increasingly, hardwaresoftware integration is becoming important as a means of tailoring products to different market requirements such as communications standards, power consumption, language, and customer tastes. such integration also helps to reduce product costs by enabling standard physical platforms to be produced in large volumes for global sales. more important, it enables greater product differentiation for everner market segments by customizing through changes in software, rather than through costly physical changes in hardware.location of innovationinnovation at the national level is closely tied to the presence of both technically skilled and entrepreneurial individuals, the quality of infrastructure, and the presence of advanced users who drive rms to innovate. rapid diffusion of internet infrastructure in the united states led to ongoing innovation in hardware (e.g., routers, switches), software (e.g., browsers, search engines), and services (e.g., online retailing, banking, stock trading, travel services). the united states has seen strong userdriven innovation (von hippel, 1998) such as itenabled business process redesign and ecommerce in the corporate world and usercreated content in the consumer world. from cisco and amazon, to dell and walmart to google and myspace, innovation on the web has largely occurred in the united states.by contrast, the relatively slow adoption of broadband and advanced mobile innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 47technologies in the united states has left the country falling behind in new areas of innovation. for instance, south korea is a leader in online computer gaming, thanks in part to its widespread deployment of cheap broadband internet service. japan™s imode system for mobile internet was years ahead of similar services in the united states. high rates of wireless adoption have beneted rms from south korea, japan, and northern europe, while china™s large mobile phone market has attracted rms such as motorola, nokia, and siemens to do product development there. in short, the lack of innovation in industries that are providers of complementary assets (which in turn may re˚ect the outmoded infrastructure underpinning the large and otherwise highly sophisticated u.s. domestic market) is a major factor hampering innovation in the pc industry. if the united states is to retain its position as a leading market for computing innovation, it cannot afford to remain behind in providing highquality, lowcost infrastructure to support userled innovation and drive demand for new personal computing products.our eld interviews indicate that design innovation, especially concept design and product planning, is likely to remain concentrated in the united states for the major u.s. rms in the personal computing industry. however, there will be increasing use of offshore r&d and design centers in locations that have specialized and costeffective talent, that lead in particular technical innovations, or that represent important markets in terms of growth potential, special market opportunities (fewer regulatory requirements, government incentives), or challenges (need for cheaper or environmentally friendly pcs), or that may in˚uence technical standards (as china is trying to do in a number of technologies). private interviews with industry executives indicate that the primary motivation for such offshore outposts is cost reduction, through hiring less costly engineers, programmers, and managers to perform activities previously performed inhouse in the united states or in a foreign subsidiary. in time, secondary benets may also arise as these locations gain capabilities or as local markets develop.other product development activities tend to be pulled by production, beginning with manufacturing process engineering, then moving up to prototyping and testing and eventually electrical, mechanical, and software engineering. these are in the process of shifting to china from taiwan and japan, although r&d, design, and development of the newest generation of products is still likely to be concentrated in the home countries of the manufacturers (dedrick and kraemer, 2006a).impacts on jobs and employmentwith respect to u.s. workers, much of the potential shift of jobs offshore has already taken place with the offshoring and outsourcing of production from 1990 to 2005. there has also been a shift in innovationrelated jobs after 2000, as production has pulled development and some design activities to asia (dedrick and kraemer, 2006a). further movement of jobs offshore is likely to occur in innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.48 innovation in global industriesthe future to meet competitive pressure for continuous cost reduction. the jobs will be in engineering, software, industrial design, engineering management, and project management at all levels. as one pc industry executive told us in interviews, he has to ﬁpushﬂ more physical design and project management jobs overseas in order to keep concept design jobs at home.the number of jobs directly moved offshore is not large and occurs incrementally. however, another indicator of the impact of offshoring is the number of new jobs that are created offshore rather than in the united states to support the industry™s continued growth and proliferation of products. one indicator of this impact is the growth of knowledge jobs in the notebook industry in taiwan as these rms take on more design and development activities for the united states and other rms. interviews and company data on the top odms in the notebook industry indicate that they hired thousands of new r&d personnel and product engineers in taiwan between 2000 and 2005, while also hiring thousands more for product and process engineering, testing, and production in china. for example, quanta, which is the largest notebook odm, has increased the number of r&d engineers from 750 in 2001 to around 7,000 in 2005 (company annual reports).as software becomes an increasingly important part of new pc products, there will be a proportionately greater increase in software jobs being moved offshore. in one company we interviewed, 50 percent of the 1,000 employees are engineers and 80 percent of these are software engineers. these jobs are currently in the united states, but the rm is experimenting with offshore teams. while there is broad awareness of the shift of jobs to india and elsewhere by software and it services companies, there is less awareness of the number of software jobs within the computer hardware industryšjobs that are likewise vulnerable to offshoring.for the united states, the fact that growth and innovation in the industry are not creating new knowledge jobs (engineering, software, design) in the united states but are creating them in taiwan and china appears to be a negative. but the number of u.s. engineering jobs in the broader computer industry is fairly stable at about 60,000 between 2002 and 2005 (dedrick and kraemer, 2006b), and without globalization there may not be as much growth and innovation. the risks of globalization for the united states are that individuals, rms, or related industries will lose technological advantage and the ability to innovate. a korn/ferry international report posed the issue for industry executives as follows:north american industrial executives must choose between two fundamental responses to their current competitive environment. one approach is to simply accept that their companies need to focus exclusively on marketing, nance and the design and development functions, while of˚oading their manufacturing needs and technologies to more accommodating locations, usually overseas. while this strategy can generate shortterm prots, it almost inevitably guarantees that a company will lose control of its design and production capabilities. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 49eventually, if history is a reliable guide, even home ofce and corporate functions will cease to exist. (kotkin and friedman, 2004)however, earlier industry innovations as well as recent innovations like the ipod, the treo, and the microsoft xbox were developed mostly in the united states, even though some component innovations came from offshore suppliers and all the manufacturing was done offshore. moreover, there is little evidence thus far that these rms have ﬁlost controlﬂ of the designs or technology for these products. such innovation is less likely to move offshore and should continue to support engineering and other knowledge jobs in the united states, as long as the united states retains the capabilities needed for such innovation.implications for policy: sustaining u.s. innovation leadershipalthough u.s. pc vendors still lead innovation in the industry, they are moving more innovation activities offshore both through setting up design centers and through outsourcing design and development activities to odms. the u.s. suppliers of key components such as microprocessors, storage, and software are also setting up r&d and design centers offshore, sometimes in locations with specialized skills such as israel or japan, and sometimes in big emerging markets with lowcost engineering talent such as india and china.the engineering, software development, and management skills associated with these activities are key to the innovation capabilities of the united states and therefore consideration needs to be given to developing people with these skills if such innovation is to remain in the united states (committee on the engineer of 2020, national academy of engineering, 2005). our interviews with executives indicate there is a growing need across the pc industry for engineers who are specically trained to work at the interface between hardware engineering, communications, and computer science. the executives also indicate that many u.s. engineering schools produce specialists in a single engineering discipline, but few schools produce people who can work at the interfaces of these disciplines. there is a need, for example, for hardware engineers who can work with communications standards, and software engineers who can produce embedded software that enables customization of products for markets. when universities fail to develop such talent, rms may rely on onthejob training, look offshore for experienced people with the needed skills, or develop the skills offshore through onthejob training of lowcost specialists.it is also likely that u.s. rms need to make greater efforts to hire rookies and develop them. several of the companies we interviewed prefer to hire fairly experienced engineers rather than beginners and report no problems in doing so in silicon valley or elsewhere. they simply hire people away from other companies, or bring in engineers from foreign countries under immigration policy. however, one highly innovative company we interviewed hired engineers as innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.50 innovation in global industriesinterns from the best engineering schools in the united states (e.g., cornell, mit, uc berkeley, carnegiemellon) and, if they worked out, made commitments to hire them even before they graduated. starting as interns, they worked as part of project teams with operational roles and real challenges to overcome. such onthejob training can help sustain a career ladder for new engineers as rms offshore more lowerlevel jobs that would normally be lled by entrylevel engineers. an executive for the rm argued that this process benets the rm as well, by giving it access to the best talent available and the chance to incorporate that talent into product development teams and learn how the company works before the engineers develop bad habits elsewhere.from a policy perspective, the u.s. government can encourage crossdisciplinary education and more universityindustry cooperation through its funding choices, and by documenting and publicizing the need for such changes. while universities are responsive to employer needs, there can be signicant inertia in academic departments and university bureaucracies, and external resources and pressure can encourage greater responsiveness and ˚exibility.all of the rms we interviewed indicated a need for more h1b visas, or for reform of the visa process. one issue involves procedures for keeping people who have been educated in the united states and perhaps interned with the rm. another involves recruiting from abroad for skills for which the u.s. supply of talent is limited, but for which other countries are noted for having people with the needed skills. for example, it appears that the supply of engineers in analog elds in the united states such as radiofrequency is limited, whereas there is a good supply in some european countries. a reported problem with the current immigration process is that the nature of u.s. supply of talent is not considered. from an immigration standpoint, an engineer is an engineer regardless of education level (bachelor, master™s, ph.d.) and there is no way to identify and respond to shortages of very specic skills or levels (e.g., bachelor vs. ph.d.).in addition to such human resource issues, another key concern is sustaining the demand for innovation. pc demand, and associated innovation, has been driven in the past decade largely by the internet and networking in general. with the united states leading in internet adoption, the pc industry was quick to adopt networking technologies such as ethernet and wireless networking, and new products such as the blackberry and treo were developed in the united states. however, the united states has fallen behind a number of countries in both wireless and broadband adoption and is not the lead market for products and services such as mobile phones and online gaming. as a result, innovations in new personal computing devices such as smart phones, video game consoles, and other network devices are likely to target foreign markets initially, making it more likely that innovation will occur in those markets rather than in the united states.while specic policy issues with regard to telecommunications, internet regulation, content, and pricing are beyond the scope of this chapter, those deciinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.personal computing 51sions should be made with an awareness of their potential impact on u.s. innovation in industries such as personal computing. innovation in pcs can require cooperation by providers of complementary assets, such as content or communication infrastructure. government policies on telecommunications can in˚uence the speed of diffusion of infrastructure like broadband, 3g, or municipal wifi networks. similarly, government policies on copyright can in˚uence the terms under which content can be distributed. while these policy issues are usually debated in terms of impacts on competition, intellectual property rights, or even consumer choice, policy makers also should consider their impact on innovation in hightechnology industries.acknowledgmentsthe research on which this chapter is based has been supported by grants to the personal computing industry center of the paul merage school of business at uc irvine from the alfred p. sloan foundation, the u.s. national science foundation, the national academy of sciences, and the california institute for telecommunications and information technology. any opinions, ndings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in these materials are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of these sponsors. the authors acknowledge the very helpful comments of david mowery, jeffrey macher, and anonymous reviewers on drafts of this chapter.referencescommittee on the engineer of 2020, national academy of engineering. (2005). educating the engineer of 2020: adapting engineering education to the new century. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.curry, j., and m. kenney. (1999). beating the clock: corporate responses to rapid change in the pc industry. california management review 42(1):836.dedrick, j., and k. l. kraemer. (1998). asia™s computer challenge: threat or opportunity for the united states and the world? new york: oxford university press.dedrick, j., and k. l. kraemer. (2005). the impacts of it on rm and industry structure: the personal computer industry. california management review 47(3):122142.dedrick, j., and k. l. kraemer. (2006a). is production pulling knowledge work to china: a study of the notebook computer industry. computer 39(7):3642.dedrick, j., and k. l. kraemer. (2006b). impacts of globalization and offshoring on engineering employment in the personal computing industry. report for the national academy of engineering. irvine, ca: crito.digitimes. (2006). ict reportš1q 2006: taiwan™s notebooks. taipei: digitimes research.economist. (2006a). the dream of the personal computer: the pc™s 25th birthday. 380(8488):17.economist. (2006b). getting personal: the pc™s 25th birthday. (july 27):5758.einhorn, b. (2005). why taiwan matters. business week. may 16.electronic business top 300. (2006). electronic business august:314.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.52 innovation in global industriesgeref, g., and v. wadhwa. (2006). framing the engineering outsourcing debate: placing the united states on a level playing field with china and india. duke university, master of engineering management program.grove, a. (1999). only the paranoid survive. new york: time warner.henderson, r. m., and k. b. clark. (1990). architectural innovation: the reconguration of existing product technologies and the failure of established rms. administrative science quarterly 35(1):930.idc (international data corporation). (2006a). worldwide black book, q2 2006. framingham, ma: idc.idc. (2006b). worldwide pc market: 4q05 and 2005 review. framingham, ma: idc.idc. (2006c). worldwide software 20062010 forecast summary. framingham, mass.: idc.idc. (2006d). idc worldwide quarterly pc tracker. december 2006.juliussen, e. (2006). worldwide pc market: may, 2006 version. arlington heights, il: etforecasts.kotkin, j., and d. friedman. (2004). executive leadership in the industrial economy. korn ferry international. available at: http://www.kornferry.com/library/viewgallery.asp?cid=865& languageid=1&regionid=23.kraemer, k. l., j. dedrick, and s. yamashiro. (2000). dell computer: rening and extending the business model with information technology. information society 16:521.li, w. c.y. (2006). global sourcing in innovation: theory and evidence from the information technology hardware industry. los angeles: ucla. working paper. 46 pp.lu, l. y. y., and j. s. liu. (2004). r&d in china: an empirical study of taiwanese it companies. r&d management 34(4):453465.mann, c. (2003). globalization of it services and white collar jobs: the next wave of productivity growth. international economics policy briefs pb0311:113.mic (market intelligence center). (2005). the greater chinese notebook pc industry, 2004 and beyond. taipei: asia ip reportmurtha, t., f. giarratani, and t. sturgeon, eds. (forthcoming). massive coordination: creating and capturing value in global knowledge networks.porter, m. (1996). what is strategy? harvard business review (novemberdecember):122.reed electronics research. (2005). yearbook of world electronics data. vols. 14.utterback, j. m. (1990). radical innovation and corporate regeneration. journal of research technology management 37(4):1021.von hippel, e. (1998). economics of product development by users: the impact of ﬁstickyﬂ local information. management science 44(5):629644.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.53 2 softwareashish aroracarnegie mellon universitychris formangeorgia institute of technologyjiwoong yoonkyung hee university, seoul, south koreaintroductionthe global movement of software services activities (dened to include software engineering services and research and development [r&d] as well as the development of software products) to locations outside of the united states is an important and growing phenomenon that has recently attracted widespread attention. over the period 19952002, exports of business services and computer and information services grew at an average annual rate of over 40 percent in india and at a rate of 20 percent in ireland. these changes have received widespread attention within the united states and have led to concerns of a ﬁhollowing outﬂ of the american information technology (it) sector and about the potential loss of american technological leadership.however, despite these changes in the location of production of it services, there is relatively little evidence of global changes in the location of new software product development. u.s. companies have historically been and continue to be the leading exporters of software products. moreover, evidence from software patents suggests that inventive activity in software continues to be concentrated in the united states. in the short run, the united states will continue to enjoy a signicant lead over other countries in the stock of highly skilled programmers and software designers that provide it with an advantage in the production of new software products. moreover, proximity to the largest source of it demand and potential agglomeration economies arising from proximity to competitors and complementors provide software product companies located in the united states with a signicant advantage.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 innovation in global industriesdispersion of inventive activity in softwarein this chapter we provide evidence on the geographic distribution of inventive activity in software. economists have long made a distinction between innovation and invention in the study of technological change. schumpeter (1934) dened innovations as new, creative combinations that upset the equilibrium state of the economy. mokyr (2002) denes invention as an increment in the set of technological knowledge in a society. schumpeter pointed out that invention does not imply innovation, and that it is innovation that provides capitalism with its dynamic elements. because it is more easily measured, in this chapter we will focus on the geographic dispersion of inventive activity. however, we adopt the position of mokyr (2002), who argues that in the long run invention is a necessary precursor to innovation.unlike some of the other industries studied in this volume, one feature of software development is that it is frequently performed both by suppliers of software packages and services and by users. as a result, software development occurs throughout all industries in the economy, and so to understand the location of inventive activity in software it is insufcient to examine where one or two industries are located.to understand this point further, it is helpful to gain a better understanding of the types of software development activity. the design, installation, implementation, and use of software consist of several phases. messerschmitt and szyperski (2002) identify two distinct value chains in software development. first, there is a supply value chain in which software creators develop software artifacts that provide value for the end user. this part of the software value chain consists primarily of design and development activities that can be thought of as software ﬁproduction.ﬂ in the past this role had been played primarily by independent users, thirdparty programmers, or independent software vendors creating custom software, but over the past 20 years this role has passed increasingly to independent software vendors creating software products.the output of this value chain contains all of what we would traditionally dene as software products, such as word processors, operating systems, enterprise software such as enterprise resource planning (erp) and business intelligence software, as well as middleware software, such as some transaction processing middleware and enterprise application integration. the total value of production in the software product industry was $61,376.9 million in 1997,1 and 195,200 persons were employed in this industry in the same year.2 firms that operate in 1 data from the u.s. bureau of economic analysis inputoutput tables. this gure includes the total value of products made in nipa industry 511200 (software publishers); 1997 is the latest benchmark year for the inputoutput tables. more recent years do not separate software producers from other information publishers.2 data from the bureau of labor statistics (bls) on the number of employees in the software publishing industry (naics 5112), available at http://www.bls.gov/ces/home.htm.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 55this value chain include all of the wellrecognized names that are traditionally regarded as ﬁsoftwareﬂ rms, including microsoft, adobe, oracle, and the sas institute, as well as smaller rms such as oblix and primatech.this value chain also includes the activity of thirdparty rms involved in custom programming and software analysis and design. such rms create custom software products for their customers and include rms like ciber, inc., intergraph corp., and xwave solutions. the total value created in custom programming and design services was $115,834.6 million in 1997 while total employment was 675,000 in 1997, indicating that both revenue and employment in this sector are greater than that in the packaged software industry.3 moreover, custom programming and design services are also growing faster than is the software publishing industry. though 1997 is the last year for which we have data on revenues by industry, we can compare employment growth across these two industries. employment in custom programming and design services has grown from 675,000 in 1997 to 1,025,300 in 2005, for an average annual growth rate of 5.8 percent. in contrast, employment in software publishing has grown from 195,200 in 1997 to 238,700 in 2005, for an average annual growth rate of 2.5 percent.second, there is a software requirements value chain in which users add functionality to software to meet their own needs. users engage in coinventive activity (bresnahan and greenstein, 1996) to translate generalpurpose software into a specic application. such coinventive activity may include modications to packaged software applications or development of new applications. however, in business software it also involves changes to business processes or organization design.activity in this value chain includes both programming by professional programmers and software designers employed by itusing rms and programming activities performed by users themselves. the activity of both groups is difcult to measure but represents a major share of value created. scafdi, shaw, and myers (2005) estimate that there were approximately 80 million enduser programmers in 2005,4 compared to 3 million professional programmers. moreover, occupation data from the united states indicate that over twothirds of software professionals do not work for it rms but rather work for itusing industries.5 neither this software development activity performed by users nor the work performed by software professionals working for it users is measured in any systematic statistics.3 these calculations are based on total sales in custom computer programming services (naics 541511) and computer systems design services (naics 541512). this latter category may include activities outside of programming, such as it systems design and integration. a conservative estimate of the value and employment of thirdparty custom programming services uses only naics 541511 and yields estimates of $86,326.8 million and 522,300, respectively.4 this estimate includes those who create userdeveloped software that is not sold in markets.5 data from bls occupational employment statistics.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56 innovation in global industriesthough systematic evidence is rare, what we do know suggests that economic activity in this value chain is likely to be far greater than that in the supply value chain. according to gormely et al. (1998), though the typical cost of implementing an erp application suite is $20.5 million, only $4 million of this cost is related to hardware and software; the rest is due to the costs of implementing and deploying the software within the business. using data on sales of software products and services in several western european countries, steinmueller (2004) estimates that for every 1 spent on software there is an additional 2.36 spent on itrelated business services. however, this estimate is likely a lower bound, because it includes only software services conducted through market transactions and excludes software development activities within itusing rms themselves.the importance of the software requirements value chain has two implications for the measurement of where inventive activity in software takes place. first, a large part of value creation in software takes place outside of rms that reside in what is considered the software product industry. the value of this activity goes largely unmeasured in traditional government statistics, as it often occurs as a labor expense within rms developing or implementing packaged software.second, it is very difcult to place a precise denition of what exactly constitutes inventive activity in software. creation and modication of source code is of course one major component, but so are user modication and business process change. should these latter activities be included as well?6 moreover, how should we treat changes to software code that are embedded in it hardware? are these hardware or software inventions? as we will discuss next, given available data, a precise estimate of inventive activity in software is probably not feasible. instead, we provide a variety of metrics that enable us to estimate broad trends and orders of magnitude in economic and inventive activity in software.in the section ﬁtrends in the location of value creationﬂ we provide evidence of recent trends in globalization of software services. these data provide evidence on globalization of activity in the software requirements value chain and some inventive activity conducted by services rms in the supply value chain, though they will largely miss changes in crosscountry software service activities that are undertaken by rms outside of the software services industry. in the section ﬁempirical evidence on the location of inventive activityﬂ we use u.s. software patent data to examine changes in the global dispersion of inventive activity in software product development.trends in the location of value creationin this section we investigate broad trends in the location of value creation activities in software. we begin with some statistics describing global variation in 6 it is interesting to note that the u.s. patent ofce has struggled with similar denitional issues, within the context of socalled business method patents (allison and tiller, 2003). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 57the exports and imports of software products and services, followed by a qualitative description of recent trends in countries that have been known to be active producers in the market for software products and services.statistical trendssoftware productsfigure 1 shows the percentage of total 2002 software product exports and imports by selected organisation for economic cooperation and development (oecd) countries. the gure shows that among oecd countries the united states continues to be the leader by a wide margin in the export of software products, accounting for 21.7 percent of total software exports. the next closest country is ireland, which accounts for 16 percent of software exports. however, as we will discuss in further detail, most of ireland™s software exports arise from u.s. multinational companies that utilize ireland as a base of operations to localize 0%5%10%15%20%25%austriacanadafrancegermanyirelanditalyjapankoreanetherlandsswedenswitzerlandunited kingdomunited statesall othersexports % totalimports % totalsoftware1.epsfigure 1 percentage of total 2002 software product exports and imports by oecd country. source: oecd (2004, table c.1.8; oecd trade in software goods, 19962002). compiled from international trade statistics database.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 innovation in global industriesu.s. software products to be shipped to countries in the european union.7 since the bulk of software product exports from ireland are due to u.s. multinationals in irelandšsands (2005) shows that over 92 percent of irish software exports are from foreign rmsšthis suggests that the share of u.s. software exports in global trade ˚ows is probably closer to onethird rather than the onefth that the oecd statistics indicate. following that, the next largest exporters are germany (due in part to software exports from erp giant sap) and the united kingdom. no other country accounts for more than 10 percent of software exports. most notably, japan accounts for only 2.5 percent of total software exports.figure 2 presents total packaged software product sales by region. the story here remains the same: north america represents the largest share of packaged software sales, and this percentage has been increasing over time from 47 percent in 1990 to 54 percent in 2001. we explore why other countries have not been more successful in developing software products in further detail in the next section.software servicesfigure 3 shows data from the oecd economic outlook (2006) and reports the global share of 1995 and 2004 exports in it services, obtained by summing the categories ﬁcomputer and information servicesﬂ and ﬁother business servicesﬂ from the imf balance of payments data. though subject to a variety of caveats about measurement and coverage, figure 3 suggests that the distribution of it service exports is more evenly distributed across countries than is the distribution of software product exports. many smaller countries are experiencing rapid growth in their exports of it services, though some are starting from a very small base.to explore trends in imports, we use data from the u.s. bureau of economic analysis (bea) on international trade in services. table 1 provides data on interrm trade in exports and imports of it services in 1998 and 2004, calculated by summing the categories ﬁcomputer and information servicesﬂ and ﬁroyalties and license fees.ﬂ8 exports of these services grew from $6,900 million to $10,862 million from 1998 to 2004, while imports grew from $1,992 to $2,591 million from 1998 to 2004.crossborder exports to and imports from unafliated foreign rms of com7 localization activities include activities such as manual translation or adapting software products to local markets. 8 the columns labeled ﬁcomputer and information servicesﬂ provide data on exports and imports of private services among unafliated rms. the columns, ﬁroyalties and license feesﬂ in the same table include computerrelated services that were delivered to foreign markets through crossborder software licensing agreements. these data do not include intrarm exports of computer services because bea does not in general release statistics on many of the countries in table 1. they also do not include wages of u.s. residents who provide computer services to nonresidents.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 59with type replaced20019901991199219931994199519961997199819992000200118016014012010011%35%47%54%30%9%806040200200180160140120100806040200oecd: north americaoecd: eu14oecd: asiaother oecdrest of the worldfigure 2 packaged software sales by region, 19902001 (u.s. dollars). source: oecd (2002) using international data corporation data. reported in thoma and torrisi (2006).usukgermanynetherlandsirelandfranceitalyjapanchinahong kong (1)belgiumspainaustriasingaporeswedenindia (1)canadadenmarkswitzerlandkoreaindonesiaisraelnorwaysaudi arabialuxembourgbrazilrussiathailandaustralialebanonexports1995141210864202004with type replacedpercentfigure 3 top 30 country shares of reported exports of other business services and computer and information services, 1995 and 2004 (2004 data not yet available for all countries). for hong kong (china), india, and the slovak republic, data are for 2003. republished with permission from oecd economic outlook (2006). based on imf balance of payments database, march 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.60 innovation in global industriesputer and information services are shown in table 1. computer and information services (naics 518) include the categories computer and data processing services (naics 5181) and database and other information services (naics 5182). this table was reorganized based on the tables of business, professional, and technical services with unafliated foreigners from bea. ireland is included in all other eu and is not identied in bea™s tables. these export and import transactions with unafliated foreigners are interrm transfers, which are traditional trades. note that ﬁafliated foreignersﬂ are locally established afliates of multinational rms. the asian tigers consist of korea, singapore, taiwan, and hong kong. there are three things to notice about this table. first, at present the numbers are small relative to total u.s. trade in services: exports and imports of software services represent 3.3 and 1.0 percent of total exports and imports of services, respectively. second, the united states maintains a positive overall balance in trade and services; moreover, over the period 19982004 exports of computer services grew at a faster rate than imports (7.86 vs. 4.48 percent average annual growth rate [aagr]). third, although imports of computing services from india grew rapidly from 1994 to 2004, overall u.s. imports from india and the other software underdogs are small relative to other estimates.data from other sources suggest that the u.s. data may underestimate imports of software services. an oecd estimate indicates that over 90 percent of indian service exports to oecd countries are not accounted for in the data on service imports published by these countries (oecd, 2004). other analyses report similar difculties in tracking indian software services exports to the united states. a recent general accounting ofce (gao) report notes that, for 2002, the united states reported $240 million in unafliated imports of business, professional, and technical (bpt) services from india, whereas india reported about $6.5 billion in afliated and unafliated exports in similar services categories (gao, 2005).9 for 2003, the united states reported $420 million in unafliated imports of bpt services from india, whereas india reported approximately $8.7 billion in afliated and unafliated exports of similar services to the united states. the bulk (4050 percent) of the difference, according to the gao, is because the united states does not count the earnings of temporary workers resident in the united states in services imports. other sources include differences in coverage (e.g., embedded software is counted as exports of goods by the united states, or itenabled nancial services are not classied as it services by the united states), and because u.s. data do not indicate afliated imports by country of origin.as noted earlier, services trade data do not capture intrarm migration of software activity abroad. the bea data on u.s. mncs provide detailed information on the investment and production activities of u.s. companies abroad.9 afliated trade occurs between u.s. parent rms and their foreign afliates and between foreignowned rms in the united states and their foreign parent. unafliated trade occurs between u.s. entities and foreign entities that neither own nor are owned by the u.s. entity. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 61table 1 computer and information services with unafliated foreigners (million dollars)yearsaagr, 19982004199419982004computer and information servicescomputer and information servicesroyalties and license feestotalcomputer and information servicesroyalties and license feestotalcomputer and information servicesroyalties and license feestotalexports all countries2,3323,7053,1956,9006,6014,26110,86210.104.927.86 canada3334301255551,1442791,42317.7114.3216.99 europe8991,7671,5083,2753,2811,3284,60910.87œ2.105.86 japan1773067241,0303271,5681,8951.1113.7510.70 asian tigers117200––163––œ16.34––underdogs brazil48136......149812301.53....... israel512432563813517.96œ13.94œ1.55 china172946754851998.761.734.74 india93817552272925634.709.3129.21imports all countries2861,4944981,9922,0025892,5915.002.844.48 canada3458995981,189121,20112.424.9112.32 europe1222594497084005629627.513.815.24 japan2041266715116œ15.43œ41.90œ21.23 asian tigers618––31––55.98––underdogs brazil11121......0.00...... israel092117310œ4.106.99œ1.58 china26......7......2.60...... india7100......315632121.07......note: omitted cells include either transactions below $500,000 or data that were omitted to maintain condentiality. aagr, average annual growth rate.source: bea data on u.s. international trade in services.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.62 innovation in global industriestable 2 shows that growth in employment in it services and computer design industries has been faster for foreign afliates of u.s. rms than for their domestic operations (aagr 5.1 vs. 3.9 percent) due to faster growth among foreign afliates in computer design and related services.financing of software products and servicestable 3 includes data on one of the inputs to software product and service rms: nancial capital. it includes data on disclosed rounds of venture capital nancing by year and by destination country as reported in the venture economics venturexpert database. as is well known, venture nancing exhibits signicant yearly variation (e.g., gompers and lerner, 2006) and our data may not capture all venture nancing rounds. however, some broad trends are suggested. first, similar to our data on inventive outputs (described in further detail later), the united states clearly dominates in inputs of nancial capital to emerging software rms. however, based on data from 20022005, there is some evidence that rounds of venture nancing to the software underdogs declined less from their 2000 peak than did nancing to u.s. rms.10 however, there was an apparent decline in venture nancing to these countries in 2005. in short, more years of data are needed to discern whether there is a trend of increasing venture capital nancing to the software underdogs.regional trends in packaged software and software servicesin the previous section we showed that the united states represents the majority of world sales in packaged software. however, other regions of the world have a large and increasing percentage of software services. in this section we discuss some regional trends that are partially responsible for the geographic variance in economic activity in packaged software and services.software producers in europe and japanin western europe, the software industry has long been dominated by custom software development and software services (malerba and torrisi, 1996; steinmueller, 2004).table 4 shows sales of software products and it services in the eu15 during 20032005.11 it professional services such as consulting, implementation, 10 the software underdogs consist of india, ireland, israel, brazil, and china.11 the eu15 comprised the following 15 countries: austria, belgium, denmark, finland, france, germany, greece, ireland, italy, luxembourg, netherlands, portugal, spain, sweden, and the united kingdom.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 63table 2 growth in employment for foreign afliates of u.s. firms vs. growth for all u.s. establishments, selected industries, 1999200219992002aagrinformation services and data processing services foreign afliates of u.s. rms104.5132.08.1 all u.s. establishments371.9473.88.4computer system design and related services foreign afliates of u.s. rms157.9172.93.1 all u.s. establishments997.01,061.32.1total foreign afliates of u.s. rms262.4304.95.1 all u.s. establishments1,368.91,535.13.9note: aagr, average annual growth rate.source: data on foreign afliates of u.s. rms from table on selected data for majorityowned nonbank foreign afliates and nonbank u.s. parents in all industries, 2003. from bea international economic accounts, u.s. direct investment abroad: financial and operating data for u.s. multinational companies. data on all u.s. establishments from u.s. county business patterns data.table 3 disclosed rounds of venture financing by country, 19882005 (thousands of dollars)united statesother g7underdogsall othertotal19882,565660003,225198915,0002,4650017,46519906,35046424807,06219911,1000001,10019921,6071,418003,025199315,2475820015,82919947,403138007,541199514,34000014,340199692,7841,46602,76697,0161997242,873007,049249,9221998300,3559,35906,039315,75319991,068,31068,01128,66621,1021,186,08920002,036,591221,29773,307169,6362,500,8302001460,91183,94432,25616,629593,740200299,83623,2956,8313,815133,7772003173,20514,60715,251167203,2302004151,0259,49210,6001,848172,9652005138,4282,0002,00059 142,487source: venture economics venturexpert database, and author™s calculations. software includes rounds of nancing from software and ecommerce software rms. dates are round date of nancing.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.64 innovation in global industriestable 4 sales of software products and it services in the eu15200320042005average growth (%)software products59,23561,70764,9794.74 system software30,94432,53734,5365.64 application software28,29129,16930,4433.73it services112,472116,149120,9133.68 professional services81,37684,38088,1474.08 support services31,09631,76932,7662.65total software171,707177,856185,892percent services52.67%53.13%53.74%source: european information technology observatory (2006).and operations management are larger than the entire software products market. malerba and torrisi (1996) identify several reasons for this focus on software services, including a weak local it hardware industry, rstmover advantages by u.s. software product rms, fragmentation of local demand, and relatively little interaction between european universities and industry. the largest european producer of packaged software is sap, the producer of enterprise software. sap is currently the third largest software product company by sales, behind microsoft and oracle.one surprising result in figures 1 and 2 is that, in contrast to many other technology industries, japanese rms account for a very small share of the total export market for packaged software. this is not a recent result; japanese rms have not ever been major players in the world market for packaged software, despite their success in video games and in other it markets. japan runs a signicant negative trade imbalance in software: in 1997, japan imported us$3.93 billion of software but exported only us$23.33 million (asahi shimbun, reported in anchordoguy, 2000).a number of reasons have been provided for the relative weakness of japanese software producers, including challenges created by the japanese language, weak venture capital markets, weakness in intellectual property protection, and weak university computer science education (anchordoguy, 2000; baba et al., 1996; cottrell, 1996; fransman, 1995). cottrell (1996) argues that weakness in japanese pc software production was due historically to a fragmented standards environment, while anchordoguy (2000) argues that the aforementioned proximate reasons were ultimately caused by japan™s economic system of ﬁcatchup capitalism.ﬂ1212 in particular, she argues that some of the key elements of the japanese economic systemšincluding state targeting policies, its keiretsu industrial groups, bankcentered nancial system, and weak intellectual property systemšhave been beneted by its development of successful industries in steel, semiconductors, and it hardware but have hindered the development of its it software industry.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 65other countries that are large software producersrapid growth in the size of the indian software industry has recently attracted much attention in the academic and popular press (e.g., athreye, 2005a; arora et al., 2001). data from nasscom show that indian it services exports grew from $22 million in 1984 to $10 billion in 2005, with an additional $3 billion due to r&d services, engineering services, and software products. as this makes clear, the indian software industry has largely been built around software services rather than products. athreye (2005a) estimates that in 2000, revenue per employee among indian software rms was approximately $35,100, up from only $6,200 in 1993.some anecdotal evidence suggests that indian rms are increasingly performing more r&dintensive activities. athreye (2005a) notes the growth of a new innovative sector of small niche companies. moreover, there is evidence of a deepening of r&d skills and the emergence of informal networks among local rms in india. this is also some evidence of success in certain niche technologies such as wireless and embedded systems (parthasarathy and aoyama, 2006; ilavarasan, 2006); software for mobile phones represents a substantial category. some indian rms have also had success in developing software products for the developing countries market: one example is citil (now i˚ex), a citibank subsidiary that initially produced software products for developing country markets before eventually moving on to headtohead competition with the established incumbent producers in developed countries (arora, 2006; athreye, 2005b). there are also some data on substantial and growing r&d activities in countries such as india; arora (2006) reports that total revenues for engineering services and r&d by indian producers in 2006 were estimated to be us$4.8 billion, a 23.1 percent increase over the prior year. in the next section we attempt to shed some additional light on this issue by examining u.s. patent data.the irish software industry consists of two very separate subindustries, each with very different characteristics. first, there is an overseas sector that is dominated by mncs. these rms primarily are engaged in software logistics (such as media replication and printing and packaging production and distribution), localization (such as translating and adapting software to suit european markets), and development (o™riain, 1999). second, there is an indigenous sector that is populated by smaller rms that is engaged in software development and product development activities.the number of mncs in ireland grew rapidly throughout the 1990s, from 74 foreign rms in 1991 to 140 foreign rms in 2000. as arora, gambardella, and torrisi (2004) note, this rapid growth was due to a number of factors, including the liberalization of economic policies that began in 1991, a large and welleducated englishspeaking workforce, an advantageous site for localization activities, as well as potential agglomeration economies that were ignited after the irish softwareproducing industry reached sufcient scale. mnc subsidiaries innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.66 innovation in global industriesare engaged primarily in ﬁlowvalueadded, lowskill activities such as porting of legacy products on new platforms, disc duplication, assembling/packaging, and localizationﬂ (arora et al., 2004). revenues and exports in the irish software industry have always been dominated by these mncs. sands (2005) notes that total industry revenues grew from $2.66 billion in 1991 to over $18 billion in 2002, with mncs continuously accounting for over 90 percent of the total. in contrast, the indigenous sector is more productbased: it accounts for just under half of employment; however, it accounts for only 9 percent of revenues. indigenous companies are usually young and small, and often produce primarily for niche or vertical (i.e., industryspecic) markets (sands, 2005).the software industry in israel looks considerably different from that in either ireland or india. compared to locally owned indian or irish rms, israeli rms are more productbased and are more r&d intensive. breznitz (2005) notes that revenue per employee for israeli software rms was us$255,172 in 2000. by his calculations, the similar statistic in 2000 for u.s. software publishers was us$231,621 and for locally owned irish software producers was us$90,000. breznitz (2005) examines the reasons for israel™s productbased industry. he provides several reasons: tight links between the r&d activities of israeli universities and hightech industries in the country; the presence of a highly successful indigenous hardware industry; the presence of local market demand for new products; the presence of american mncs locating r&d facilities in israel; and the ability of the israeli it industry to raise capital in u.s. nancial markets.empirical evidence on the location of inventive activityin this section we examine the global geographic distribution of inventive activity in software. the data presented in the preceding section pointed to expanding markets for software services abroad. those data also show that the market for packaged software continues to be highly concentrated in the united states, and little evidence indicates that this trend is reversing. however, authors such as athreye (2005a) report increasing inventive activity in indian rms, and other authors have reported similar trends in ireland (sands, 2005) and china (tschang and xue, 2005), as well as wellestablished software product industries in israel (breznitz, 2005) and brazil (botelho et al., 2005). software product sales are a lagging indicator of inventive activity in software: could inventive activity in software be picking up in other areas of the world but not yet re˚ected in product sales? if so, how signicant are these developments in terms of number of inventions and their importance? to answer these questions, one needs a measure of r&d and inventive activity that is comparable across countries.patent data have long been used as one measure of inventive activity. patents have also been found to be correlated, although weakly, with r&d spending, so they provide a weak measure of raw inputs into innovation (griliches, 1990). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 67there are, of course, signicant limitations to the use of software patents as a measure of inventive activity. as jaffe and trajtenberg (2002) note, not all inventions meet the u.s. patent and trademark ofce (uspto) criteria for patentability,13 and inventors must make an explicit decision to patent an invention, as opposed to relying on some other method of intellectual property protection. in particular, there may be incremental inventive activity that is not patented and therefore is not re˚ected in patent statistics. moreover, rms may sometimes choose to use trade secrecy rather than patenting to protect groundbreaking inventions because of incomplete enforcement of property rights. to the extent that intellectual property regimes differ across countries, this may make comparison of levels of patents across countries more difcult.conversely the high growth rate of patenting that we observe in our sample may be in˚uenced by strategic patenting behavior. as hall and ziedonis (2001) document in the semiconductor industry, rms may patent not to protect standalone technological inventions but rather to protect against holdup by external patent holders or to negotiate access to external technologies. thus, when interpreting our results, readers should be aware of how patent statistics may deviate from the level of inventive activity across countries. however, so long as the propensity to patent does not change signicantly over time, these biases should not appreciably affect our interpretation of the time trends of patenting behavior across countries (and their interpretation as a metric of inventive activity).historically, inventions in software were not patentable14 and for a time copyright was the predominant form of formal intellectual property protection in software. however, a series of court decisions widened the scope of software patents. eventually, this culminated in the commissioner of patents issuing guidelines for the patenting of software that allowed inventors to patent any software embodied in physical media (hall and macgarvie, 2006). in contrast, over the same period, a series of cases, including several copyright infringement cases brought by lotus development, weakened the intellectual property protection offered by copyrights. graham and mowery (2003) show that over this period the number of granted software patents has increased dramatically while the propensity of rms to copyright has declined.15 recent research has shown that the stock of patents is correlated with rm success in the software industry 13 note that not all inventions also meet the criteria for patentability for the european patent ofce (epo) and japanese patent ofce (jpo). 14 the following provides a necessarily brief overview of the history of intellectual property protection in software. for a more detailed overview, see graham and mowery (2003) and hall and macgarvie (2006). 15 the set of patentable inventions is narrower in europe than in the united states. to be patentable, the european patent convention requires that inventions address a particular technical problem and suggest a technical means to solve this problem (thoma and torrisi, 2006). the implication of this requirement is that ﬁinventions having a technical character that are or may be implemented by computer programs may well be patentableﬂ (epo, 2005). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.68 innovation in global industries(merges, 2006), suggesting that patents may be a potentially useful metric of the inventive output of rms.a second issue in using software patents to measure inventive activity in software is identifying exactly which patents are software patents.16 software patents are not assigned to a particular class or subclass in either the uspto or international patent classication (ipc) schemes. moreover, there is no unique software classication eld for patents. graham and mowery (2003) were the rst to systematically identify software patents for research purposes. they identied the ipc classes used by the six largest producers of pc software over the period 1984 to 1995. this search resulted in a list of 11 ipc classes, which account for over half (57 percent) of the more than 600 patents assigned to the 100 largest packaged software rms in 1995 (as identied in the trade news publication softletter).the grahammowery approach of using the patent classication system to identify software patents has been used and revised by others. graham and mowery (2005) identify software patents using uspto classications. hall and macgarvie (2006) identify software patents by nding the uspto classsubclass combinations in which 15 large software rms patent. to identify their nal sample, they intersect the resulting set of patents with another keyword denition used by bessen and hunt (2004).bessen and hunt (2004) identify software patents through the use of a boolean query that searches for keywords in the text of patents. they arrive at a patent sample that is broader than that used by other researchers (laynefarrar, 2005). other researchers have identied a smaller sample of patents by reading them manually. allison and tiller (2003) identify internet business method patents and allison et al. (2005) identify university software patents.17for this chapter, we use a version of the grahammowery approach based on the ipc system. we began by identifying the top 10 rms by revenue volume in 1995 according to the corptech directory of technology companies.18 we then examined the ipc classes in which they patented. because we found that the grahammowery set of ipc classes covered only 46 percent of the patents of these top 10 rms, we added two additional ipc categories. our complete list of patent classes covered more than 80 percent of the patents of these top 10 rms. table 5 provides a list of the included ipc classes and subclasses and their descriptions.16 this section provides an overview of the issues in identifying software patents. for a more complete discussion, see laynefarrar (2005) and hall and macgarvie (2006). 17 thoma and torrisi (2005) compare several of these methods in a study of european software patents. 18 these are adobe, autodesk, cadence, macromedia inc., microsoft, novell, oracle, sap, sybase, and symantec corp. note that corptech™s coverage of foreign rms is more limited than its coverage of u.s. rms; however, so long as the distribution of patent classes used by software patenting rms does not vary substantially for u.s. and nonu.s. rms, this issue should not appreciably in˚uence our results. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 69by using a broader set of ipc classes than graham and mowery, we are more likely to include patents that may be assigned to the aforementioned classes but are not software patents. as we will see, software patenting outside of the united states is relatively rare, so we utilize a conservative denition that includes as many such patents as possible in hopes of achieving an ﬁupper boundﬂ on the stock of software patents invented outside of the united states. however, we recognize that, if the rate of patenting in related technologies outside of software is higher than that inside and if the share of inventive activity in these other technologies is higher in the united states than abroad, then our measure may articially in˚ate the gap in software patenting between the united states and other nations. to address this possibility, we compare our results using several software patenting denitions, including those of graham and mowery (2003, 2005).table 5 list of ipc patent classes used in analysesclass/subclassdescriptiong06f 3/00input arrangements for transferring data to be processed into a form capable of being handled by the computer; output arrangements for transferring data from processing unit to output unit (e.g., interface arrangements)g06f 5/00methods or arrangements for data conversion without changing the order or content of the data handledg06f 7/00methods or arrangements for processing data by operating upon the order or content of the data handledg06f 9/00arrangements for program control (e.g., control unit)g06f 11/00error detection; error correction; monitoringg06f 12/00accessing, addressing, or allocating within memory systems or architecturesg06f 13/00interconnection of, or transfer of, information or other signals between memories, input/output devices, or central processing unitsg06f 15/00digital computers in generalg06f 17/00digital computing or data processing equipment or methods, specially adapted for specic functionsg06k 9/00methods or arrangements for reading or recognizing printed or written characters or for recognizing patterns (e.g., ngerprints)g06k 15/00arrangements for producing a permanent visual presentation of the output datag06t 11/00twodimensional image generation (e.g., from a description to a bitmapped image)g06t 15/00threedimensional image rendering (e.g., from a model to a bitmapped image)g09g 5/00control arrangements or circuits for visual indicators common to cathoderay tube indicators and other visual indicatorsh04l 9/00arrangements for secret or secure communicationnote: class names are as follows: g06f, electric digital data processing; g06k, recognition of data, presentation of data, record carriers, handling record carriers; g06t, image data processing or generation, in general; g09g, arrangements or circuits for control of indicating devices using static means to present variable information; h04l, electric communication technique. source: international patent classication system, world intellectual property organization, http://www.wipo.int/classications/ipc/ipc8/?lang=en.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.70 innovation in global industriesfigure 4 percent of u.s. patents invented in united states under different software denitions. source: uspto data and authors™ calculations.software4.eps455055606570percent u.s. patents19881992199620002004yeargm 03gm 05afyas an illustration, we computed the percentage of patents produced by inventors who reside in the united states (regardless of assignee location) under different denitions and then compared them.figure 4 presents these results. all three denitions show similar percentages for u.s. patents. moreover, the three denitions have similar trends: increasing throughout the 1990s before reaching a peak around 2000 before declining slightly. given the similarity in results across these different denitions, we will continue to focus on our original denition described earlier.results of patent data analysisfigure 5 shows the number of u.s. patents invented in the united states, japan, other g7, and all other nations (based on inventor address) by year of patent grant. the steep increase in the number of patents granted after 1995 is consistent with prior work that has shown an increase in the propensity to patent software after increases in the scope of intellectual property rights afforded by software patents (graham and mowery, 2003; hall and macgarvie, 2006). in 2004, 4,695 software patents were issued to inventors in the united statesša larger number of patents than inventors from all other areas of the world combined (2,811). the average annual growth in software patenting between 1988 and 2004 was also greater in the united states than in all other g7 nations: patenting by u.s. inveninnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 71software5.eps010002000300040005000number of patents19881992199620002004yearjapanother g7all othersusfigure 5 u.s. software patents invented in united states and other countries. source: uspto data and authors™ calculations.tors grew at an average annual rate of 19.5 percent, compared to 16.1 percent for inventors in japan and 18.0 percent in other g7 nations.these gures may re˚ect a ﬁhome country biasﬂ: u.s. rms may be more likely to patent in the u.s. market than foreign rms. thus, in our data on patenting by location of inventor, the high percentage of u.s. patents may re˚ect (1) higher rates of u.s. patenting by u.s. rms (compared to rms in other countries) and (2) a higher propensity for u.s. rms to invent in the united states. more broadly, there may be some concern that there are potential differences between the site of inventive activity in u.s.assigned u.s. patents that have epo or jpo equivalents and the site of inventive activity in u.s.assigned u.s. patents that do not have such equivalents. we address this potential concern in two ways. first, we look at the location of inventive activity for patents assigned to rms from outside of the united states. second, we compare our results to recent work that has examined software patenting behavior in european patents.we examined the percentage of patents assigned to the home country by country of assignee rm, based on year in which the patent was granted. figure 6 shows that japanassigned u.s. software patents are predominantly invented in japan, although this share appeared to decline during 20002004. similarly, the location of invention in israeli and g7assigned patents (excluding the united innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.72 innovation in global industriesstates and japan) is predominately sited in those countries and regions. to be clear, comparing the propensity of u.s. software patents assigned to u.s. rms to be invented in the united states with the propensity of u.s. software patents assigned to rms from other countries to be invented in that (home) country is not an ﬁapples to applesﬂ comparison. however, given this important caveat, this gure does not suggest that patents assigned to u.s. rms are signicantly more likely to be invented in the home country (united states) than are the patents from other countries. in fact, for several years, the u.s. patents assigned to japanese and israeli rms were more likely to be invented in the home country than u.s. patents assigned to u.s. rms. in recent years, however, this ﬁhomeﬂ percentage has been higher for patents assigned to u.s. rms than for others, though this is largely attributable to a decline in the home invented share for patents assigned to rms from other countries.thoma and torrisi (2006) examine the rate of software patenting in european patents. figure 7 shows the number of patents granted by country of patent assignee and year of patent application. there are some differences in the way thoma and torrisi dene software patents and other differences in their sample construction: in particular, thoma and torrisi examine the distribution of patentsoftware6.eps80859095100percent invented in home country19881992199620002004yearusjapanisraelg7 excluding us and japanfigure 6 percentage of u.s. software patents invented in home country by country of assignee. source: uspto data and authors™ calculations.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 73ing activity by site of assignee rather than inventor.19 however, the broad trends are very similar to those in figure 5: u.s. rms are responsible for the majority of software patenting activity, followed by japanese rms, and then all others. moreover, thoma and torrisi (2006) note that, of the european software patents in their database, 80.3 percent have also been granted by the uspto and 73.8 percent have also been granted by jpo. if the majority of european software patents assigned to u.s. rms are also invented in the united states (not an unreasonable assumption given evidence presented in the earlier paragraph that the majority of u.s. software patents assigned to u.s. rms are invented in the united states), then the graph suggests that, even using european software patent data, a large share of the inventive activity in software takes place in the united states. further, we note that while the levels of software patenting expressed in figures 4 and 5 may be in˚uenced by home country bias, so long as this bias does not change systematically over time, the time trends shown in these gures will not be as in˚uenced by such bias.19 in particular, thoma and torrisi use a variant of hall and macgarvie™s (2006) method of constructing a software patent sample based on patent classes and bessen and hunt™s (2004) keyword method. moreover, this graph shows patenting by assignee country rather than inventing country; however, according to our data 93.4 percent of patents assigned to u.s. rms were also invented in the united states. last, this gure shows patenting by year of application rather than year of granting; however, the broad trend of greater patenting among u.s. assignees is robust to this difference. software7.epsbitmap imagewith type replaced1200010000800060004000200001979198019811982198319841985198619871988198919901991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003othersjpusitgbfrdefigure 7 european patent ofce software patent grants by country of the assignee and year of application. source: thoma and torrisi (2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.74 innovation in global industriespatenting activity by regionfigure 8 shows the number of u.s. patents invented in the underdog countries based on inventor location. israel is the only one among them to have a signicant number of u.s. patents. israeli patenting activity increased from 3 in 1998 to a high of 90 in 2003. no other country has had more than 20 patents in any one year, though the number of patents invented in india has risen slightly in recent years, from an average of 0.5 throughout the 1990s to 16 in 2004.figure 9 shows the number of patents invented in the east asian tigers based on inventor location.20 the number of patents invented in these countries is signicantly higher than that of the underdogs. however, evidence suggests that many of these patents may be related to electronics.21 patenting among these countries is dominated by inventors from indigenous electronics companies in korea and taiwan: in 2004, 264 of the 280 patents granted were from this set of assignees.20 for the purposes of this paper, the asian tigers consist of korea, taiwan, singapore, and hong kong. this is a separate and distinct set from the software underdogs. 21 the top patenting rms in these countries include daewoo electronics co. ltd. (33), electronics and telecommunications research (60), hyundai electronics industries co. ltd. (57), industrial technology research institute (55), inventec corporation (25), lg electronics (102), and samsung electronics (463). all of these companies are heavily involved in electronics research.software8.eps020406080100number of patents19881992199620002004yearbrazilindiachinairelandisraelfigure 8 number of u.s. software patents invented in underdog countries. source: uspto data and authors™ calculations.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 75software9.eps050100150number of patents19881992199620002004yearkoreataiwansingaporehong kongfigure 9 number of u.s. software patents invented in east asian tigers. source: uspto data and authors™ calculations.assignee location for patents invented abroadas noted earlier, multinational rms have played a major role in the development of software industries in other countries such as india and ireland and may be driving the patenting activity by overseas inventors. to investigate this question further, we examined the location of u.s. software patent assignees for u.s. software patents invented in different countries. the overwhelming majority of patents invented in the united states were also assigned to u.s. rms. this fraction ranges from 93 to 97 percent over the period 19882004. no other region ever exceeded 6 percent in these data.figure 10 shows the distribution of assignee country for patents invented in the underdog countries. here, the fraction of patents assigned to u.s. rms has generally been increasing over time, ranging from 20 percent in 1990 to a high of 65.7 percent in 2002. excluding israel (which has a robust software product industry) from the software underdogs, the top assignees in the software underdogs are 3com (12), ibm (25), and texas instruments (12); no other company has more than ve patents. the percentage of patents invented in underdog nations that are assigned to underdog rms has similarly been declining over time, from 80 percent in 1990 to 32.7 percent in 2004.the increasing share of patents invented abroad in one of the software uninnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.76 innovation in global industriesderdogs but assigned to u.s. rms suggests that there may be some shift in the location of inventive activity for u.s. rms to offshore locations. there is some evidence of a shift to more offshore invention for patents assigned to u.s. rms. however, the shift is small and offshore software invention in underdog countries by u.s. rms accounts for a very small share of the total patents assigned to u.s. rms. we also examine the trends in the site of inventive activity for u.s. software patents assigned to u.s. rms; note that these trends, because they only examine the site of inventive activity for patents assigned to u.s. rms, are not subject to concerns of home country bias. the percentage of u.s.assigned patents invented in the united states fell from 93.5 percent in 1996 to 92.1 percent in 2005.22 this decrease in the share of u.s. patents is due in large part to the increase in offshore activity in the underdogs: the percent of u.s.assigned patents invented in the underdogs rose from 1.1 percent in 1996 to 1.8 percent in 2005.we next examined whether there were any systematic differences in the industrial classication of the patent assignees by region where the patent was in22 the share of u.s.assigned patents invented in the united states was 96.2 percent in 1988 and 93.0 percent in 1989, though the number of software patents in these years was much lower than in 1996 (260 in 1988 and 387 in 1989 compared to 1,519 in 1996) which, as described earlier, was one of the rst years in which software patenting began to grow rapidly.software10.eps020406080100percentage oftotal patents19881992199620002004year020406080100percentage oftotal patents19881992199620002004yearasian tigersother g7underdogsall othersfigure 10 distribution of assignee country for u.s. software patents invented in software underdogs. top panel, united states; bottom panel, all other countries.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 77vented. to do this, using assignee (company) name, we merged our u.s. software patent data with the corptech database of high technology companies.table 6 shows the distribution of assignee industry for patents by inventor region. due to the way the corptech data are collected, the industries of many asian and g7 countries in the corptech database are classied as holding companies, so we focus our analyses on patents invented in the united states and in the underdog countries. one fact that is immediately apparent across all rows of the table is that patents are assigned to companies that belong to a variety of industries. outside of the ﬁholding companyﬂ category, most patents are from the ﬁotherﬂ category. moreover, most patents are not assigned to rms in the ﬁsoftware publishersﬂ industry (sic 7372)šthe sic industry for packaged software producers. second, the distributions of industries in the united states and underdog countries are broadly similar, with u.s. rms slightly more likely to be in industrial machinery and equipment and the underdogs more likely to be in electronics.in table 7 we provide some descriptive statistics on top patenting rms in major softwareproducing countries. to construct this table, we identied the ve rms with the largest number of u.s. patents in each of nine countries: china, germany, the united kingdom, ireland, israel, india, japan, south korea, and the united states. two major facts emerge. first, as noted earlier, the top patenting rms in software are usually not packaged software producers. second, the top patenting rms in the underdog countries are usually large u.s. producers of table 6 assignee industry for u.s. patents by region, 19882005industrial machinery (sic 35)electrical & electronic equip. (sic 36)holding companies (sic 67)software publishers (sic 7372)all otherunited states9,741(27.48)5,291(14.92)4,770(13.45)2,217(6.25)13,434(37.89)other g71,023(5.87)153(0.88)12,561(72.11)98(0.56)3,585(20.58)asian tigers47(2.77)51(3.00)781(46.00)1(0.06)818(48.17)software underdogs133(18.02)136(18.43)56(7.59)59(7.99)354(47.97)all other85(6.42)44(3.33)609(46.03)15(1.13)570(43.08)source: author™s manipulation of data from uspto and corptech database of technology companies. numbers represent frequencies of row and column combinations. numbers in parentheses represent the percentage of assignees in an industry conditional on invention in the country in the row. the unit of observation in the table is a patent.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.78 table 7 leading recipients of u.s. software patents, by country of inventor, 19882005nameyear company was foundedindustrynumber of employeesrevenuehome countrynumber of patentschinamicrosoft1975software71,553$44 billionunited states6ibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states5united microelectronics corp.1980electronics12,000taiwan4intel1968electronics99,900$39 billionunited states2huawei technologies1988telecommunication44,000$8.2 billionchina1germanysiemens1847conglomerate472,000$75 billiongermany252robert bosch gmbh1886automotive251,000$55 billiongermany178ibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states98inneon technologies1999electronics36,000$7 billiongermany41daimler chrysler ag1998automotive383,000$150 billiongermany38united kingdomibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states140international computers limited1968computersunited kingdom40british telecommunnications plc1846telecommunications104,400$37 billionunited kingdom38sun microsystems inc.1982it hardware31,000$11 billionunited states35philips corporation1891electronics159,226$36 billionthe netherlands32ireland3com corporation1979networks1,925$800 millionunited states11analog devices inc.1965it hardware 8,800$2.4 billionunited states3richmount computers limited3hitachi ltd.1920it hardware, electronics323,072$80.5 billionjapan3ibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states3israelibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states69intel1968electronics99,900$39 billionunited states58motorola inc.1928electronics88,000$37 billionunited states32scitex corporation (now scailex corporation)ait hardware, now venture capital$128.2 millionisrael12applied materials inc.1967semiconductor12,576$7 billionunited states11indiaibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states17texas instruments1930hardware30,300$13 billionunited states12honeywell international inc.1886aerospace116,000$26 billionunited states3veritas operating corporation (acquired by symantec)b1989software16,000$4.1 billionunited states3sun microsystems inc.1982hardware31,000$11 billionunited states2japanhitachi ltd.1920it hardware, electronics323,072$80.5 billionjapan1,403canon1937imaging100,000$35 billionjapan1,286fujitsu1935hardware158,000$40 billionjapan1,127nec corporation1899electronics148,540$41 billionjapan976toshiba1904electronics165,000$60 billionjapan820south koreasamsung1938electronics$80 billionsouth korea460lg electronicsc1958electronics66,614$23.5 billionsouth korea100electronics and telecommunications research institute1976south korea55hyundai electronics (now hynix semiconductor)semiconductors13,000$5.6 billionsouth korea49hyundai motor company1967automotive51,000$57 billionsouth korea30innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 79table 7 leading recipients of u.s. software patents, by country of inventor, 19882005nameyear company was foundedindustrynumber of employeesrevenuehome countrynumber of patentschinamicrosoft1975software71,553$44 billionunited states6ibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states5united microelectronics corp.1980electronics12,000taiwan4intel1968electronics99,900$39 billionunited states2huawei technologies1988telecommunication44,000$8.2 billionchina1germanysiemens1847conglomerate472,000$75 billiongermany252robert bosch gmbh1886automotive251,000$55 billiongermany178ibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states98inneon technologies1999electronics36,000$7 billiongermany41daimler chrysler ag1998automotive383,000$150 billiongermany38united kingdomibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states140international computers limited1968computersunited kingdom40british telecommunnications plc1846telecommunications104,400$37 billionunited kingdom38sun microsystems inc.1982it hardware31,000$11 billionunited states35philips corporation1891electronics159,226$36 billionthe netherlands32ireland3com corporation1979networks1,925$800 millionunited states11analog devices inc.1965it hardware 8,800$2.4 billionunited states3richmount computers limited3hitachi ltd.1920it hardware, electronics323,072$80.5 billionjapan3ibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states3israelibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states69intel1968electronics99,900$39 billionunited states58motorola inc.1928electronics88,000$37 billionunited states32scitex corporation (now scailex corporation)ait hardware, now venture capital$128.2 millionisrael12applied materials inc.1967semiconductor12,576$7 billionunited states11indiaibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states17texas instruments1930hardware30,300$13 billionunited states12honeywell international inc.1886aerospace116,000$26 billionunited states3veritas operating corporation (acquired by symantec)b1989software16,000$4.1 billionunited states3sun microsystems inc.1982hardware31,000$11 billionunited states2japanhitachi ltd.1920it hardware, electronics323,072$80.5 billionjapan1,403canon1937imaging100,000$35 billionjapan1,286fujitsu1935hardware158,000$40 billionjapan1,127nec corporation1899electronics148,540$41 billionjapan976toshiba1904electronics165,000$60 billionjapan820south koreasamsung1938electronics$80 billionsouth korea460lg electronicsc1958electronics66,614$23.5 billionsouth korea100electronics and telecommunications research institute1976south korea55hyundai electronics (now hynix semiconductor)semiconductors13,000$5.6 billionsouth korea49hyundai motor company1967automotive51,000$57 billionsouth korea30continuedinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.80 nameyear company was foundedindustrynumber of employeesrevenuehome countrynumber of patentsunited statesibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states4,981intel1968electronics99,900$39 billionunited states1,648microsoft1975software71,553$44 billionunited states1,136sun microsystems inc.1982hardware31,000$11 billionunited states1,088hewlettpackard inc.1939hardware150,000$89 billionunited states682 adata are for scailex. bdata are for symantec. clg electronics and lg semicon co. ltd. are each part of the lg group. lg phillips is a joint venture with the lg group and philips. data missing are because data on some subsidiaries of the lg group are not separately available.source: the top ve rms with the largest number of u.s. patents, identied from our calculations of uspto data. company data are from hoover™s online, company annual reports, company web pages, and wikipedia. revenues are in u.s. dollars and for the most current year available. missing cells represent rms for which we were unable to recover data.table 7 continuedinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 81nameyear company was foundedindustrynumber of employeesrevenuehome countrynumber of patentsunited statesibm1888it hardware, software, services330,000$91 billionunited states4,981intel1968electronics99,900$39 billionunited states1,648microsoft1975software71,553$44 billionunited states1,136sun microsystems inc.1982hardware31,000$11 billionunited states1,088hewlettpackard inc.1939hardware150,000$89 billionunited states682 adata are for scailex. bdata are for symantec. clg electronics and lg semicon co. ltd. are each part of the lg group. lg phillips is a joint venture with the lg group and philips. data missing are because data on some subsidiaries of the lg group are not separately available.source: the top ve rms with the largest number of u.s. patents, identied from our calculations of uspto data. company data are from hoover™s online, company annual reports, company web pages, and wikipedia. revenues are in u.s. dollars and for the most current year available. missing cells represent rms for which we were unable to recover data.electronicsšand to a much lesser extent european and japanese producersšsuch as ibm, intel, texas instruments, and sun microsystems. one exception is china, where one taiwanese and one chinese rm are included among the leading producers. however, as noted earlier, the number of u.s. software patents produced in china is very small.u.s. market advantages for innovative activitythe data in the prior two sections show two very different stories occurring in the globalization of software activity. on one hand, as has been well documented, there has been increasing growth in the production of it service activity outside the united states. this trend has been going on for some time now and shows no signs of abating. second, there is evidence that inventive activity in software development (at least as measured by patents) is highly concentrated in the united states and heavily controlled by u.s. rms. though there is some evidence that inventive activity is picking up outside the united states, at current rates of growth this activity will not catch up with the u.s. software industry any time soon. moreover, though there is some evidence that some inventive activity by u.s. rms has shifted abroad, at present the shift is small and this remains a small share of u.s. rms™ overall inventive activity.however, these trend rates of growth can change, so it is useful to examine the conditions that are widely thought to be conducive to innovation and inventive activity in new technologies. the literature has long examined some of the factors in˚uencing the variance in innovative activities across countries.23 these include r&d investments and human capital (e.g., romer, 1990), supportive public policies (e.g., nelson and rosenberg, 1994; mowery and rosenberg, 1998), and more localized factors supporting the growth of clusters, including spillovers and userproducer interactions (porter, 1990). in general, the united states has advantages over other rich and poor countries in all of these dimensions. we focus our attention on one area that we believe has received insufcient attention: the importance of geographic proximity to lead user innovation.a key factor in the development and growth of a local software industry is the relationship with users. the transition of new inventions to usable economic products is a difcult process. solving the problems that remain after initial conceptualization requires sustained innovative activity. user innovation and input are often an important part of this process (rosenberg, 1963), and the willingness and ability of individuals to acquire and use new products and technologies is often as important as the developments of such products and technology themselves (rosenberg, 1983).such user activity is particularly important in software. business software in particular is often bundled with a set of business rules and assumptions about 23 for a recent overview and review of this literature, see furman et al. (2002). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.82 innovation in global industriesbusiness processes that must be integrated with the existing business organization, its activities, and its processes. recent research indicates that proximity between software developers and users is particularly important for this activity to occur.the software industry has a long history of user innovation and interactions with users leading to pathbreaking new products. for example, ibm™s collaboration with american airlines on the sabre airline reservation system in the 1950s and 1960s was an important early use of information technology in ﬁrealtimeﬂ applications that would later be used in airline reservations, bank automation, and retail systems (campbellkelly, 2003; copeland and mckenney, 1988). the genesis of this project was a serendipitous event: the chance meeting on a ˚ight of r. blair smith of ibm™s santa monica sales ofce with c. r. smith, the president of american airlines. the eventual outcome of this project was the sabre system. both ibm and american airlines made extensive investments and contributions to the project: ﬁwe tapped almost all types of sources of programming manpower. the control (executive) program was written by ibm in accordance with our contract with them. we used some contract programmers from service organizations; we used our own experienced data processing people; we tested, trained, and developed programmers from within american airlines, and hired experienced programmers on the open market.ﬂ24 similarly, the early development of erp software by sap occurred through a series of incremental improvements during development of realtime software for clients (campbellkelly, 2003).one major challenge to offshoring software product development work will result from the difculty of coordinating software development activity across a globally distributed team. as is well known, partitioning complicated software development projects across multiple team members is difcult and often substantially increases the costs of software development (brooks, 1995).these problems may become still greater when management of such projects is attempted at a distance. globally distributed team members do not have access to the rich communication channels that colocated developers have. moreover, differences in language and culture may make it much more difcult to establish common ground among team members and ensure that miscommunications do not occur (armstrong and cole, 2002; olson and olson, 2000). these projects face other challenges, including an inability to engage in informal communication as well as the difculty of managing team members who may believe that such projects are a prelude to job cuts.a number of techniques have been proposed for lowering the costs of distributed software development. going back as far as march and simon (1958), one common technique in distributed development is to reduce the interdependencies among software components. the increasing modularization of software code and 24 parker (1965), as quoted in campbellkelly (2003). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 83the use of objectoriented software development techniques has likely reduced some of the costs of distributed development over time. however, schedules and feedback mechanisms are necessary when interdependencies are unavoidable (march and simon, 1958). the recent successes of largescale opensource projects such as linux and apache have led some to consider whether opensource project management methodologies could be utilized in traditional corporate software development. globally distributed teams rely heavily on coordination tools such as email, phone, and more recently instant messaging as well as conguration management tools. however, several authors have shown that initial meetings are often necessary both to detail project requirements and for project members to become familiar with one another (e.g., herbsleb et al., 2005). in general, the literature has demonstrated that, despite the continued development of tools and techniques to manage distributed projects, globally distributed work is difcult and can involve signicant coordination costs.despite the considerable work that has been done in examining the challenges of software project management in a distributed environment, there has been heretofore relatively little systematic widespread empirical evidence on how distance from software suppliers impacts rm decisions to offshore software development.arora and forman (2007) attempt to gather such systematic evidence by examining which it services can be effectively performed from a distance or, to put it another way, which it services are tradable. one way of examining the tradability of it services is to examine the extent to which they are clustered near local demand. if markets for it services are local, then we should expect the entry decisions of it services rms to depend in part on the size of the local market. if markets are not local, then the composition of local demand should matter little; rather, suppliers should locate in lowcost regions. by providing evidence of the geographic reach of markets, this analysis also provides evidence on the tradability of services: markets for services that are not tradable will be local, whereas those for services that are tradable need not be local.arora and forman examine the clustering of local market supply for two types of it services: programming and design and hosting. ﬁprogramming and designﬂ refers to programming tasks or planning and designing information systems that involve the integration of computer hardware, software, and communication technologies. these projects require communication of detailed user requirements to the outsourcing rm in order to succeed. hosting involves management and operation of computer and dataprocessing services for the client.25 after an initial setup period, the requirements of such hosting services will be relatively static and will require relatively little coordination between client and 25 while hosting activities do not t most denitions of ﬁinnovationﬂ or ﬁinventionﬂ in software per se, they do provide a useful benchmark to compare tradability of services that require complex communication and coordination between supplier and customer and those that do not.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.84 innovation in global industriestable 8 average outsourcing by size of metropolitan statistical areaprogramming (%)programming and design (%)hosting ex internet (%)rural area 17.8124.3015.91(0.38)(0.43)(0.37)small msa ( 250,000)17.8723.8515.04(0.54)(0.60)(0.50)medium msa (250,000 to 1 million)18.4826.3016.41(0.35)(0.40)(0.34)large msa ( 1 million)18.5426.0815.31(0.21)(0.24)(0.20)note: calculations are for 2002; standard errors in parentheses. the difference between rural/small and medium/large is signicant at the 5 percent level for all three types. source: arora and forman (2007).service provider. thus, ex ante we would expect that hosting activities may more easily be conducted at a distance than other activities. using data from u.s. census county business patterns, arora and forman (2007) nd that the elasticity of local supply to local demand characteristics is higher for programming and design (0.806) than for hosting (0.1899). that is, a 10 percent increase in local market demand will translate into an 8.1 percent increase in the supply of programming and design rms but only a 1.9 percent increase in the supply of hosting rms.arora and forman also examine whether rm decisions to outsource programming, design, and hosting services depend on local market supply. table 8 shows how 2002 outsourcing varied by the size of geographic area in the united states. average outsourcing of programming and design is clearly increasing in the size of a location, though the pattern for hosting is less clear. outsourcing of programming and design increases from an average level of 24.2 percent in small metropolitan statistical areas (msas) and rural areas to 26.1 percent in medium and large msas, and these levels are signicantly different from one another at the 1 percent level. in contrast, outsourcing of hosting declines slightly from an average level of 15.61 percent in rural areas and small msas to 15.60 percent in medium and large msas; these levels are not statistically different from one other. since the supply of outsourcing establishments is increasing in location size, these results suggest that the decision to outsource programming and design is increasing in the local supply of outsourcing rms. controlling for industry differences, establishment size, and other factors yields the same conclusion.this evidence, combined with that on the costs of distributed software development described earlier, suggests that proximity to users is an important determinant of inventive activity in software. the contrast with other products and industries in this volume is informative. for other products, such as wireless devices or pdas, lead users have signicant concentration in locations outside innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 85of the united states such as east asia. however, the lead users of software are predominantly large organizations, and the leading large organizations in use of software and it remain in the united states. this is especially true for the large market segment of business applications software, for which software products and services are frequently embedded in business process. user requirements in this setting often involve the transfer of tacit knowledge, and so proximity to lead users is particularly salient. thus, as long as the united states remains the major market for software products, and the locus of the vast majority of lead users, it is unlikely to lose its technical leadership.some recent trends and projections for the futuretrends in computer science educationcontinued success in any innovative industry like software requires a talented and highly educated workforce. there is widely reported concern about a perceived shortage of domesticborn scientists and engineers in the united states (e.g., ricadela, 2005).figure 11 shows data from the national center for education statistics (nces) on the number of undergraduate and master™s degrees in computer science earned in the united states over the period 19832002.26 the numbers of both undergraduate and master™s degrees rose sharply from a combined gure of 35,200 in 1996 to 65,700 in 2002. this increase was in˚uenced by the boom in the it sector in the late 1990s.more recent indicators of undergraduate and master™slevel enrollments in computer science are currently unavailable using ofcial u.s. statistics. figure 12 presents data from an annual survey of incoming freshmen. mirroring the nces statistics, these data show intention to major in computer science rising throughout the late 1990s and remaining high until 2001. however, intentions to major in computer science drop sharply thereafter. the computing research association™s taulbee survey shows similar ndings. these data survey ph.d.granting institutions in the united states. aspray et al. (2006) argue that data from the taulbee survey closely match trends in the nces data, and so these data are a good leading indicator of the national educational statistics. figure 13 shows a sharp decline in newly declared computer science majors after 2000.somewhat more recent ofcial data are available for doctoral degrees conferred by u.s. universities. figure 14 shows the number of doctoral degrees earned in computer science and mathematics during the period 19832003. in contrast to bachelor™s or master™s degrees, the number of doctoral degrees granted has generally been on the decline in the united states over the past decade. the 26 data from the nces and other ofcial government statistics in this subsection are from the national science foundation publication science and engineering indicators.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.86 innovation in global industriessoftware11.eps0.0010.0020.0030.0040.0050.0060.0070.00198319841985thousands1986198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998200020012002bachelor™smaster™sfigure 11 undergraduate and master™s degrees earned in computer science. sources: u.s. department of education, national center for education statistics, integrated postsecondary education data system, completions survey; and national science foundation, division of science resources statistics, webcaspar database, http://webcaspar.nsf.gov. see appendix table 226 from science and engineering indicators 2006 for further details; 1999 data are not available.gure shows that the number of computer science ph.d.s peaked in 1995 at about 1,000 and then has fallen over time. in 2003 the number of such degrees advanced slightly, from 810 to 870. however, due to the very long lag between entry and graduation in doctoral programs, this increase likely re˚ects enrollment decisions in the middle to late 1990s, when demand for computer scientists was particularly strong.while the number of students entering computer science programs appears to have fallen recently, there is evidence that such enrollments have been picking up in other countries. figure 14 also shows the number of doctoral degrees granted in mathematics and computer science in selected countries other than the united states. the number of doctoral degrees in computer science and mathematics has recently been increasing in asian countries such as china, korea, and taiwan.27unfortunately, similar statistics are not easily available for the production of 27 these statistics, presented in science and engineering indicators and collected from a variety of places, are unfortunately available only with some lag, and may not be strictly comparable. moreover, they do not provide educational statistics on computer science graduates for india.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 87figure 12 freshman intentions to major in computer science. source: globalization and offshoring of software: a report of the acm job migration task force (2006), eds. aspray, mayadas, and vardi.figure 13 newly declared computer science majors. source: computing research association and globalization and offshoring of software: a report of the acm job migration task force (2006), eds. aspray, mayadas, and vardi.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.88 innovation in global industriessoftware14.eps050010001500200025001983198519871989199119931995199719992000200120022003thousandsuschinagermany & ukkorea & taiwanfigure 14 doctoral degrees in mathematics and computer science by region. sources: chinašnational research center for science and technology for development and educational yearbook, 2002; division of higher education, special tabulations (2005); south koreašorganisation for economic cooperation and development, center for education research and innovation, education database, http://www1.oecd.org/scripts/cde/members/eduuoeauthenticate.asp; and taiwanšministry of education, educational statistics of the republic of china (annual series).bachelor™s and master™s degrees. geref and wadhwa (2005) provide evidence on the number of bachelor™s and subbaccalaureate engineering, computer science, and it degrees for the united states, india, and china in 2004.figure 15 shows that the number of degrees awarded in engineering by india and the united states are roughly similar. although the numbers of engineering graduates in china are much larger than that of either the united states or india, geref and wadhwa (2005) note that educational statistics on engineers from china include degrees from 2 or 3year programs that include students graduating from technical training programs that may be qualitatively different from baccalaureate programs in the united states. when normalized by population, the united states continues to lead in the production of bachelor™s degrees in engineering, producing 468.3 bachelor™s degrees per million compared to 103.7 in india and 271.1 in china.however, recent work by arora and bagde (2006) shows that the number of engineering baccalaureate degrees awarded in india is growing much faster than in the united states. table 9 shows that, although the number of engineerinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 89ing baccalaureate degrees awarded in 2003 is roughly the same as that reported by gerri and wadhwa, this number has grown steeply over time. from about 42,000 in 1992, the total more than tripled to greater than 128,000 in 2003.28 moreover, since the number of baccalaureates produced re˚ects the capacity added with a 4year lag, it is important to note that sanctioned engineering baccalaureate capacity in india now exceeds 440,000, although a substantial portion is of dubious quality.figure 16 shows that the number of foreign students enrolled in graduate computer science programs in the united states declined in 2003 for the rst time since 1995, re˚ecting visa restrictions imposed after september 11, 2001, the growth in degreegranting programs in other countries, as well as declines in the demand for engineers and computer scientists that took place in the early years of the most recent decade (nsf, 2006).overall, the data show that the united states continues to maintain a lead in the production of computer science graduates at all levels. however, recent data suggest that enrollments in computer science may be declining in the united states and picking up in other nations. as we will show in the next section, however, these changes in domestic supply are likely not due to longterm declines in the demand for computer science graduates within the united states.28 these numbers are based on data reported by 14 states, which include all the major states except bihar, and probably represent 8090 percent of the engineering baccalaureates produced in india.software15.eps137,437112,000351,53784,898292,569103,0000100,000200,000300,000400,000500,000600,000700,000u.s.indiachinabachelors degreessubbaccalaureate degreesfigure 15 bachelor™s and subbaccalaureate degrees in engineering, 2004. source: geref and wadhwa (2005).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.90 innovation in global industriestable 9 output of engineering graduates (b.s. and b.e.) in india, various yearsyeartotal number of engineering graduates produced199042,022199144,281199246,762199348,281199452,905199556,181199657,193199761,353199867,548199975,030200079,343200197,9422002107,7202003128,432notes: these data are based on the gures for the 14 major states (except the state of bihar) in india, which account for 80% of the gross domestic product and likely more than that number of the total production of engineering graduates. these data are based on ﬁannual technical manpower reviewﬂ (atmr) reports published by national technical manpower information system (ntmis), india. these reports are prepared by a statelevel nodal center of ntmis and give details of sanctioned engineering college capacity and outturn for all undergraduate technical institutions in the state. see cited source for more details.source: arora and bagde (2006).labor market trendsthere is some evidence that growth in the number of computer science degrees awarded over the past 25 years has not been fast enough to keep pace with demand for workers with computer science training. figure 17 shows that the annual growth rate in the production of all mathematics and computer science degrees averaged 4.2 percent during the period 19802000, signicantly less than the average annual growth of 9.3 percent in occupations directly associated with these elds.29 in comparison, over the same period, growth of all science and engineering graduates (including math and computer science) averaged 1.5 percent while growth in all science and engineering occupations averaged 4.2 percent (table 10). thus, the difference between degree growth and employment growth is larger in mathematics and computer science than it is for science and engineer29 occupational data from these gures were compiled by the national science foundation, division of science resources statistics, from u.s. census data.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 91software16.eps0.005.0010.0015.0020.0025.0030.00198319841985198619871988198919901991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003thousandsforeigncitizensfigure 16 u.s. graduate enrollment in computer science by citizenship. source: science and engineering indicators 2006.software17.eps012345678910allbachelor™smaster™sdoctoralemploymentfigure 17 average annual growth of degree production and occupational employment in mathematics and computer science, 19802000. source: science and engineering indicators 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.92 innovation in global industriesing overall. these data are now several years old and do not account for students receiving degrees from outside of computer science but moving into computer science professions. however, despite these qualications, they do suggest that the united states may have relied in part on workers from abroad to make up for the shortfall of native workers with computer and math skills.recent data suggest that the in˚ationadjusted median salaries for master™s graduates in mathematics and computer science rose 54.8 percent between 1993 and 2003, higher than any other broad class of science and engineering graduates and higher than the average across all nonscience and engineering graduates.30 growth in salaries was similarly competitive for graduates with bachelor™s degrees (28.0 percent aagr, second only to engineering graduates among science and engineering graduates) and those with doctoral degrees (18.6 percent aagr, second only to graduates in engineering and physical sciences among science and engineering graduates). furthermore, 2003 median salaries for computer science master™s graduates are higher than any other broad category of science and engineering graduates ($80,000), whereas levels for bachelor™s ($50,000) and doctoral ($67,000) degree graduates remain similarly competitive. thus, even when one uses data that include the recent technology downturn, salaries of occupations requiring skills in mathematics and computer science have remained quite competitive when compared to other occupations in science and engineering and compared to the national average.as noted earlier, there has been a signicant shortfall in the rate of computer science degrees conferred relative to the rate of employment growth, and this excess demand for workers with computer science and engineering skills has been partially offset by the immigration of skilled workers from abroad. in scal year 2001 there were 191,397 h1b visa admissions to the united states from computerrelated occupations, 57.8 percent of total such admissions and 30 the source for these data is the national science foundation, division of science resource statistics, national survey of college graduates.table 10 output of engineering graduates (b.s. and b.e.) in india, various yearsdegree growthemployment in occupationall science and engineering1.54.2mathematics/computer science4.29.3notes: degree growth includes undergraduate, master™s, and doctoral degrees.source: science and engineering indicators 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 93the largest of any such category.31 kapur and mchale (2005a) list the top companies that petitioned for h1b visas in october 1999 through february 2000, a list that includes some of the leading it hardware and software rms: motorola (618 petitions), oracle (455 petitions), cisco (398 petitions), mastech (398), intel (367), microsoft (362), rapidigm (357), syntel (337), wipro (327), and tata consulting (320).changes in immigration represent one mechanism that has the potential to affect the u.s. software industry in the relatively short term, and recent changes in the environment outside the united states can potentially affect immigration ˚ows. the rapid growth in the software industries of countries like india and ireland has increased the attractiveness of those countries to highly skilled indigenous workers. this has been particularly evident in ireland, where rapid growth has encouraged an increasing number of highly skilled workers to remain in ireland or return to ireland from the united states. kapur and mchale (2005a) report that emigration of male irish graduates fell from about 25 percent in 1987 to under 15 percent in 1997, with similar trends for female graduates. of the 644,444 irish who had spent one year outside of ireland in a 2002 census, 42 percent reported taking up residence in ireland between 1996 and 2002, suggesting that a large fraction are recently returning irish (kapur and mchale, 2005a).32with the continuing growth of the software industries in india and ireland, it is likely that these historically important sources of highly skilled software professionals will retain a growing fraction of their indigenous software workers. moreover, as noted by kapur and mchale (2005b), the international market for software professionals is increasingly competitive. richer countries such as the united states, canada, australia, germany, and the united kingdom increasingly compete for talent from other countries. in many cases, this competition has manifested itself as a decline in the traditional barriers to short and longterm migration (kapur and mchale, 2005b). this competition is likely only to increase with the aging demographics of these countries as well as the increasing requirements for a skilled workforce in software and in other industries.federal government spending on software r&du.s. federal government investment in computer hardware and software r&d is thought to be one of the contributing success factors to both industries (flamm, 1988; langlois and mowery, 1996). early government r&d investment in software provided the computer facilities for universities to conduct early software research (langlois and mowery, 1996) and federal agencies such as 31 administrative data from the u.s. department of homeland security, bureau of citizenship and immigration services.32 these data include migration of irish citizens that have returned after studying in u.s. universities, including those studying for computer science degrees.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.94 innovation in global industriesnational aeronautics and space administration (nasa) and defense advanced research projects agency (darpa) have been longstanding supporters of computerrelated research. federal grants remain a major source of funding for doctoral students in computer science: in 2003, 17.4 percent of fulltime computer science graduate students reported that their primary source of funding was from the federal government.33in the 1990s, though funding from the department of defense had largely ˚attened out, r&d spending grew rapidly throughout the decade through expanded funding from agencies such as the department of energy and nsf. however, over the period 20012003 (the most recent data available), government r&d spending in computer science remained largely ˚at. moreover, the percent of total r&d spending on computer science (relative to other elds) declined over the period 20012003, from 4.5 to 4.0 percent.34 we discuss the implications of these spending patterns in the next section.conclusions and implicationspublic policy implicationsthe trends that we have described in this paper have several public policy implications. first, our results have provided evidence of a sizable exportdriven software services sector in countries like india and ireland, though there is less evidence of substantial inventive activity in software going on outside of the united states. these results suggest that entry and midlevel programming jobs can be performed away from the point of nal demand, though inventive activity that requires proximity with lead users is most effectively done in the united states. however, these entry and midlevel programming jobs have traditionally provided u.s. it workers with the skills needed to perform more complicated development activities such as creation of new software programs (levy and murname, 2004). in other words, training by u.s. rms has traditionally bestowed a benecial externality upon entrylevel workers by providing them with general human capital that workers appropriate later in their careers. this human capital is not easily provided by traditional publicly funded primary or secondary school education programs (levy and murname, 2004). as a result, a declining demand for entrylevel programming jobs could hurt u.s. workers™ future ability to perform more complex software development activity (e.g., new packaged software development). if this is true, then there are two ways that u.s. workers could obtain the general human capital needed. one would be for u.s. workers 33 national science foundation, division of science resource statistics, survey of graduate students and postdoctorates in science and engineering, webcaspar database (science and engineering indicators, 2006). 34 science and engineering indicators 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 95to internalize the externality by accepting jobs for lower salaries. of course, in the short run, workers may prefer instead to accept jobs in other (relatively higherpaying) elds. alternatively, the government could attempt to subsidize entrylevel employment, for example, by raising the costs of h1b visas or by direct labor market subsidies. however, if the cost of remote software development remains lower than that in the united states, then clearly implementation of this policy may be problematic.we have provided evidence of recent declines in computer science enrollments at the graduate and undergraduate levels. in our view, it is too soon to speculate whether these changes are evidence of a new trend or instead re˚ect temporary student reactions to business cycle ˚uctuations, particularly the it downturn that began in the early part of this decade. still, there is evidence that for some time, u.s. software developers have been using skilled labor from abroad as inputs into their innovation production function, presumably in part to supplement the pool of skilled labor available locally. as noted earlier, there is increasing competition from other industrialized countries for these skilled workers, and there is no sign that this competition will abate in the near future. decreasing the costs of h1b visas or lowering the costs of permanent migration is unlikely to be feasible in the short run because of the aforementioned concerns of labor substitution between foreign and indigenous workers. as a result, ensuring an adequate supply of local workers with sufcient basic or enabling skills (levy and murname, 2004) in mathematics, computer science, and related elds taught in the nation™s school and university system will be important to the longterm success of software producers in the united states.another area of public policy concern is in government funding of computer science research. as noted earlier, federal funding of computer science has ˚attened out in recent years. a continuation of this trend could negatively impact innovative activity in software in the united states in two ways: by decreasing an important source of nancial capital for basic research as well as potentially accentuating the negative downturn in enrollments in computer science graduate programs in the united states through a decline in graduate student funding.summary and conclusionsthere are currently two very different stories in the globalization of software development. on the one hand, the it services industries in countries such as india, ireland, and other countries continue to grow rapidly. the production of it services is quite dispersed globally, and this dispersion will only increase over time. in contrast, both sales and inventive activity in packaged software are localized in the united states and undertaken primarily by u.s. rms. while differences in the levels of patent activity across countries should be interpreted with some caution because of divergence between the rate of patenting and inventive activity, examination of patent growth rates is less subject to these concerns innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.96 innovation in global industriesand they show there is no sign of these trends reversing in the short to medium term.recent trends in computer science enrollments have attracted considerable attention in the popular press. we do nd evidence of some declines in enrollments in u.s. computer science in recent years.35 however, of likely equal or greater importance in the short run may be the increasing incentives for skilled foreign workers to remain in their home countries or to depart from the united states immediately or some years after degree conferral. there is already some evidence that improving educational systems and employment opportunities in the underdog countries is causing some skilled software professionals to remain at home or to return.nonetheless, there are powerful forces at work that are likely to keep the development of new software products and software innovation concentrated in the united states for some time to come. despite recent trends, the united states continues to have the best postsecondary educational systems in the world for training computer scientists, and it continues to enjoy substantial albeit declining inward migration that benets the software (and other) industries. beyond the education and human capital issues, u.s. software innovators continue to enjoy substantial advantages due to agglomeration economies arising from the preexisting concentration of the industry, as well as a generally favorable business environment. perhaps the most signicant advantage that u.s. software product innovators enjoy is proximity to lead users. u.s. rms have been among the most innovative users of it in the world, and these users have beneted u.s. software producers in the past and will continue to do so for some time to come.acknowledgmentswe thank jeffrey macher and david mowery for their comments and suggestions, and nicholas yoder and kristina steffenson mcelheran for outstanding research assistance.referencesallison, j., and e. tiller. (2003). internet business method patents. pp. 259257 in patents in the knowledgebased economy, w. m. cohen and s. a. merrill, eds. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.allison, j., a. rai, and b. n. sampat. (2005). university software ownership: trends, determinants, issues. working paper, columbia university.anchordoguy, m. (2000). japan™s software industry: a failure of institutions? research policy 29:391408.35 in graduate programs these declines appear to be concentrated primarily among immigrants. among undergraduate degree programs current data are not available to indicate whether these declines are from u.s. nationals or immigrants. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 97armstrong, d.j., and p. cole. (2002). managing distances and differences in geographically distributed work groups. pp. 167186 in distributed work, p. j. hinds and s. kiesler, eds. cambridge: mit press.arora, a. (2006). the indian software industry and its prospects. working paper, heinz school of public policy & management, carnegie mellon university.arora, a., and s. bagde. (2006). the indian software industry: the human capital story. working paper, heinz school of public policy & management, carnegie mellon university.arora, a., and c. forman. (2007). proximity and software programming: it outsourcing and the local market. proceedings of the 40th annual hawaii international conference in system sciences, waikoloa, hawaii. available at http://www.hicss.hawaii.edu/diglib.htm.arora, a., v.s. arunachalam, v.s. asundi, and r. fernandes. (2001). the indian software services industry. research policy 30(8):12671287.arora, a., a. gambardella, and s. torrisi. (2004). in the footsteps of silicon valley? indian and irish software in the international division of labor. pp. 78120 in building hightech clusters: silicon valley and beyond, t. bresnahan and a. gambardella, eds. cambridge, uk: cambridge university press.aspray, w., f. mayadas, and m. y. vardi. (2006). globalization and offshoring of software: a report of the acm job migration task force. available at http://www.acm.org/globalizationreport/pdf/fullnal.pdf.athreye, s. (2005a). the indian software industry. pp. 740 in from underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in brazil, china, india, ireland, and israel, a. arora and a. gambardella, eds. oxford, uk: oxford university press.athreye, s. (2005b). the indian software industry and its evolving service capability. industrial and corporate change 14(3):393418.baba, y., s. takai, and y. mizuta. (1996). the userdriven evolution of the japanese software industry: the case of customized software for mainframes. pp. 104130 in the international computer software industry, d. c. mowery, ed. oxford, uk: oxford university press.bessen, j., and r. m. hunt. (2004). an empirical look at software patents. working paper 0317/r, research on innovation.botelho, a. j. j., g. stefanuto, and f. veloso. (2005). the brazilian software industry. pp. 99130 in from underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in brazil, china, india, ireland, and israel, a. arora and a. gambardella, eds. oxford, uk: oxford university press.bresnahan, t., and s. greenstein. (1996). technical progress in computing and in the uses of computers. brookings papers on economic activity, microeconomics 178.breznitz, d. (2005). the israeli software industry. pp. 7299 in from underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in brazil, china, india, ireland, and israel, a. arora and a. gambardella, eds. oxford, uk: oxford university press.brooks, f. (1995). the mythical manmonth: essays on software engineering, 20th anniversary edition. reading, ma: addisonwesley.campbellkelly, m. (2003). from airline reservations to sonic the hedgehog: a history of the software industry. cambridge: mit press.copeland, d. g., and j. l. mckenney. (1988). airline reservations systems: lessons from history. mis quarterly 12(3):353370.cottrell, t. (1996). standards and the arrested development of japan™s microcomputer software industry. pp. 131164 in the international computer software industry, d. c. mowery, ed. oxford, uk: oxford university press.european information technology observatory. (2006). european information technology observatory 2006. berlin, germany: european information technology observatory (eito)šeuropean economic interest grouping (eeig).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.98 innovation in global industrieseuropean patent ofce (epo). (2005). computerimplemented inventions and patents. law and practice at the european patent ofce.flamm, k. (1988). creating the computer: government, industry, and high technology. washington, d.c.: brookings institution press.fransman, m. (1995). japan™s computer and communications industry: the evolution of industrial giants and global competitiveness. new york: oxford university press.furman, j. l., m. e. porter, and s. stern. (2002). the determinants of national innovative capacity. research policy 31(6):899933.gao (general accounting ofce). (2005). u.s. and india data on offshoring show signicant differences. gao report gao06116.geref, g., and v. wadhwa. (2005). framing the engineering outsourcing debate: placing the united states on a level playing field with china and india. report, master of engineering program, duke university.gompers, p., and j. lerner. (2006). the venture capital cycle: second edition. cambridge: mit press.gormely, j., w. blustein, j. gatloff, and h. chun. (1998). the runaway costs of packaged applications. the forrester report 3(5).graham, s. j. h., and d. c. mowery. (2003). intellectual property protection in the u.s. software industry. pp. 219258 in patents in the knowledgebased economy, w. m. cohen and s. a. merrill, eds. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.graham, s. j. h., and d. c. mowery. (2005). software patents: good news or bad news. pp. 4580 in intellectual property rights in frontier industries: software and biotechnology, r. w. hahn, ed. washington, d.c.: aeibrookings joint center for regulatory studies.griliches, z. (1990). patent statistics as economic indicators. journal of economic literature 28(4): 16611707.hall, b. h., and m. macgarvie. (2006). the private value of software patents. nber working paper 12195.hall, b. h. and r. h. ziedonis. (2001). the patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of patenting in the u.s. semiconductor industry, 19791995. rand journal of economics 32(1): 101128.herbsleb, j. d., d. j. paulish, and m. bass. (2005). global software development at siemens: experience from nine projects. pp. 524533 in international conference on software engineering. st. louis, mo.ilavarasan, p. v. (2006). r&d in indian software industry. pp. 134143 in managing industrial research effectively, r. varma, ed. icfai university press.jaffe, a., and m. trajtenberg. (2002). patents, citations, and innovations: a window on the knowledge economy. cambridge: mit press.kapur, d., and j. mchale. (2005a). sojourns and software: internationally mobile human capital and hightech industry development in india, ireland, and israel. pp. 236274 in from underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in brazil, china, india, ireland, and israel, a. arora and a. gambardella, eds. oxford, uk: oxford university press.kapur, d., and j. mchale. (2005b). give us your best and brightest: the global hunt for talent and its impact on the developing world. washington, d.c.: center for global development.langlois, r. n., and d. c. mowery. (1996). the federal government role in the development of the u.s. software industry. pp. 5385 in the international computer software industry, d. c. mowery, ed. oxford, uk: oxford university press.laynefarrar, a. (2005). dening software patents: a research field guide. working paper 0514, aeibrookings joint center for regulatory studies.levy, f., and r. j. murname. 2004. the new division of labor: how computers are creating the next job market. new york: russell sage foundation.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.software 99malerba, f., and s. torrisi. (1996). the dynamics of market structure and innovation in the western european software industry. pp. 165196 in the international computer software industry, d. c. mowery, ed. oxford, uk: oxford university press.march, j. g., and h. a. simon. (1958). organizations. new york: wiley.merges, r. p. (2006). patents, entry, and growth in the software industry. working paper, university of california, berkeley.messerschmitt, d. g., and c. szyperski. (2002). software ecosystem: understanding an indispensible technology and industry. cambridge: mit press.mokyr, j. (2002). the lever of riches. oxford, uk: oxford university press.mowery, d. c., and n. rosenberg. (1998). paths of innovation. cambridge, uk: cambridge university press.nelson, r., and r. rosenberg. (1994). american universities and technical advance in industry. research policy 23(3):323348.nsf (national science foundation). (2006). science and engineering indicators 2006. washington, d.c.oecd (organisation for economic cooperation and development). (2002). oecd information technology outlook. paris: oecd.oecd. (2004). oecd information technology outlook. paris: oecd.oecd. (2006). oecd information technology outlook. paris: oecd.olson, g. m., and j. s. olson. (2000). distance matters. humancomputer interaction 15(23): 139178.o™riain, s. (1999). remaking the developmental state: the irish software industry in the global economy. doctoral dissertation, department of sociology, university of california, berkeley.parker, r. w. (1965). the sabre system. datamation (september):4952.parthasarathy, b., and y. aoyama. (2006). from software services to r&d services: local entrepreneurship in the software industry in bangalore, india. environment and planning a 38(7):12691285.porter, m. e. (1990). the competitive advantage of nations. new york: free press.ricadela, a. (2005). q&a: bill gates on supercomputing, software in science, and more. information week. november 18.romer, p. (1990). endogenous technological change. journal of political economy 98:s71s102.rosenberg, n. (1963). technological change in the machine tool industry, 18401910. journal of economic history 23:414443.rosenberg, n. (1983). inside the black box: technology and economics. cambridge, uk: cambridge university press.sands, a. (2005). the irish software industry. pp. 4171 in from underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in brazil, china, india, ireland, and israel, a. arora and a. gambardella, eds. oxford, uk: oxford university press.scafdi, c., m. shaw, and b. myers. (2005). estimating the numbers of end users and end user programmers. pp. 207214 in proceedings of the 2005 ieee symposium on visual languages and humancentric computing. los alamitos, calif.: ieee computer society.schumpeter, j. a. (1934). the theory of capitalist development. cambridge, ma: harvard university press.steinmueller, e. (2004). the european software sectoral system of innovation. pp. 193242 in sectoral systems of innovation: concepts, issues, and analyses of six major sectors in europe, f. malerba, ed. cambridge, uk: cambridge university press.thoma, g., and s. torrisi. (2006). the evolution of the software industry in europe. working paper, cespri, bocconi university.tschang, t., and l. xue. (2005). the chinese software industry. pp. 171206 in from underdogs to tigers: the rise and growth of the software industry in brazil, china, india, ireland, and israel, a. arora and a. gambardella, eds. oxford, uk: oxford university press.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.101 3 semiconductorsjeffrey t. machergeorgetown universitydavid c. moweryuniversity of california, berkeleyalberto di mininscuola superiore sant™anna, pisa, italyintroductionthe determinants, patterns, and consequences of globalization of the innovative activities of u.s. hightechnology rms are the subject of a large empirical literature. among the central questions addressed within this research is the extent to which international ˚ows of research and development (r&d) investment and the offshore movement of other forms of innovative activity are linked with u.s. rms™ foreign investments in manufacturing and related activities. a second important issue concerns measurement of the internationalization of rms™ innovative activitiesšrmlevel r&d investment data often do not capture developments within individual technological or industrial elds, and r&d data may provide little information on important aspects of the internationalization of rms™ innovationrelated activities. partly because of the imperfections of these data, analyses of the globalization of innovative activity rarely consider developments within individual industries.this chapter addresses these challenges in an examination of trends in the globalization of innovationrelated activities in a single industryšsemiconductors. we consider several measures of innovative activity within this industry, including r&d investment, technologydevelopment alliances, and patenting. as is often the case in empirical work, the insights from this approach are obtained at some cost, conning our analysis to a relatively short time period and limiting our discussion of trends in the globalization of nonu.s. semiconductor rms™ innovationrelated activities. in addition, the data themselves represent imperfect proxies for the actual phenomena that we wish to examine. the different innovationrelated indicators also do not aggregate in a straightforward innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.102 innovation in global industriesway, which complicates efforts to develop strong conclusions concerning the consequences of these trends. remarkably, after more than 30 years of intensive study of the internationalization of r&d and other innovationrelated activities in the semiconductor industry, the data on these trends remain fragmented and limited in their coverage. nevertheless, the results of our analysis highlight several distinctive trends in the globalization of innovationrelated activities in this industry:1. the share of industryfunded r&d investment devoted to offshore r&d by u.s. rms in ﬁelectronics componentsﬂ manufacturing (an industry category that includes semiconductors, along with several other electronics product segments) grew only modestly during 19852001.2. the number of technologydevelopment alliances in the global semiconductor industry declined during the 1990s, although alliances among foreign rms appear to have grown more substantially than alliances among u.s. semiconductor rms during this period.3. processtechnology r&d remains ﬁhomeboundﬂ in the home countries of u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor rms, based on trends in the siting of ﬁdevelopmentﬂ fabrication facilities (ﬁfabsﬂ).4. the patenting activity of large u.s. integrated semiconductor rms (those that both design and manufacture their products) remains predominantly ﬁhomebound,ﬂ with little increase in offshore inventive activity in their patents during the period 19912003.5. patenting by european, japanese, and taiwanese semiconductor rms is similarly dominated by domestic inventive activity and this dominance by ﬁhome countryﬂ inventive activity appears to have increased slightly during the period 19962003.6. the patenting activity of u.s. ﬁfablessﬂ semiconductor rms, which design and market but do not manufacture their products, indicates modest growth in offshore inventive activity during the period 19912003.7. although the vast majority of inventive activity undertaken by nonu.s. rms remains homebound, the united states is the predominant location for offshore inventive activity of all but canadian semiconductor rms.8. there is little evidence that the changing international structure of u.s. semiconductor rms™ innovationrelated activities has had negative consequences for engineering employment in the u.s. semiconductor industry, re˚ecting the limited offshore movement of innovationrelated activities documented by these indicators.taken as a whole, our ndings underscore the importance of a broad view of the array of activities that contribute to innovation in the semiconductor industry. these results also highlight the in˚uence of growing vertical specialization on the globalization of innovation in this industry. interestingly, the expanded offshore innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 103investment by u.s. semiconductor rms in production capacity does not appear to have in˚uenced movement of their r&d activities to nonu.s. locations. instead, the most important in˚uence on the expanded offshore inventive activities of a subset of u.s. semiconductor rms (the fabless rms) may be the emergence of new segments of market demand that are concentrated in southeast asia. but even within the fabless segment of the u.s. semiconductor industry, the contributions of ﬁoffshoreﬂ innovationrelated activities are modest thus far.structural change in the global semiconductor industrythe global semiconductor industry experienced signicant structural change during the 1990s. the market for semiconductor components shifted from one dominated by personal computers (pcs) to a more diverse array of heterogeneous niches associated with the internet and wireless communications applications. the integrated device manufacturers (idms) that both design and manufacture semiconductor components no longer dominate industry production and innovation; instead, a vertically integrated industry segment coexists with a vertically specialized segment. idms compete and often collaborate with rms that specialize in either design and marketing (fabless rms) or manufacturing (foundries). as is the case in other hightechnology industries, semiconductorrelated market demand and technical expertise are growing in geographic regions that formerly accounted for smaller shares of global demand for semiconductor components (e.g., malaysia, taiwan, singapore, china).the decline of the pc and emergence of new component marketsthe market for enduse semiconductor components during the late 1990s and early 2000s experienced a gradual shift away from one dominated by computer applications (especially pcs) to a more fragmented market in which wireless communications and other nonpc consumer products are more signicant (linden et al., 2004). figure 1 depicts the shares of chip consumption accounted for by different enduse markets during the period 19942004. computer applications still represent the predominant enduse market for semiconductor components, but most industry observers agree that noncomputer (i.e., communications and consumer product) markets for semiconductor components will grow more rapidly during the next decade.differences between pc and nonpc markets for semiconductor components mean that this shift in consumption patterns has important implications for the organization of innovative activities in the semiconductor industry. the pc market is characterized by an entrenched architectural standard (the socalled wintel standard), with welldened and stable interfaces among semiconductor components and pc components. this stable architectural standard contrasts with the innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.104 innovation in global industriessemiconductors1.eps010203040506019941995199619971998199920002001200220032004yearpercentagemilitaryautomotiveindustrialcommunicationsconsumercomputerfigure 1 semiconductor enduse markets by application, 19942004. source: integrated circuit engineering (ice) and ic insights.situation in many nonpc markets, where new products require more extensive ﬁdesigninﬂ efforts on the part of component suppliers, and the interfaces governing the design and compatibility of components for these products can change signicantly through successive product generations. no single product dominates semiconductor enduse demand in these applicationsšanother contrast with pc component markets. as a result, production runs of new component designs are likely to be smaller and the cost savings through productionbased learning will decline in signicance. smaller production runs also mean that new semiconductor production capacity, the costs of which continue to rise, must become more ˚exible and capable of producing a wider variety of component designs.the relative decline of the pc market for semiconductors has important implications for the geographic location of demand for semiconductor components. the pc market has been dominated by designs developed in the united states and by an architecture that was largely under the control of u.s. rms. but designers innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 105semiconductors2.eps05101520253035404519941995199619971998199920002001200220032004yearpercentagenorth americajapaneuropeasiapacificfigure 2 semiconductor enduse markets by geographic region, 19942004. source: integrated circuit engineering (ice) and ic insights.and producers of the systems for which markets are growing more rapidly (e.g., wireless communications and consumer products) are more heavily concentrated in southeast asia, especially in taiwan, japan, and singapore. figure 2 illustrates the shifting geographic structure of demand during the period 19942004, highlighting declines in the share of global chip consumption accounted for by japan and the united states and a corresponding rise in southeast asia™s share.producers of these electronics systems often require that functionality be based on features in the semiconductor components incorporated in the productsšsocalled systemonchip designs that are more complex and require more intensive interaction between system and chip designers (ernst, 2005). moreover, the number of new applications that use semiconductors has increased dramatically. the needs of an increasing variety of system providers mean that a onesizetsall model for semiconductor components is appropriate in only a limited number of cases. as a result, close interaction between designers of components and designers (as well as producers) of these more heterogeneous electronics systems is essential to product development. proximity to system customers, more innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.106 innovation in global industriesand more of whom are located in southeast asia, therefore is likely to grow in importance for developers of stateoftheart semiconductor devices.growth of vertical specialization in the semiconductor industryfor the rst two decades of the computer and semiconductor industries, large integrated producers such as at&t and ibm designed their own solidstate components, manufactured the majority of the capital equipment used in the production of these components, and utilized internally produced components in the manufacture of electronic computer systems that were leased or sold to their customers (braun and macdonald, 1978). during the late 1950s, ﬁmerchantﬂ manufacturers entered the u.s. semiconductor industry and gained market share at the expense of rms that produced both electronic systems and semiconductor components. specialized producers of semiconductor manufacturing equipment began to appear by the early 1960s.since 1980, the interdependence between product design and process development has weakened in many semiconductor product segments (macher et al., 1998). this shift has been associated with the entry of new types of rms that specialize in semiconductor component design or production. hundreds of socalled fabless semiconductor rms that design and market semiconductor components have entered the global semiconductor industry since 1980. these rms rely on contract manufacturers (socalled foundries) for the production of their designs. contract manufacturers include ﬁpureplay foundriesﬂ that specialize in semiconductor manufacturing, as well as the foundry subsidiaries of established integrated device manufacturers (idms) seeking to fully utilize excess fabrication capacity. fabless semiconductor rms serve a variety of fastgrowing industries, especially computers and communications, by offering more innovative designs and shorter delivery times than integrated semiconductor rms. fablessrm revenues increased from slightly less than 4 percent of global industry revenues in 1994 to more than 15 percent by 2004 (figure 3). the increasing demand for and variety of communications and consumer products (e.g., gps systems, game controllers, appliances, automatic lighting) suggests that the demand for specialpurpose functionality has also increased. the socalled embedded systems and software market represents a growing and increasingly important segment of the semiconductor industry, with its own vertically specialized market structure. measuring the growth of this market segment, however, is hampered by a lack of data.the growth of vertical specialization in the semiconductor industry re˚ects the in˚uence of developments in markets and technology (macher and mowery, 2004). the expansion of markets for semiconductor devices enables vertically specialized semiconductor design and production rms to exploit economies of scale and specialization. scale economies lower production costs, expanding innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 107semiconductors3.eps05010015020025019941995199619971998199920002001200220032004yearrevenue ($ billion)0.02.04.06.08.010.012.014.016.018.0share (%)fablessindustryfabless % of industryfigure 3 fabless and overall industry revenues, 19942004. source; fabless semiconductor assocation (fsa) and integrated circuit engineering (ice). the range of potential enduser applications for semiconductors and creating additional opportunities for entry by vertically specialized rms. the increasing capital requirements of semiconductor manufacturing provide another impetus to vertical specialization, since these higher xed costs make it necessary to produce large volumes of semiconductor components in order to achieve lower unit costs. the design cycle for new semiconductor products also has become shorter and product life cycles more uncertain. as a result, it is more difcult to predict whether demand for a single product will fully utilize the capacity of a fabrication facility that is devoted exclusively to a particular product, increasing the risks of investing in such ﬁdedicatedﬂ capacity. since foundries tend to produce a wider product mix, they are less exposed to these risks.at the same time, however, a number of large semiconductor rms (idms) still combine semiconductor device design and manufacture. the advantages of integrated management of design and manufacture are greatest in product lines innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.108 innovation in global industriesat the leading edge of semiconductor technology, especially in drams (macher, 2006). the relationship between the specialized foundry producers and the idms combines elements of cooperation and competition. for example, u.s. idms negotiated license agreements for the supply of product and process technologies to lessadvanced semiconductor rms operating in japan and south korea during the 1970s, and u.s., japanese, and european idms also supplied product and process technologies to taiwanese and singaporean foundry rms during the 1980s and 1990s. many of these idms provided advanced process technologies to foundries in exchange for a guaranteed supply of semiconductor components. the development of a semiconductor intellectual property market also spurred growth in the number and importance of specialized product design rms (linden and somaya, 2003). product and process licensing in the semiconductor industry has facilitated entry by both vertically specialized and integrated rms.increased vertical specialization in the semiconductor industry has been associated with the entry of new rms and geographic redistribution in production capacity. figure 4 shows the regional distribution of fabrication capacity (measured in terms of wafer starts per month1) during the period 19952003. the north american and japanese shares of global semiconductor production capacity fell signicantly during the period, and the shares attributable to ﬁasia/pacicﬂ countries increased, re˚ecting capacity growth in china, taiwan, south korea, and singapore. these southeast asian countries now collectively account for the largest regional share of global production capacity, and their share will continue to grow in the near future.figure 5 reclassies manufacturing capacity by region of ownership rather than location for the period 19972003, revealing a slightly different pattern. the share of global manufacturing capacity owned by rms headquartered in southeast asian countries trails that of japanese and north american producers. north american, japanese, and (to a lesser extent) european semiconductor rms have shifted much of their production capacity to southeast asia since the mid1990s and have entered joint ventures with southeast asian producers. southeast asian rms, on the other hand, have invested primarily within their home regions during this period.the growing concentration of manufacturing capacity in southeast asia is attributable in large part to the success of the foundry business model, which is re˚ected in foundry rms™ growing share of semiconductorindustry revenues (figure 3). the most advanced foundries are located in singapore and (especially) taiwan. a few taiwanese rms have opened foundries in the united 1 there are many possible measures of fab capacity, including the number of wafers processed over a given time period, the total wafer surface area that can be processed, the amount of installed processing equipment, and so on. leachman and leachman (2004) measure fabrication capacity as the estimated number of electrical functions that are produced by chip manufacturers, where a function is a memory bit or logic gate.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 109semiconductors4.eps051015202530354045199519961997199819992000200120022003yearpercentageasia neceurope nectaiwanchinas. koreajapanusafigure 4 geographic location of semiconductor manufacturing capacity, 19952003.source: strategic marketing associates.semiconductors5.eps0510152025303540451997199819992000200120022003yearpercentageasia neceurope nectaiwanchinas. koreajapanusafigure 5 location of ownership of semiconductor manufacturing capacity, 19972003. source: strategic marketing associates.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.110 innovation in global industriesstates, and taiwan™s dominant position in the foundry industry faces competition from lowercost production sites in other areas of southeast asia (particularly malaysia and china) and elsewhere.u.s. dominance in product designalthough semiconductor manufacturing capacity now is widely distributed among mature and fastgrowing regions within the global economy, semiconductor design activities, especially those associated with fabless rms, remain more concentrated. u.s. fabless semiconductor rms accounted for more than 60 percent of the value of orders received by the top four foundry rms (tsmc, umc, chartered, and smic) during the period 20002004.nonetheless, the growth of fabless rms in other countries is one indication of the widening geographic distribution of semiconductordesign activity and expertise. table 1 indicates that several nonu.s. clusters of fabless rms have emerged in israel, canada, taiwan, the united kingdom, and south korea. although hundreds of fabless rms now operate in dozens of other countries, most of these rms are smaller than their u.s. counterparts.2a number of factors have contributed to the success of u.s. rms in semiconductor design. established regional hightechnology clusters in areas such as silicon valley, boston™s route 128, and austin, texas, attract large numbers of semiconductor designers. these clusters are located near universities and other research centers that produce new design techniques, design software, and engineering talent. the role of u.s. universities in developing new design software and chip architectures has long outstripped their function as a source of new manufacturing methods, in part because the cost of constantly reequipping the necessary facilities exceeds the resources of most academic institutions.although we lack data to track these trends more systematically, most industry observers suggest that southeast asian countries account for a growing share of global semiconductor industry design activities (brown and linden, 2006a). as u.s. semiconductor rms, and especially fabless rms, seek to collaborate more closely with the systems rms that are located in southeast asia, a regional or local design presence is important. in addition, countries such as taiwan and south korea have developed product development expertise in digital consumer electronics and wireless communications, among other areas (ernst, 2005). offshore design centers, particularly in china and india, may offer cost savings and comparable productivity in lesssophisticated design activities (brown and linden, 2006b). but most observers assess the semiconductor design capabilities of 2 the data in table 1 that form the basis for this discussion include 640 fabless rms that are members of the fabless semiconductor association (fsa) or nonmembers veried by the fsa. at least 300 other small fabless rms are thought to exist but have not been veried by the fsa.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 111table 1 fabless firms by country of location, 2002countryfabless firmsnonu.s. cityfabless firmsunited states475tel aviv, israel14canada30ottawa, canada13israel29hsinchu, taiwan13taiwan22seoul, south korea9united kingdom22taipei, taiwan8south korea13toronto, canada8germany8cambridge, england4france6japan5sweden5switzerland4india3spain3others15total640source: arensman (2003).chinese and indian centers as lagging those of canada, israel, taiwan, the united kingdom, and the united states, as well as other industrial economies.in summary, the structure of production activities in the global semiconductor industry has shifted from one dominated by vertical integration to a more complex structure that blends vertical specialization and vertical integration. specialized design and manufacturing rms have entered the industry in large numbers, and the growth of foundry rms has been associated with a substantial shift in production capacity investment to southeast asia. vertical specialization has facilitated the entry of new rms, many of which are located outside of the regions that were homes to established rms. but, thus far, increased vertical specialization in this industry appears to be associated with shifts in the location of production to a much greater extent than shifts in the location of product design and r&d activities.measuring globalization of innovationrelated activities in semiconductorsindicators of offshore innovationrelated activitieswe use four indicators to examine trends in the offshore r&d activities of u.s. and nonu.s. other rms in the global semiconductor industry: (1) the share of industryfunded r&d expenditures supporting offshore r&d (available only for u.s. rms) during the period 19852001; (2) the number and location of development fabs established by u.s. and nonu.s. rms within the global innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.112 innovation in global industriessemiconductor industry during the period 19952003; (3) the number of international and domestic alliances formed by u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor manufacturing rms during the period 19901999; and (4) the site of inventive activity resulting in u.s. patents issued to u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor rms during the period 19942004. each measure by itself provides an incomplete portrait of ﬁglobalizationﬂ of innovationrelated activities within the global semiconductor industry, but taken together, they do shed light on the extent of globalization or nonglobalization of innovation within the industry.industryfunded offshore r&d investmentfigure 6 displays trends in offshore r&d investment (measured as a share of industryfunded r&d spending) by u.s. manufacturers of electronic components during the period 19852001. the data in the gure suggest minimal change in the share of offshore r&d within total industryfunded r&d, which drops to less than 3 percent by 2000 from its 1985 share of more than 4 percent.3 the sharp increase during 20002001 in the offshore share of industryfunded r&d may or may not indicate a signicant departure from this ˚at trend. in addition to the fact that this ﬁreversalﬂ covers only one year of data, the magnitude of the increase in reported offshore r&d during this period (more than doubling, from $327 million in 2000 to $852 million in 2001) suggests that a change in sample composition or other factors may be responsible, rather than a longterm shift in u.s. rms™ r&d investment behavior.the industrylevel r&d investment data compiled by the national science foundation (nsf) that are the source for figure 6 have a number of wellknown problems. coverage by the nsf r&d survey of smaller rms (e.g., entrants), particularly for the longer time period depicted in figure 6, is problematic since the nsf sample frame was not updated frequently during the 1980s and early 1990s. the ﬁelectronic componentsﬂ product line for which these data were compiled by the nsf also includes a number of other products in addition to semiconductor components. moreover, the denition of this and other product lines for which nsf collects r&d data have undergone some revisions during the period covered in figure 6.even if the reported r&d data accurately summarize the trends in semiconductorrelated offshore r&d investment, there is reason to suspect that the r&d investment data reported by semiconductor rms do not capture many of the activities that contribute to innovation in this industry. for example, r&d 3 we examined several sources of r&d data related to the globalization of innovationrelated activity in the semiconductor industry. most of these data, including publicly available information such as company annual reports and form 10ks, did not yield time series that were consistent or covered most of the rms in the industry. we therefore narrowed our data sources to indicators that most effectively underscore trends in the offshore r&d activities of u.s. and other rms in the global semiconductor industry.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 113semiconductors6.eps1.002.03.04.05.06.07.08.019851986198719881989199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001yearpercentagefigure 6 foreign r&d as percentage of industryfunded r&d (electronic components), 19852001. source: national science foundation (nsf).investment data may not include process innovation or the ﬁtweakingﬂ that occurs within the production facilities of idms. as we note later in the chapter, much of the process innovation within foundries (few of which are operated by u.s.headquartered rms) relies heavily on productionfacility upgrades that may or may not be included in the r&d investments reported by rms. design activities, especially those carried out by fabless rms, are another important source of innovations that may or may not be reported consistently as r&d investment.these problems aside, the lack of a strong trend during the period 19852001 in reported offshore r&d investment is striking. this widely accepted measure of ﬁglobalization of innovationﬂ indicates that u.s. semiconductor rms do not appear to be expanding this portion of their offshore innovationrelated activities signicantly, and the offshore portion of their selfnanced r&d investment remains modest.offshore processdevelopment facilitiesa second indicator of the offshore movement of semiconductor rms™ innovationrelated activities is the location of their processtechnology developinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.114 innovation in global industriesment facilities during the period 19952003. these facilities are important sites for process innovation in the semiconductor industry, since they are used for the development and ﬁdebuggingﬂ of new manufacturing technologies (appleyard et al., 2000; hatch and mowery, 1998). but this type of process innovation is irrelevant to innovation by fabless rms, whose designs are manufactured by foundries. moreover, foundries rarely use development fabs. rather than developing new manufacturing processes in dedicated r&d facilities and transferring these process technologies to fullvolume production sites, foundries instead incrementally upgrade manufacturing processes within their fullvolume production facilities. this approach enables the foundry rms to maintain stability and predictability in the evolution of the component designs that they produce for their customers. this indicator of the location of innovationrelated activities therefore applies only to one segment of the global semiconductor industryšthe idm and systems rms.the source for our data on the siting of semiconductor rms™ development facilities is strategic marketing associates (sma), a market research rm that tracks investment in semiconductor manufacturing facilities. the sma data provide information on the home country for each rm in the dataset; years in operation and facility type (production, r&d, development, etc.) for each production facility; the technological sophistication (e.g., smallest linewidth of components produced), capacity, and size for each facility; and other information. although the sma database includes hundreds of public and private semiconductor entities, we exclude government and universitybased facilities that are used solely for research and teaching purposes, research labs that possess production facilities for consulting purposes, and similar organizations.the sma data are collected through surveys. the development fabs that are included in the following discussion are used for the characterization of new (i.e., stateoftheart) manufacturing processes and are typically much smaller (less than 5,000 wafer starts per month) than fullvolume production facilities. the manufacturing facilities that we categorize as development fabs thus include facilities in which a variety of innovationrelated activities are carried out. nonetheless, these data are the only tabulation of which we are aware that can shed some light on the organization of the process r&d activities of idms and systems rms.figure 7 displays the number of ﬁdomesticﬂ and ﬁforeignﬂ development fabs in operation during the period 19952003. domestic development fabs are dened as those located in the home country of the semiconductor rm and foreign development fabs are located in a different host country. the overwhelming majority of development fabs are located in semiconductor rms™ home countries. the ﬁhomeboundﬂ nature of processtechnology development appears to re˚ect the demanding technical requirements of this activity, the need for close coordination between product design and processtechnology development, the need for an iterative approach to the introduction of new manufacturing processes, and the innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 115figure 7 foreign and domestic development fabs in operation, 19952003. source: strategic marketing associates.semiconductors7.eps010203040506070199519961997199819992000200120022003yearnumberforeigndomesticimportance of close coordination between the processtechnology development activities and commercialscale production operations of the rm. other empirical work has corroborated the importance of colocation of manufacturing and processtechnology development activities (hatch and mowery, 1998; macher and mowery, 2003).figure 7 also reveals a decline in the number of development fabs during the period 19952003. this trend is another re˚ection of the structural change in the semiconductor industry that we discussed earlier. a growing share of global production capacity in the semiconductor industry now is accounted for by foundries, which typically do not use development fabs. even within the idm/systemsrm segment of the industry, the high capital costs of new commercialvolume production facilities (now more than $3 billion) have raised the minimum efcient scale of production fabs and appear to have contributed to some shrinkage in the number of new commercialvolume facilities.table 2 and figure 8 provide additional detail on the location of development fabs. table 2 disaggregates foreign development facilities by country of location and country of ownership. the united kingdom, germany, and the united innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.116 innovation in global industriestable 2 foreign development facilities in operation, 19952003country of location199519961997199819992000200120022003canada000000000united kingdom221000000france000110000germany002111102italy000010000japan100010000netherlands000000000taiwan000000001united states110000000country of ownership199519961997199819992000200120022003canada010000000united kingdom000000000france000000000germany002111102italy000010000japan100000001netherlands221000000taiwan000000000united states100130000source: strategic marketing associates.semiconductors8.eps05101520253035199519961997199819992000200120022003yearnumbercanadachinaenglandgermanyjapans. koreataiwanu.s.figure 8 geographic location of domestic development fabs, 19952003. source: strategic marketing associates.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 117states are the leading locations for foreignowned development fabs (keeping in mind that these represent a small fraction of total developmentfab capacity). semiconductor rms headquartered in germany, the netherlands, and the united states have a greater tendency to invest in foreign development fabs than do semiconductor rms based in other countries. although interesting, the very small number of observations on offshore development fabs make it difcult to conduct additional analyses of the reasons for these differences.figure 8 disaggregates ﬁdomesticﬂ development facilities by country of location (as in table 2, these data refer to the stock of development fabs in operation). japanese and u.s. semiconductor rms operate the majority of domestic development fabs, and those operated by u.s. semiconductor rms outnumber japanese ﬁhomeboundﬂ development fabs during this period. consistent with figure 7, the number of domestic development fabs owned by japanese and u.s. rms fell during the period 19952003. also notable within these data is the lack of taiwaneseowned domestic production facilities, re˚ecting the fact that the taiwanese semiconductor industry is dominated by foundries.international technologydevelopment alliancesour third indicator of globalization of innovationrelated activities is the innovationrelated alliances formed by u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor rms during the period 19901999. the data that we use to track alliances in this industry cover both domestic and international alliances and were obtained from the pro˚les of ic manufacturers and suppliers published by integrated circuit engineering (ice), a semiconductor industry market research rm.alliances in the ice database include a number of different activities related to innovation and technology development in semiconductors. some of these alliances consist of production sourcing agreements between fabless and foundry rms, whereas others cover the development and transfer of process technology among rms. these data unfortunately do not include alliances focused on collaborative product development between fabless semiconductor rms and systems rms. the alliance data also lack information on the revenues, investments, or assets associated with individual alliances, which means that we are unable to weight individual alliances by some measure of their economic importance. in spite of these problems, the ice data have some advantages. they enable us to track the dissolution as well as the formation of alliances, and thus provide information on both the rate of new alliance formation and the ﬁstockﬂ of semiconductor industry alliances in existence during our sample period.figure 9 displays the number of newly formed and ongoing alliances in the semiconductor industry during the period 19901999. the number of alliances grew during the early 1990s, reached a peak during the middle of the decade, and has gradually declined since 1995 as the rate of alliance formation has decreased. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.118 innovation in global industriessemiconductors9.eps020040060080010001990199119921993199419951996199719981999yearnumberin operationcreatedsemiconductors10.eps010203040506070801990199119921993199419951996199719981999yearpercentagese asiaeuropejapann. amerfigure 9 semiconductor industry alliances, 19901999. source: integrated circuit engineering (ice).figure 10 home region of semiconductor alliance participants, newly formed alliances, 19901999. source: integrated circuit engineering (ice).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 119the annual ﬁstockﬂ of alliances in operation averaged more than 400 during the period 19901999.the regional composition of alliances also changed substantially during the 1990s. figure 10 depicts trends in the regional composition of alliance partner rms for newly formed alliances during the period 19901999, based on partnerrm home countries. the share of north american rms in newly formed alliances decreased from roughly 70 percent in 1990 to slightly more than 50 percent in 1999, while the share of european and southeast asian rms increased.figure 11 disaggregates the stock of alliances in figure 9 by the nationality of the rms participating in them. domestic alliances are those in which all partner rms are headquartered in the same country, and international alliances are those for which at least one partner rm is headquartered in a different country. u.s. domestic alliances declined from roughly 35 percent of semiconductor industry alliances in 1990 to slightly more than 20 percent in 1999, although the 1999 share represented an increase from its low point of 10 percent in 1996. the share of alliances between u.s. and nonu.s. rms (ﬁu.s. intlﬂ) within total industry alliances was essentially unchanged in 1999 from its 1990 level of 40 percent, although this share grew to more than 60 percent by 1996 before declinsemiconductors11.eps0102030405060701990199119921993199419951996199719981999yearpercentageu.s. domu.s. intlnonu.s. domnonu.s. intlfigure 11 home region of semiconductor industry alliance participants, alliance ﬁstock,ﬂ 19901999. source: integrated circuit engineering (ice).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.120 innovation in global industriesing. the share of nonu.s. domestic alliances also declined during the period 19901999, while nonu.s. international alliances increased from slightly more than 25 percent of total alliances in 1990 to roughly 35 percent by 1999.taken together, figures 9, 10, and 11 suggest a slowdown in the rate of formation of alliances for r&d and technology development by all rms in the semiconductor industry during the 1990s, keeping in mind that we lack information on the size or economic signicance of individual alliances. but the behavior of u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor rms presents some contrasts that are not well understood. u.s. semiconductor rms experienced a period of signicant growth during the early 1990s in their international alliance activities, followed by a decline in international alliance formation. these trends contrast with those for nonu.s. rms, which appear to have expanded their share of the shrinking number of newly formed international alliance activities throughout the 1990s. nonu.s. rms also use alliances to team with rms from other nations or regions. if anything, globalization through alliances therefore appears to have been more persistent and intensive for nonu.s. semiconductor rms during the latter half of the 1990s.another analysis of alliance formation during the late 20th century by hagedoorn (2002) used a different source of data but also concluded that the share of international undertakings declined from the 1980s through the 1990s. moreover, hagedoorn found that ﬁinformation technologyﬂ r&d alliances (including semiconductors and a number of other industries) were less likely to involve crossborder relationships than was true of other sectors. the reasons for the apparent decline in the propensity of semiconductor rms to enter international r&d alliances, along with the (apparently) lower rate of formation of international r&d alliances by rms in semiconductors and related industries, remain unclear. hagedoorn™s (2002) examination of r&d alliance data also does not shed light on the relative importance of participant rms from the united states and other industrial economies. nonetheless, the results of the hagedoorn analysis are broadly consistent with our ndings, suggesting that this vehicle for globalization of innovationrelated activities in the semiconductor industry declined somewhat in importance during the 1990s, especially for u.s. rms.patentingpatents, our nal indicator of globalization in innovation, are an input to the innovation process rather than a direct measure of innovation. nevertheless, these data, which are based on the semiconductor technology classication developed by the u.s. patent and trademark ofce (uspto), have several useful features, not least in making it possible to locate the site of the inventive activity that resulted in the patent. we are also able to weight our patent observations by various citationbased measures of the signicance of individual patents, to control innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 121somewhat for the skewed distribution of patents by economic or technological importance.4the semiconductor industry is a hightechnology sector for which patents for many years were viewed as unimportant, re˚ecting the fact that (among other things) much of the most important innovative activity related to process innovation was protected through secrecy or inimitability, and crosslicensing of patents was widespread. as hall and ziedonis (2001) point out, however, patenting by both idms and fabless semiconductor rms grew rapidly during the 1980s, following changes in u.s. patent policy and some large nancial awards in patentinfringement cases. we therefore believe that the period covered by our patent analysis is one during which semiconductor rms patented extensively, and patents therefore should serve as a reasonable proxy for inventive activity.our empirical analysis utilizes patents assigned to 217 u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor rms during the period 19912003 (based on year of application). this dataset includes almost 114,000 patents from more than 80 patent classes, as identied by the uspto™s ofce of technology assessment and forecast and hall and ziedonis. (the appendix in this chapter lists the patent classes included in our dataset.) we also collected data on citations to these patents in subsequently issued patents in all patent classes.we use information on the location of the inventors listed on each patent as an indicator of the site of the inventive activity that produced the patent. based on a comparison of the reported site of the invention with the headquarters location for each company in our dataset, each patent is assigned to one of the following mutually exclusive categories.ł domestic patents: patents whose inventors are all located in the home country of the controlling company;ł foreign patents: patents whose inventors are all located in countries other than the home country of the controlling company; andł international collaboration patents: patents that have at least one inventor located in the home country and at least one inventor located in another country.5we corrected patent data for selfcitations (excluding citations to other patents led by the assignee), and created forward citation windows of 2, 3, and 4 4 patent citation data were collected with the help of the metrics group division of utekekms, an ip strategy company based in boston.5 bergek and bruzelius (2005) argue that the ﬁinventor locationﬂ data often yield misleading information, because of rmspecic differences in the attribution of patents to inventors or inventor mobility between the time of application and the time of issue of the patent. it is plausible that such ﬁnoiseﬂ may affect inferences from crosssectional analyses of patent data. we use the ﬁinventor locationﬂ information for longitudinal analysis, however, and there is little reason to believe that the problems identied by bergek and bruzelius have become signicantly more severe during the time period of this analysis.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.122 innovation in global industriesyears after publication for each patent, yielding a total of 402,865 forward citations that omit selfcitations. in our citation analysis that follows, we use a 3year ﬁwindowﬂ for patent citations (i.e., we limit the count of citations to those in the rst 3 years after the year of issue of the relevant patent).any comparisons of patents issued to u.s. and nonu.s. rms must be interpreted carefully. for most nonu.s. rms, the higher costs of seeking a patent in the united states in addition to a homecountry patent mean that u.s. patent protection will be obtained for only the more valuable patents in these rms™ portfolios. a simple comparison of u.s. patents assigned to u.s. rms with those assigned to nonu.s. rms thus may yield misleading results because of the different underlying ﬁqualityﬂ of the two patent groups.accordingly, our comparisons of u.s. patents assigned to u.s. and nonu.s. rms use only u.s.assigned patents with ﬁequivalentsﬂ in either the japanese patent ofce (jpo) or the european patent ofce (epo). in other words, our discussion of u.s. and nonu.s. semiconductor rms™ patenting that follows (but only that discussion) includes only the semiconductor patents assigned to u.s. rms for which a patent on the same or a very similar invention also has been issued in one of these other major markets. we used the delphion international patent database to identify u.s.assigned patents for which an equivalent patent has been issued by either the jpo or the epo.figure 12 depicts trends during the period 19912003 in the share of all semiconductor patents assigned to u.s. rms that were created by domestic inventors (either an individual located in the united states or an ﬁalldomesticﬂ inventor team) and the share of semiconductor patents assigned to u.s. rms that involved semiconductors12.eps01020304050607080901001991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003percent distribution of patentsdomestic inventors onlyat least one foreign inventorapplication yearfigure 12 domestic and offshore u.s.assigned semiconductor patents, 19912003 source: thomson delphion consulting.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 123semiconductors13.eps01020304050607080901001991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003application yearpercent distribution of patentsdomestic inventors onlyat least one foreign inventorfigure 13 domestic and offshore u.s.assigned semiconductor patents, idm and systems rms, 19912003. source: thomson delphion consulting.semiconductors14.epsthe plotted points in the electronic file look differentfrom the hard copy.01020304060507080901001991199219931994199519961997199819992000200120022003application yearpercent distribution of patentsdomestic inventors onlyat least one foreign inventorfigure 14 domestic and offshore u.s.assigned semiconductor patents, fabless rms, 19912003. source: thomson delphion consulting.at least one offshore inventor (combining foreign and international collaborative patents). the absence of any strong trend during the decade in this measure of offshore inventive activity is strikingšthe domestic share remains stable at roughly 90 percent throughout the period. a similar lack of growth in offshore inventive activity also is apparent in figure 13, which shows the same ﬁsite of inventionﬂ trends for the idm and systems rms in our sample. although the number of patents for fabless rms in our sample is considerably smaller, figure 14 reveals innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.124 innovation in global industriesa modest shift toward greater offshore inventive activity among fabless rms.6 even for this group of rms, however, patenting remains dominated by homecountry inventive activity.table 3 includes patents assigned to u.s. (for which an international ﬁequiva6 we also analyzed the share of forward citations accounted for by the ﬁhomeinventedﬂ and ﬁoffshore participantﬂ subsamples in our patent database. interestingly, citations are proportionate to the patent shares (i.e., there is no evidence that homeinvented patents are cited much more intensively than those for which offshore inventors are involved).table 3 firm hq and location of inventive activity, u.s. patents19942003one inventor located inusaeuropejapantaiwankoreaisraelcanadasingaporeothersfirm hq inusa86.5%6.5%3.8%0.2%0.2%0.9%0.4%0.3%0.7%europe28.4%60.0%1.5%7.1%1.3%0.2%0.3%0.5%0.4%japan4.2%0.7%94.8%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.1%0.1%taiwan7.6%0.1%1.0%90.7%0.1%0.0%0.0%0.1%0.5%korea2.5%0.1%0.5%0.0%96.1%0.0%0.1%0.1%0.8%israel5.3%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%91.6%3.1%0.0%0.0%canada13.3%19.1%1.2%0.0%0.0%0.0%66.5%0.0%0.0%singapore18.5%1.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%80.4%0.3%19961999one inventor located inusaeuropejapantaiwankoreaisraelcanadasingaporeothersfirm hq inusa86.9%6.4%4.1%0.1%0.2%0.7%0.4%0.4%0.5%europe30.6%57.2%1.4%9.1%0.6%0.3%0.2%0.3%0.3%japan4.2%0.7%94.8%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.1%0.1%taiwan9.2%0.1%1.5%88.7%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.4%korea2.4%0.0%0.5%0.0%96.1%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.9%israel6.7%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%88.9%4.4%0.0%0.0%canada13.1%20.4%1.5%0.0%0.0%0.0%65.0%0.0%0.0%singapore25.0%0.8%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%73.9%0.8%20002003one inventor located inusaeuropejapantaiwankoreaisraelcanadasingaporeothersfirm hq inusa85.1%8.1%3.8%0.2%0.2%0.3%0.3%0.2%0.9%europe23.8%62.6%2.0%6.4%2.7%0.2%0.5%0.7%0.7%japan4.0%0.8%95.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.1%0.0%taiwan5.7%0.1%0.5%92.8%0.2%0.0%0.0%0.2%0.3%korea8.7%0.0%0.0%0.0%82.6%0.0%0.0%4.3%4.3%israel3.8%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%94.9%1.3%0.0%0.0%canada16.0%15.4%0.6%0.0%0.0%0.0%67.9%0.0%0.0%singapore14.2%1.4%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%0.0%84.5%0.0%source: thomson delphion consulting.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 125lentﬂ patent, as dened earlier, was found) and nonu.s. rms, disaggregating the data by home country of patent assignee and site of inventive activity for 19942003, and further splitting the data into 19961999 and 20002003 subperiods. japanese rms™ inventive activity is dominated by homecountry inventors to a greater extent than is true of either u.s. or european semiconductor rms for the 19942003 period. japanese inventors are listed on almost 95 percent of japanese rms™ u.s. patents, whereas u.s. inventors are listed on almost 87 percent of u.s. patents and european inventors appear on 60 percent of european rms™ u.s. patents. looking at the offdiagonal portions of table 3, european inventors account for almost twice as large a share of u.s. semiconductor rms™ patents as japanese inventors. u.s. inventors appear on nearly 30 percent of european rms™ u.s. patents, and japanese inventors on less than 2 percent. a comparison of the two subperiods does not reveal signicant differences, although there is some indication that the ﬁhomeboundednessﬂ of the inventive activities of european, japanese, and taiwanese semiconductor rms is increasing slightly. for all but canadian semiconductor rms, the single most important offshore site for inventive activity is the united states, which on the basis of this evidence remains the dominant site for the offshore inventive activities of most nonu.s. semiconductor rms. for u.s. semiconductor rms, the leading offshore site for inventive activity in both the 19961999 and the 20002003 subperiods is europe, followed closely by japan.figure 15 depicts the leading locations of offshore inventors in the semiconductor patents assigned to u.s. rms for the 19961999 and 20002003 subperiods. the gure highlights considerable change in these locations over time and differences in the location of offshore inventive activity between fabless and other rms in the u.s. semiconductor industry. canadian inventors play a more prominent role in the offshore patenting of u.s. fabless rms than is true of idm and systems rms, accounting for less than 4 percent of the offshore inventive activity of idms and system rms versus more than 20 percent for fabless rms, in both periods. the japanese share of u.s. fabless rms™ offshore patenting also declines between the two subperiods, perhaps re˚ecting the growth in systems design in nonjapanese asia (notably taiwan, south korea, and singapore). european inventors are of comparable importance for both u.s. idms and u.s. fabless rms in both time periods. a comparison of the two subperiods for both groups of rms also highlights the shift in the importance of nonjapanese asian inventors. the share of ﬁother asiaﬂ inventors (particularly singapore) for fabless rms increases more than sixfold (albeit from a very modest initial level), and the ﬁother asiaﬂ share for idms and systems rms nearly doubles.figures 16 and 17 compare the invention locations for u.s. semiconductor patents assigned to u.s. and nonu.s. rms, using only the u.s.assigned patents for which an international ﬁequivalentﬂ patent exists. the data in the gures are based on a random sample of 5,000 patents from the semiconductor patent portfolios of asian, european, and u.s. rms. the randomsampling procedure, which innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.126 innovation in global industriesis stratied by year and patent class within our overall semiconductorpatent ﬁfamily,ﬂ was adopted to provide a patent sample that was not affected by the different propensities of u.s., asian, and european rms to obtain foreign as well as domestic patents. figure 16 displays data on the reported site of inventions for the 19961999 and 20002003 subperiods, and figure 17 displays data on the shares of citations within the rst 3 years after issue for these patents. although the united states is the largest single site of inventive activity resulting in patents throughout the 19962003 period, its dominance declines modestly between the 19961999 and 20002003 subperiods. the share of patents attributable to japanese or taiwanese sites is essentially unchanged throughout the 19932003 period, whereas the european share of inventive activity increases between the 19961999 and 20002003 subperiods.comparing the shares of patents with the shares of citations in figure 17 figure 15 offshore invention sites, u.s.assigned semiconductor patents, 19962003 source: thomson delphion consulting.semiconductors15.epseurope47%japan21%taiwan2%korea2%canada4%other asia18%israel4%others2%idms/systems firms (20002003)europe40.6%japan27.8%taiwan5.3%korea1.8%canada3.6%other asia9.1%israel8.0%others3.8%idms/systems firms (19961999)europe43.2%japan7.1%taiwan5.8%korea0.0%canada23.9%other asia16.8%israel1.3%others1.9%fabless firms (20002003)europe41%japan27%taiwan0%korea0%canada24%other asia3%israel1%others4%fabless firms (19961999)innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 127reveals that patents from japanese and european invention sites tend to be ﬁundercitedﬂ (their share of citations is smaller than their share of overall patents), whereas u.s. patents are ﬁovercitedﬂ relative to their share of overall patenting. patents with taiwanese invention sites are cited slightly more intensively relative to their share during the 20002003 subperiod.overall, the results of our analysis of the site of inventive activity resulting in u.s. patents support the original ndings of the analysis of patenting by rms from a broader sample of industries by patel and pavitt (1991), who found that large multinational rms™ patenting was dominated by homebased inventive activity. the evidence on postissue citations suggests that the most ﬁimportantﬂ semiconductor patents are slightly more likely to result from domestic inventive activity, but this conclusion should be qualied by a recognition of the small size figure 16 distribution of invention sites, all uspto semiconductor patents, 19961999.figure 17 distribution of citations by invention site, all uspto semiconductor patents, 19912003. source: thomson delphion consulting and utekekms.semiconductors16.epssea1.0%others0.2%israel0.6%korea1.2%canada0.9%taiwan7.2%japan27.9%europe29.5%usa31.4%20002003sea0.6%others0.2%israel0.5%korea2.1%canada1.2%taiwan7.3%japan27.9%europe22.2%usa38.1%19961999sea0.9%others0.2%israel0.7%korea0.7%canada1.5%taiwan8.2%japan29.0%europe18.8%usa40.0%20002003semiconductors17.epssea0.6%others0.2%israel0.5%korea2.0%canada1.5%taiwan9.7%japan23.4%europe14.9%usa47.4%19961999innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.128 innovation in global industriesof the sample on which it is based. the trends in patenting for fabless rms suggest that the demanding requirements for close collaboration between semiconductor component designers and systems rms may be causing some shift within this segment of the semiconductor industry toward greater reliance on foreign inventive activity in patenting; but any such trend is very modest. although additional analysis is required, this nding concerning fabless rms™ offshore patenting is consistent with the ﬁmarket demandexploitationﬂ motive for locating r&d offshore discussed by gerybadze and reger (1999)šan important factor in the location of rms™ r&d is their need to be near their innovative customers.implications for engineering employmentthe evidence presented in this chapter suggests that globalization and structural change in the semiconductor industry have resulted in signicant growth in offshore manufacturing capacity, much of which remains owned by u.s. producers. but this growth in offshore production capacity has had far less signicant effects on the location of innovationrelated activities within the semiconductor industry, including the innovationrelated activities of u.s. semiconductor rms. indeed, the growth of offshore foundry production capacity in southeast asia has helped sustain the growth of employment of engineers and designers in u.s.based fabless semiconductor rms.innovationrelated activities in this industry include a number of different activities, such as semiconductor chip design, processtechnology development, and producttechnology development. the limited evidence on these three activities discussed earlier in this chapter suggests that semiconductor chip design is the least ﬁhomeboundﬂ of the three. processtechnology development, as measured by the siting of development fabs, does not appear to have moved offshore to any extent, while patenting (which includes product and processtechnology development) also displays little evidence of signicant offshore relocation.a recent analysis of engineeringemployment trends in the u.s. semiconductor industry (brown and linden, 2006b) suggests that the employment effects of shifts in the location of chip design for u.s. engineers have been modest thus far. brown and linden (2006b) found that employment and earnings growth were higher during the 20002005 period for engineers employed in the u.s. semiconductor industry than in other u.s. industries. employment growth during this period was strongest for electrical, computer hardware, and electronic engineers, but was negative for industrial engineers within the semiconductor industry. brown and linden (2006b) report some evidence that median earnings for ﬁmatureﬂ engineers (50 years and older) employed in the semiconductor industry are lower than for younger engineers, but this tendency appears throughout the time period (20002004) that they analyze, rather than becoming more pronounced in the most recent year. moreover, interpreting these trends is difcult, since they re˚ect some tendency for engineers to move into management positions as they innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 129mature. the individuals classied as ﬁengineersﬂ among this older cohort thus have remained out of management, which may affect their reported earnings.similarly to many other dimensions of globalization of innovationrelated activities in the semiconductor industry, the available data are not well suited to analysis of the employment effects of any movement of different categories of innovationrelated activities to nonu.s. locations. the most detailed analysis of employment trends in the u.s. semiconductor industry during the 20002005 period does not reveal signicant erosion in engineering employment or earnings during the period (brown and linden, 2006b). the available evidence, imperfect as it is, thus does not support grave concern about the employment consequences of recent shifts in the location of innovationrelated activities in the semiconductor industry.the u.s. employment data are largely ﬁbackwardlookingﬂ indicators of the employment consequences of globalization of innovationrelated activities in the semiconductor industry. the implications for future engineering employment trends in the u.s. semiconductor industry associated with the growing numbers of design engineers in china, india, and taiwan are unclear (brown and linden, 2006b). despite government sponsorship and local access to systems rms, china™s chip design capabilities do not yet represent a viable product design outsourcing alternative. india offers certain product design advantages given the predominant use of the english language and its thriving software sector, but zero government involvement, limited manufacturing capacity, and no major fabless rm presence have hampered success. taiwan appears best poised to become a viable offshoring and outsourcing alternative, as well as a signicant competitive threat, to u.s. semiconductor rms in the near term, given its focused government programs, locally owned fabless design segment, and close proximity to systems houses and foundries. these factors suggest that u.s. semiconductor rms™ dominance in product design could be challenged in the future, potentially reducing u.s. employment in this innovationrelated activity. but here too, even a partial ﬁhollowing outﬂ of the u.s. product design segment seems unlikely.implications for firm strategy and public policyan earlier study of the u.s. semiconductor industry™s innovative and competitive performance (macher et al., 1999) noted that u.s. rms™ development of new products (including microprocessors and digitalsignal processing chips) and new business models (notably the growth of fabless rms) had enabled them to overcome a signicant competitiveness crisis during the late 1980s and early 1990s. u.s. semiconductor rms remain globally competitive in the face of rapid innovation by nonu.s. semiconductor rms, but structural change in the global semiconductor industry has resulted in considerable change in the structure of the innovation process.fabless rms in particular seek to develop closer collaborative relationships innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.130 innovation in global industrieswith major systems rms based outside of the united states. shorter product life cycles and the increased variety of individually smaller applications that utilize semiconductor components mean that the idms face greater risks from swings in demand as the costs of their production facilities continue to rise. the design and (especially) the manufacturing capabilities of foreign regions also have improved signicantly since the 1980s, creating new opportunities for u.s. rms to exploit a global division of labor in semiconductor design and manufacturing. among other things, this emergent division of labor has supported the rapid growth of fabless semiconductor rms in the united states.in contrast to the industry challenges of the 1980s that threatened the viability and very survival of the u.s. semiconductor industry, the challenges of the early 21st century stem from the need to manage this global division of labor effectively and strategically while maintaining leadership in innovation. these challenges are hardly new, as lowerproductivity, laborcostsensitive functions in many u.s. manufacturing industries (and a growing array of u.s. nonmanufacturing industries, such as software and nancial servicesšsee chapters 2 and 10, respectively) have moved to lowercost areas of the global economy. many of these regions have developed strong educational and economic infrastructures that can support the creation of productive labor forces and contribute to such innovationrelated activities as product design and process engineering.the offshoring and outsourcing of various activities by u.s. rms has a long history, but so too do the innovative responses of successful u.s. rms. even as the more costsensitive, lowervalueadded activities have been shifted to offshore locations, u.s. rms have maintained their global competitiveness by developing and introducing innovative new products (e.g., pcs and communications) and business models (e.g., fabless semiconductor rms). in the semiconductor industry, product innovation will remain central, and manufacturingprocess innovation is likely to focus on a narrower range of products in which u.s. idms remain dominant. in other words, the strategic management of innovation becomes even more important for the competitive performance of semiconductor rms that seek to exploit the emerging global division of labor in product design and manufacturing while maintaining strength in product and process innovation.it seems likely, for example, that the remaining u.s. idms will continue to exploit offshore sites for manufacturing while relying on foundries to serve a larger portion of their production requirements for products that are slightly behind the ﬁbleeding edgeﬂ of technologyšthe ﬁfabliteﬂ model of production. the continuing growth of semiconductor foundries will provide further opportunities for expansion by u.s. fabless rms, although these rms also are likely to shift at least some of their designrelated activities to offshore locations because of the presence of major customers in these areas.in spite of the powerful forces that are shifting some design, manufacturing, and other functions to offshore locations, the bulk of u.s. semiconductor rms™ ﬁinventive activityﬂ did not shift during the 1990s. as measured imperfectly innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 131by the reported residence of inventors listed on u.s. patents, the inventive activities of u.s. semiconductor rms remain concentrated in the united states. moreover, the inventive activities of nonu.s. semiconductor rms, as measured by similar information for their u.s. patents, also appear to be concentrated in their home countries. this tendency for inventive activity to remain homebound was rst pointed out in an analysis by patel and pavitt (1991) of patenting by multinational rms. the ﬁnonglobalizationﬂ of patenting activity seems to re˚ect the strong dependence of inventive activity on domestic sources of fundamental research and skilled researchers. despite remarkable advances in the codication and global transmission of scientic research, access to such research results for purposes of inventive activity remains surprisingly national in scope. and the apparent importance of the national science and engineering base for domestic inventive activity reinforces the importance of another key governmental functionšfunding the scientic and engineering research and education that support this domestic knowledge pool.the most important implications of this study for u.s. public policy thus relate to (1) the importance of continued (and arguably renewed) federal funding for r&d in the engineering and physical sciences in industry and universities and (2) the importance of public support (which may be nancial or regulatory) for more rapid development of the ﬁinformation infrastructureﬂ (e.g., broadband communications) that can support the growth of a large domestic market of demanding and sophisticated consumers that will in turn spawn innovations in information and electronics technologies.much of the remarkable record of innovation in the u.s. semiconductor and related it industries that spans the 19452006 period rested on substantial investments of public funds in r&d that supported industrial research and innovation, as well as the training of generations of engineers and scientists. much of this federal r&d investment was linked to nationalsecurity goals, and the end of the cold war and associated defense ﬁbuilddownﬂ led to signicant reductions in growth and in some cases the level of federal funding for r&d in the physical and engineering sciences, especially in academic institutions. growth in federal r&d investment since the late 1980s has been dominated by growth in biomedical r&d funding. although a portion of this biomedical r&d investment has supported education and training in the physical sciences and engineering, the imbalance in investment trends, if not reversed, could have detrimental consequences for the continued innovative vitality of the u.s. semiconductor industry and related industries.the importance of market demand in the locational structure of innovation in the semiconductor industry and other hightechnology industries (see chapters 8, 9, and 10, which illustrate the importance of local demand in service industries as well) is difcult to overstate. we have noted that the declining share of semiconductor consumption accounted for by the pc has been associated with the growth of new markets for semiconductor components (e.g., wireless cominnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.132 innovation in global industriesmunications devices) that involve major nonu.s. systems rms. moreover, many of the most innovative, demanding, and sophisticated users of such devices now are located in nonu.s. markets (e.g., south korea for wireless devices, or finland for broadbandbased applications). historically, u.s. semiconductor rms have derived enormous competitive advantages from their ability to serve (and learn from) a large domestic market populated by sophisticated and demanding usersšin some cases, these demanding users were major institutions, such as the military.one important reason for the rapid development of browserbased applications and new business models in the early days of the world wide web, which relied on innovations developed in europe, was the broad diffusion and low cost of pcs within the united states, as well as the low costs of accessing computer networks (mowery and simcoe, 2002). government policy can play a signicant role in the creation or support of markets for advanced technologies (recall that the internet was aided by substantial federal as well as private funding) by supporting investment in the infrastructure that proved so fruitful in the early days of computer networking and developing regulatory policies that create incentives for the large private investments in the communications infrastructures needed for the emergence of new applications, products, and services. r&d and related investments from around the globe are likely to ˚ow to markets in which users demand the most advanced technologies and where these users have access to an array of options for developing new applications of these technologies. such markets are likely to rely in part on a sophisticated wireless and highspeed broadband communications infrastructure.conclusionthe u.s. and global semiconductor industries have experienced signicant structural change since 1980 with the growth of specialized design and manufacturing rms. the growth of new products that use semiconductor components and the entry of rms from southeast asia also have contributed to growth in offshore manufacturing capacity within the industry, much of which remains under the control of u.s. semiconductor rms. nevertheless, there is surprisingly little evidence that the innovationrelated activities of u.s. semiconductor rms have moved offshore to a comparable extent. overall, the results of this descriptive examination of an array of measures of the ﬁglobalizationﬂ of innovationrelated activities in the semiconductor industry support the ndings of patel and pavitt (1991) from more than a decade ago. the innovationrelated activities of otherwise global rms in this industry remain remarkably nonglobalized, even in the face of expanded international ˚ows of capital and technology, farreaching change in the structure of semiconductor manufacturing, and signicant shifts in the structure of demand.how can one explain these ndings? the homebound nature of process innoinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 133vation investments is perhaps the least surprising, given the complexity of process technology within the semiconductor industry and the demanding requirements for coordination between product and process innovation. moreover, the emergence of vertically specialized foundries that do not rely on development facilities to the same extent as idms means that our data on the location of development fabs exclude process innovation in a segment of semiconductor manufacturing that has grown considerably and gives every indication of continued growth. it is also important to highlight the retrospective nature of these indicators, which (especially in the case of patents) re˚ect r&d and related investments made years before their effects appear in these data. trends in patenting in the late 1990s thus re˚ect actions or strategies that were put in place in the early 1990s and, like most other scholars, we have almost no forwardlooking indicators.some of our other indicators, such as the nsf r&d investment data, exclude nonu.s. rms, and the data themselves may well omit signicant innovationrelated activities. it is plausible, for example, that much of the design work of u.s.based fabless rms is not captured by the nsf r&d surveys. u.s.based semiconductor rms also benet from the strength of their homebased innovation system, especially in the product design area. ﬁhomebase augmentationﬂ (kuemmerle, 1999) thus may be a relatively minor factor for u.s. rms™ r&d investment strategies and a signicant motive for nonu.s. rms™ r&d investments in the united states and elsewhere. moreover, the exploitation by u.s. semiconductor rms of these ﬁhomebaseﬂ advantages may not require signicant offshore r&d investment to complement offshore production investment. indeed, one hypothesized motivation for offshore r&d that receives the most support from our analysis is the ﬁmarketdemand exploitationﬂ hypothesis of gerybadze and reger (1999), which may be particularly relevant to the patenting activities of u.s.based fabless rms.the trends highlighted in our discussion of technologydevelopment and r&d alliances in this industry also raise interesting questions. the declining rate of formation of domestic and international alliances by semiconductor rms throughout the industry is surprising but may re˚ect some exhaustion of the pool of potential alliance partners or projects. nontariff barriers to u.s. rms™ access to foreign markets resulting from government procurement restrictions or other policies have been reduced during the past decade in several industries (oecd, 2005), and it is possible that these reductions in marketaccess barriers have reduced u.s. rms™ incentives to pursue collaborative ventures with nonu.s. rms. our alliance data also do not fully capture the types of alliances that are important to the fabless rm segment of the u.s. semiconductor industry, and thereby understate the signicance of international alliances within the overall industry. these data nevertheless suggest some growth in the participation by nonu.s. rms in domestic and foreign alliances, especially among nonjapanese asian rms. some portion of this alliance activity may be motivated by access to the chinese mainland market, where nontariff barriers remain signicant.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.134 innovation in global industriesthe results of our analysis of patents provide the strongest support for the original ndings of patel and pavitt (1991), but these results also must be treated with caution. as we pointed out earlier, patents omit many of the innovationrelated activities that are most important to the creation or maintenance of competitive advantage for idms and fabless rms alike, and our ndings for these indicators accordingly must be qualied.does the nonglobalized character of u.s. semiconductor rms™ innovationrelated activities differ signicantly from that of semiconductor rms based in other nations? the data presented in table 3 indicate that the homebound character of u.s. semiconductor rms™ patenting is similar to that of semiconductor rms headquartered in other nations, as is the homebound character of the processtechnology development facilities that u.s. and nonu.s. idms and systems rms operate.are the trends discussed in this paper for the semiconductor industry representative of other hightechnology industries, or is this industry unique? comparing the extent of ﬁnonglobalizationﬂ in the semiconductor industry with that of other knowledgeintensive industries is difcult, since few detailed studies of these trends have been undertaken for other industries. offshore r&d investment by u.s. rms in electronic components accounted for a smaller share of industryfunded r&d during the 1990s than is true of u.s. rms in pharmaceuticals, where more than 14 percent of industryfunded r&d was performed offshore in 2001 (national science board, 2006). like semiconductors, the pharmaceuticals industry underwent considerable structural change and vertical specialization during the 1990s (see chapter 6), particularly through the entry of biotechnology rms that often specialize in drug discovery and contract research organizations that specialize in drug development (i.e., clinical trials). unlike semiconductors, however, the structure of market demand in pharmaceuticals has undergone little signicant changešthe u.s. remains the most protable single national market, thanks to the peculiar structure of its health care delivery system.why do we observe such contrasts between these two industries in the (apparent) share of offshore sites in innovationrelated activities? one hypothesis appeals to the more diverse structure of products in the pharmaceuticals industry, combined with substantial scientic research capabilities (in many cases, based on public funding) in many nonu.s. industrial economies. the science underlying product innovation in various therapeutic classes, to say nothing of the growing variety of delivery mechanisms (topical, inhaled, subdermal, as well as oral), arguably spans a wider variety of elds and has become much more diverse during the past 20 years than is true of product innovation in semiconductors. these factors have supported the growth of signicant clusters of scientic expertise in specic therapies or diseases that attract the r&d investments of u.s. pharmaceuticals rms. a large part of the ﬁdﬂ in pharmaceutical r&d also represents costs associated with conducting and administering clinical trials to diverse patient populations. the situation in semiconductors arguably is innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 135quite differentšthe structure of products and markets remain less complex, and government r&d programs have not created comparably accessible clusters of scientic and technological expertise.as this speculative discussion suggests, the dynamics of globalization and nonglobalization in innovation are complex and re˚ect contrasting paths of evolution (at the industry level) within different national innovation systems, as well as the interplay among these national innovation systems, trade policy, and other in˚uences. still another important in˚uence on the globalization of at least some types of pharmaceuticals r&d is regulatory policy in the offshore as well as domestic markets in which all global pharmaceuticals rms operate. maintaining a signicant r&d presence in their offshore markets may facilitate the management of clinical trials for new products that u.s. rms seek to introduce into these markets.even in the pharmaceuticals industry, however, narin et al. (1997) have pointed out that the patents led in the united states by nonu.s. (as well as u.s.) inventors tend to rely disproportionately on ﬁhomecountryﬂ science, as measured by the citations to scientic publications in their patent applications. the links between science and technology that contribute to much of the inventive activity that is embodied in patenting retain a considerable homebound element, rather than operating seamlessly and frictionlessly across national boundaries.overall, this discussion of the globalization of innovationrelated activities in the u.s. semiconductor industry does not indicate an imminent policyrelated ﬁcrisisﬂ in the innovative capabilities of u.s. rms. the implications of our discussion for the employment of engineers in innovationrelated activities in the u.s. semiconductor industry also are reasonably positive. as we have noted repeatedly, u.s. rms have reacted to the growth of offshore innovative and productive capabilities by developing novel business models that have enabled them to compete successfully in an array of new markets. the success of these innovative strategies has sustained innovation and employment in the u.s. semiconductor industry. nonetheless, it seems clear that much of the innovative performance of u.s. semiconductor rms relies on the health of a complex domestic r&d infrastructure that has beneted from large investments of public funds during the past six decades. a second important historical contributor to the innovative performance of u.s. rms is the large domestic market of innovative users that these rms face. sustaining both of these factors that have contributed to the innovative performance of u.s. semiconductors in an intensely competitive global industry will require innovations in policy by both government and industry for decades to come.acknowledgmentsresearch for this chapter was supported by the alfred p. sloan foundation, the ewing m. kauffman foundation, and the andrew w. mellon foundation. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.136 innovation in global industriesa portion of david mowery™s research was supported by the national science foundation (ses0531184). a portion of alberto di minin™s research was supported by the insat laboratory, scuola superiore sant™anna, pisa, italy. deepak hedge provided valuable comments on an earlier draft of this chapter.referencesappleyard, m. m., n. w. hatch, and d.c. mowery. (2000). managing the development and transfer of process technologies in the semiconductor manufacturing industry. pp. 183207 in the nature and dynamics of organizational capabilities, g. dosi, r. r. nelson, and s. g. winter, eds. london: oxford university press.arensman, r. (2003). fabless goes global. electronic business. march 21.bergek, a., and m. bruzelius. (2005). patents with inventors from different countries: exploring some methodological issues through a case study. paper presented at the druid conference, june 2729, copenhagen, denmark.braun, e., and s. macdonald. (1978). revolution in miniature: the history and impact of semiconductor electronics. cambridge: cambridge university press.brown, c., and g. linden. (2006a). offshoring in the semiconductor industry: a historical perspective. in brookings trade forum 2005: offshoring whitecollar work, s. m. collins and l. brainard, eds. washington, d.c.: brookings institution press.brown, c., and g. linden. (2006b). semiconductor engineers in a global economy. national academy of engineering workshop on the offshoring of engineering: facts, myths, unknowns and implications. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.ernst, d. (2005). complexity and internationalisation of innovation: why is chip design moving to asia? international journal of innovation management 9(1):4773.gerybadze, a., and g. reger. (1999). globalization of r&d: recent changes in the management of innovation in transnational corporations. research policy 28(23):251275.hagedoorn, j. (2002). interrm r&d partnerships: an overview of major trends and patterns since 1960. research policy 31:477492.hall, b. h., and r. h. ziedonis. (2001). the patent paradox revisited: an empirical study of patenting in the u.s. semiconductor industry, 19791995. rand journal of economics 32(1):101128.hatch, n. w., and d. c. mowery. (1998). process innovation and learning by doing in semiconductor manufacturing. management science 44(1):14611477.integrated circuit engineering (19901999). proles: a worldwide survey of ic manufacturers and suppliers. scottsdale, az: integrated circuit engineering corporation.kuemmerle, w. (1999). the drivers of foreign direct investment into research and development; an empirical investigation. journal of international business studies 30(1):124.leachman, r. c., and c. h. leachman. (2004). globalization of semiconductors: do real men have fabs, or virtual fabs? in locating global advantage: industry dynamics in the international economy, m. kenney and r. florida, eds. palo alto, calif.: stanford university press.linden, g., and d. somaya. (2003). systemonachip integration in the semiconductor industry: industry structure and rm strategies. industrial and corporate change 12(3):545576.linden, g., c. brown, and m. appleyard. (2004). the net world order™s in˚uence on global leadership in the semiconductor industry. pp. 232257 in locating global advantage: industry dynamics in the international economy, m. kenney and r. florida, eds. palo alto, calif.: stanford university press.macher, j. t. (2006). technological development and the boundaries of the rm: a knowledgebased examination in semiconductor manufacturing. management science 52(6):826843.macher, j. t., and d. c. mowery. (2003). managing learning by doing: an empirical study in semiconductor manufacturing. journal of product innovation management 20(5):391410.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 137macher, j. t., and d. c. mowery. (2004). vertical specialization and industry structure in high technology industries. pp. 317356 in business strategy over the industry lifecyclešadvances in strategic management (vol. 21), j. a. c. baum and a. m. mcgahan, eds. new york: elsevier.macher, j. t., d. c. mowery, and d. a. hodges. (1998). reversal of fortune? the recovery of the u.s. semiconductor industry. california management review 41(1):107136.macher, j. t., d. c. mowery, and d. a. hodges. (1999). semiconductors. pp. 245286 in u.s. industry in 2000: studies in competitive performance, d. c. mowery, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.mowery, d. c., and t. s. simcoe. (2002). is the internet a u.s. invention? an economic and technological history of computer networking. research policy 31:13691387.narin, f., k. s. hamilton, and d. olivastro. (1997). the increasing linkage between u.s. technology and public science. research policy 26(3):317330.national science board (2006). science and engineering indicators 2006. arlington, va: national science foundation.oecd (organisation for economic cooperation and development). (2005). looking beyond tariffs: the role of nontariff barriers in world trade. paris: oecd trade policy studies.patel, p., and k. pavitt. (1991). large rms in the production of the world™s technology: an important case of ﬁnonglobalisationﬂ. journal of international business studies 22(1):120.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.138 innovation in global industriesappendix: semiconductor patent classesł 029. subclasses: 116.1; 592; 602.1; 613; 729; 740; 827; 830; 832; 835; 840; 841; 854; 855; 025.01; 025.02; 025.03ł 065. subclass: 152ł 073. subclasses: 514.16; 721; 727; 754; 777; 862; 031.06ł 084. subclasses: 676; 679ł 102. subclasses: 202ł 117 subclasses: allł 118: subclasses: 407; 408; 409; 410; 411; 412; 413; 414; 415; 669; 715; 716; 717; 718; 719; 720; 721; 722; 723; 724; 725; 726; 727; 728; 729; 730; 731; 732; 733; 900ł 134. subclasses: 902; 001.2; 001.3ł 136. subclasses: 243; 244; 245; 246; 247; 248; 249; 250; 251; 252; 253; 254; 255; 256; 257; 258; 259; 260; 261; 262; 263; 264; 265ł 148. subclasses: 239; 033ł 156. subclasses: 345; 625.1; 626; 627; 628; 636; 643; 644; 645; 646; 647; 648; 649; 650; 651; 652; 653; 654; 655; 656; 657; 658; 659; 660; 661; 662ł 164. subclass: 091ł 174. subclasses: 102; 261; 015.1; 016.3; 052.4; 052.5ł 194. subclass: 216ł 204. subclasses: 192; 206ł 205. subclasses: 123; 157; 656; 915ł 206. subclasses: 334; 710; 711; 832; 833ł 216. subclasses: 002; 014; 016; 017; 023; 079; 099ł 219. subclasses: 121.61; 385; 500; 501; 505; 638ł 228. subclasses: 122.2; 123.1; 179.1; 903ł 250. subclasses: 200; 208; 338.4; 339.03; 341.4; 370; 371; 390; 492; 552; 559ł 252. subclasses: 950; 062.3ł 257. subclasses: allł 264. subclasses: 272.17ł 307. subclasses: 201; 270; 272; 291; 296; 355; 443; 446; 454; 455; 456; 463; 465; 468; 473; 475; 530; 651ł 310. subclass: 303ł 313. subclasses: 366; 367; 498; 499; 500; 523ł 315. subclass: 408ł 323. subclasses: 217; 223; 235; 237; 263; 265; 268; 300; 311; 313; 314; 315; 316; 319; 320; 350; 902; 907ł 324. subclasses: 207.21;235; 252; 719; 722; 763; 765; 767; 768; 769; 158f; 158rł 326. subclasses: allinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.semiconductors 139ł 327. subclasses: 109; 112; 127; 170; 186; 188; 189; 192; 193; 194; 195; 196; 203; 204; 206; 207; 208; 209; 210; 211; 212; 213; 214; 223; 224; 258; 262; 281; 288; 306; 324; 327; 328; 334; 366; 367; 368; 369; 370; 371; 372; 373; 389; 390; 391; 404; 405; 409; 410; 411; 412; 413; 416; 417; 419; 420; 421; 422; 423; 424; 425; 426; 427; 428; 429; 430; 431; 432; 433; 434; 435; 436; 437; 438; 439; 440; 441; 442; 443; 444; 445; 446; 447; 448; 449; 450; 451; 452; 453; 454; 455; 456; 457; 458; 459; 460; 461; 462; 463; 464; 465; 466; 467; 468; 469; 470; 471; 472; 473; 474; 475; 476; 477; 478; 479; 480; 481; 482; 483; 484; 485; 486; 487; 488; 489; 490; 491; 492; 493; 494; 495; 496; 497; 498; 499; 500; 501; 502; 503; 504; 505; 510; 511; 513; 527; 528; 529; 530; 536; 537; 538; 539; 541; 542; 543; 546; 562; 563; 564; 565; 566; 568; 569; 570; 571; 574; 575; 576; 577; 578; 579; 580; 581; 582; 583; 584; 585; 586; 587; 051; 065; 081; 408; 409; 410; 411; 412; 413ł 329. subclasses: 301; 305; 314; 326; 342; 362; 364; 365; 369; 370ł 330. subclasses: 114; 116; 117; 118; 124; 127; 128; 129; 140; 141; 142; 143; 144; 146; 147; 148; 149; 150; 151; 152; 153; 154; 155; 156; 157; 168; 172; 181; 182; 183; 185; 186; 192; 193; 199; 200; 202; 250; 252; 253; 254; 255; 260; 263; 264; 267; 269; 270; 272; 275; 277; 282; 285; 290; 292; 296; 297; 004.9; 007; 009; 044; 051; 056; 059; 061; 069; 070; 075; 076; 087; 299; 3ł 331. subclasses: 107; 111; 008; 052; 1ał 332. subclasses: 102; 105; 110; 113; 116; 130; 135; 136; 146; 152; 164; 168; 177; 178ł 333. subclasses: 103; 247ł 334. subclasses: 015; 047ł 338. subclass: 195ł 340. subclasses: 146; 598; 634; 814; 815.45; 825ł 341. subclasses: 118; 136; 143; 145; 156ł 346. subclass: 150.1ł 347. subclasses: 130; 238; 001; 059ł 348. subclasses: 126; 294; 390; 391; 420; 801; 087ł 349. subclasses: 140, 202, 041, 042, 047, 053ł 355. subclass: 053ł 356. subclass: 030ł 358. subclasses: 261; 426; 482; 483; 513; 514; 037ł 359. subclasses: 109; 248; 332; 342; 343; 344; 359; 360; 006ł 360. subclasses: 051ł 361. subclasses: 100; 196; 197; 198; 277; 519; 523; 525; 527; 537; 600; 697; 703; 717; 718; 723; 737; 763; 764; 783; 813; 820; 001; 056; 091ł 362. subclass: 800ł 363. subclasses: 108; 109; 114; 123; 125; 126; 127; 128; 131; 135; 159; 160; 163; 010; 027; 037; 041; 048; 049; 053; 054; 056; 057; 060; 070; 077ł 364. subclasses: 232; 249; 468; 477; 488; 489; 490; 491; 578; 579; 715; 716; 748; 750.5; 754; 760; 787; 862; 927; 954; 514rinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.140 innovation in global industriesł 365. subclasses: 103; 104; 105; 106; 114; 145; 156; 174; 175; 176; 177; 178; 179; 180; 181; 182; 183; 184; 185; 186; 187; 188; 189; 200; 201; 203; 205; 207; 208; 210, 212; 218; 221; 222; 225; 226; 227; 230; 233; 015; 049; 053; 096ł 368. subclasses: 239; 241; 083ł 369. subclasses: 121; 044; 047ł 370. subclasses: 013; 060; 062; 085; 094.1ł 371. subclasses: 005; 010; 011; 021; 022; 037; 040; 047ł 372. subclasses: 043; 044; 045; 046; 047; 048; 049; 050; 075; 081ł 374. subclasses: 163; 178ł 375. subclasses: 118; 224; 351; 356ł 376. subclass: 183ł 377. subclasses: 127; 057; 069ł 379. subclasses: 253; 287; 292; 294; 361; 405ł 381. subclasses: 175; 015ł 382. subclasses: 144; 145; 151ł 385. subclasses: 131; 014; 049; 088ł 395. subclasses: 182.03; 200; 241; 250; 275; 280; 290; 296; 309; 325; 375; 400; 403; 425; 430; 445; 500; 519; 550; 575; 650; 700; 725; 750; 800ł 396. subclasses: 211; 236; 321; 081; 099ł 414. subclass: 935ł 417. subclass: 413ł 422. subclass: 245ł 427. subclasses: 457; 074; 080; 098; 099; 523; 524; 525; 526; 527; 528; 529; 530; 531; 532; 533, 534; 535; 536; 537; 538; 539; 540; 541; 542; 543; 544; 545; 546; 547; 548; 549; 550; 551; 552; 553; 554; 555; 556; 557; 558; 559, 560; 561; 562; 563; 564; 565; 566; 567; 568; 569; 570; 571; 572; 573; 574; 575; 576; 577; 578; 579; 580; 581; 582; 583; 584; 585; 586; 587; 588, 589; 590; 591; 592; 593; 594; 595; 596; 597; 598; 599; 600; 601ł 428. subclasses: 209; 450; 457; 620; 641; 650; 680; 938ł 430. subclasses: 311; 312; 313; 314; 315; 316; 317; 318; 319; 005ł 436. subclasses: 147; 149; 151; 004ł 437. subclasses: allł 445. subclasses: 001ł 455. subclasses: 169; 180.4; 191.2; 193.3; 252.1; 331; 333ł 505. subclasses: 190; 191; 220; 235; 329; 330; 703; 917; 923ł 510. subclasses: 175ł 524. subclass: 403ł 902. subclass: 026innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.141 4 flat panel displaysjeffrey a. hartindiana universityintroductionthis chapter focuses on the ˚at panel display (fpd) industry, an industry that manufactures display components for various types of electronic systems from cell phones to highdenition televisions. this is a relatively young but highly competitive and dynamic industry that got its technological start in the united states in the 1960s but quickly migrated to japan, then to korea and taiwan. despite the fact that fpds are now manufactured almost entirely in east asia, a number of u.s. rms (such as ibm, corning, applied technologies, and photon dynamics) are central participants in the industry. this chapter examines changes in the structure and geographic location of the industry™s innovation process since 1990 and discusses the effects of these changes on u.s. rms and workers.one way to address these issues is to examine whether innovative activity has followed the movement of investment in fpd manufacturing. since investment in manufacturing has been primarily in east asia since 1990šrst in japan and then later in korea and taiwanšone might also expect most innovative activity to be located there. in actuality, some important innovative activity is still located outside east asia, primarily in supplier rms in the united states and western europe. u.s. and european rms remain important in the industry™s innovative processes, but it will be difcult for them to remain so unless they work closely with the manufacturers in east asia. several u.s. rms have done this and have remained, as a result, at the center of the innovation process. a major implication is that public policy should not punish u.s. rms for their efforts to follow the action in globalizing industries like this one.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.142 innovation in global industriesbackground information on the industryin 2005, the total value of fpd1 sales worldwide was $65.25 billion (see figure 1). liquid crystal displays (lcds) accounted for over 95 percent of fpd sales by value; thinlm transistor (tft) lcds accounted for over 90 percent of lcd sales; and largesized tft lcds accounted for about 75 percent of the value of tft lcd sales.2 the unit volume of largesized tft lcd panels in 2004 was 138.5 million displays. the unit volume of small and mediumsized lcds in that year was around 650 million (young, 2005). the average annual growth rate from 1990 to 2005 in the real value of fpd sales was 23 percent. real growth rates for tft lcd sales are likely to be somewhat higher than those for fpds.demand for tft lcds is a function of the demand for a wide variety of products, including, among others, televisions, personal computers, pdas, camcorders, cell phones, and digital cameras (see figure 2). the market for tft lcds and other fpds became larger and increasingly diversied as the consumer electronics market moved toward digital and highdenition televisions and portable digital devices and as the size and quality of tft lcds increased.innovations in process technology along with vigorous competition permitted consumers to benet from steadily declining prices over time. for example, prices of tft lcds declined with each successive generation of production equipment. every time the glass substrate size for processing displays increased, a new generation of production equipment was created to match that size. with the entry of korean and taiwanese rms into the market, the demand for tft lcds increased in all markets where thinness and low power consumption were valued by consumers.the potential market for fpds is enormous. about 780 million cell phones were sold globally in 2005; 176 million tv sets; 145 million desktop personal computers; 62 million notebook computers; 9 million personal digital assistants (pdas); 10 million camcorders; 50 million mp3 players; and 85 million digital cameras.3 and yet, while tft lcds accounted for almost all notebook computer displays, camcorder viewnders, pda displays, and handheld tvs in 2005, they accounted for only around 60 percent of computer monitors and 10 percent of televisions. until recently, most cell phones used super twisted nematic (stn) 1 the term ˚at panel display encompasses a variety of display technologies, including lcds, plasma displays, organic lightemitting diodes, and electroluminescent displays. many of the statistics collected about the industry focus on the largest segment of the ˚at panel display marketšlcds. this chapter focuses mainly on lcds.2 an lcd is a thin, ˚at display device made up of any number of pixels arrayed in front of a light source or re˚ector. see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/liquidcrystaldisplay for details. a color lter is required for color displays and, since the mid 1990s, most lcds sold use a multiplexed activematrix method of addressing the pixels that depends on the deposition of very small tfts on the bottom glass panel of the device. see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/tftlcd. a largesized panel is 10 inches or more, measured diagonally. small and mediumsized panels are less than 10 inches.3 various business press sources. the estimate for pdas is for 2004.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 143flat panel1.epsbitmap imagefigure 1 global ˚at panel display revenues, 19902005 (current and constant 2003 dollars).note: the statistics in the gure include revenues for a variety of fpd products including lcds, plasma displays, electroluminescent displays, and organic lightemitting diodes. source: displaysearch.figure 2 global ˚at panel display sales by application, 2005. source: frost and sullivan, http://www.frost.com/prod/servlet/cio/fa1f01020101/chart2.1.gif.lcds because of their lower price. in 2005, however, 47 percent of cell phones had tft lcd displays, up from 30 percent the previous year (softpedia news, 2005). even in those display markets where tft lcds competed with alternative technologies, growth rates were impressive. for example, in 2005, sales of lcd notebook pc panellcd tvplasma tvmobile phonespublic info displaysindustrial applicationsautomotive applicationsmedical applicationsportable media playerother applicationsdesktop monitor panelpdaflat panel2.epsinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.144 innovation in global industriestvs grew to over 17 million units, up from 181,000 in 2000 (cantrell, 2005). figure 2 shows global sales of fpds in 2005 by application.display size was initially a major constraint on demand for tft lcds. in the early 1980s, when the maximum size of tft lcds was 2 to 3 inches (measured diagonally), sales were limited to handheld tvs and camcorder viewnders. in the late 1980s, when the maximum size was 13 inches and prices were still relatively high, computer monitor sales were limited primarily to displays for expensive notebook computers. most notebook computers had passivematrix4 stn lcd displays until the price of tft lcds came down sufciently to attract buyers. by the late 1990s, highquality tft lcd monitors for computers were being produced in high volume and prices had declined to the point where they were competitive in the marketplace with cathode ray tube (crt) monitors.by 2005, when the maximum size of tft lcds that could be produced in highvolume factories was over 40 inches, the main constraint on sales was price and quality relative to alternative similarly sized computer and tv displays, including plasma display panels (pdps)5 included in the fpd revenues discussed earlier. by 2005, tft lcds were competing successfully in television markets with 42inch or smaller crtbased televisions and pdps. given the previous price declines in smaller tft lcds, however, it was clear that tft lcds would soon be competing successfully in the larger screen sizes as well.patterns of investment in manufacturingin 1996, over 95 percent of all tft lcds produced globally were made in japan. in 2005, less than 11 percent were made there; the top two production locations were korea and taiwan (see figure 3), each producing roughly 40 percent of global supply. the change over time in the location of tft lcd production was a result of a sequence of investment decisions on the part of major rms in the three countries. japan was the dominant production site until 2001, when korean rms took the lead. taiwanese production accomplished the same in 2002 but remained a bit below korean production in 2002 and 2003. by 2004, the koreans and taiwanese were running neck and neck. whereas the koreans 4 a passivematrix display is one in which each pixel must retain its state between screen refreshes without the benet of a steady electrical charge. pixels in passivematrix displays are addressed via row and column drivers. tft lcds are activematrix displays because a transistor associated with each pixel holds the steady charge that is lacking in an stn lcd. a key advantage of activematrix displays over passivematrix displays is that it is not necessary to address each pixel via row and column drivers during each screen refresh. only those pixels that need to change are addressed during a refresh. this generally permits activematrix displays to have faster response times than passivematrix displays.5 a pdp is an emissive fpd in which visible light is generated by phosphors excited by a plasma discharge between two panels of glass.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 145flat panel3.epsbitmap imagefigure 3 production shares of ftf lcds by location, 19932004 (percentages). source: murtha et al. (2001).began to produce tft lcds in high volume around 1995, the taiwanese did not begin to do so until 1998.the main reasons for this shift in production within east asia were lower engineering and labor costs in korea and taiwan and the ability of rst korean and then taiwanese rms to raise the large amounts of capital needed for investing in stateoftheart fabrication facilities. it is important to note that most japanese rms were not able to do this after the beginning of the bubble economy in 1991.6 this provided a window of opportunity for the entry of korean rms in the mid1990s. similarly, a window of opportunity was created for taiwanese rms in the wake of the asia crisis of 19971998, as korean rms temporarily experienced difculties in nancing new plants.the ownership of production was similar to the location of production with some notable exceptions. some of the production (less than onefourth) located in japan in the mid1990s was owned by ibm through its joint venture with toshiba (display technologies, inc.). some of the production (about onefourth) located in korea in the late 1990s was owned by philips (a european rm) in its joint venture with lg (lg philips displays). after 2000, sony also owned some of the 6 after the collapse of the japanese stock market in 1990 and a major decline in the value of real estate, japanese banks suffered from a shortage of capital. since many loans to small businesses were backed by property and small business loans constituted more than a majority of total loans, the entire banking system began to look shaky after 1990. financial regulators failed to force the banks to write off their bad loans, so bank depositors began to look elsewhere for places to invest their capital and corporate borrowers began to look to overseas capital markets for loans (see hutchison, 1998; wood, 1992).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.146 innovation in global industriesproduction in korea through its joint venture with samsung (slcd). japanese rms provided some of the capital and technology for new entrants in taiwan and china. they did this in order to have access to dependable supply sources of ˚at panels so that they would be able to compete with lowcost producers in japan (such as sharp) and korea in enduser markets for computers and televisions. taiwanese rms supplied assembled displays to japanese rms on an original equipment manufacturer basis. table 1 provides a list of the largest producers of tft lcds in 2005.tftlcd manufacturingtft lcd manufacturing is technically challenging, expensive, and risky. the seventh generation of tft lcd fabrication plants required an investment of between $1.5 billion and $2 billion per plant. because of learningcurve economies (dynamic economies of scale) in tft lcd production, the price for any given size of display declined over time, just as it did for integrated circuits (ics). but the competition among display rms was so intense that it was not always possible to enjoy the prots that are sometimes connected with learningcurve economies, hence the risk of making large investments with limited payoffs.the technology for manufacturing tft lcds is quite complex, bearing many similarities to that for ics. both tft lcd and ic production require advanced clean rooms, advanced lithography equipment, chemical or physical vapor deposition equipment, specialized testing equipment, and robotic handling equipment. tft lcds, like ics, require many process steps; an error at any step may produce a faulty device. tft lcd and ic production is highly capitalintensive, and extensive training is required for cleanroom production workers and, even after a factory is producing at full capacity, a large team of production engineers must be on hand to diagnose and x production problems. the proportion of engineers to production workers increases as one moves from generation to generation (as does the necessity to employ automated handling and conveyance technologies) because of the increasing difculty of maintaining high yields and throughput.table 1 major tft lcd manufacturers by location, 2005japankoreataiwanu.s.chinasharpł samsungł lg philips displaył  sonysamsung lcdł au optronicsł chi mei optoelectronicsł hannstarł quanta displaył chunghwa picture tubesnoneł  beijing orient electronicsł svanecinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 147as the glass substrate size increased in tft lcd production (see figure 4), some physical properties changed, thus creating new challenges for equipment manufacturers. for example, large glass substrates required special handling technologies because of the tendency of glass to sag when transported horizontally. photolithography equipment had to be updated to be capable of transferring designs onto the larger and larger substrates. filling the lcd cells with liquid crystal materials became more challenging as the cell and module size increased.one important difference between tft lcds and ics is that ics are always shrinking in size in order to achieve a greater number of chips per silicon wafer and to speed the performance of the chip itself. in contrast, a signicant portion of the global market for tft lcds tends to shift toward largersized displays (e.g., for computer monitors and tvs) while the demand for smaller displays (e.g., for cell phones) also has tended to grow rapidly, so the only way to reduce average unit costs is by increasing yields and by reducing defects on larger and larger glass substratesšthe large sheets of glass on which multiple display panels are processed (see figure 4).this episodically requires a shift to the next generation of production technology, new tools and handling equipment geared to the larger substrates, and manufacturers to have ˚exible strategies with regard to the production of a variety of display sizes. figure 4 shows that there have been six generational shifts between 1991 and 2005, so the average time between shifts has been 2.3 years. while the ic industry also has gone through transitions to larger wafer sizes (the latest being from 200 to 300mmdiameter wafers), these transitions are flat panel4.epsbitmap imagefigure 4 glass substrates, rst through seventh generation. source: samsung corning precision, http://www.scp.samsung.com/content/en/product/generation.asp.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.148 innovation in global industriesless frequent and ics of a given type generally do not increase in size over time (rather they tend to shrink).firm strategiesthe strategy for manufacturers of tft lcds consists mainly of deciding if and when to invest in the construction of a new fabrication facility. along with the decision to invest in a new line comes the even more important decision of whether to move to the next generation of substrates (see figure 4). it is a risky decision for a number of reasons: (1) there is always uncertainty about the future demand for tft lcds of various sizes, (2) there is uncertainty about how many competitors will match the investment and when (hence uncertainty about future supply), (3) there are uncertainties about both product and process technologies, and (4) there are uncertainties about how well the rm itself will be able to execute its selected strategy.product technologies are uncertain because of the potential competition from alternative display technologies. for example, it was not clear that lcd televisions would be able to compete with crtbased televisions and pdps in the market for digital televisions until fthgeneration tft lcd plants were built. not only was there the question of relative price, there was also a question of relative quality of displays and the premium that consumers would be willing to pay for higher quality.process technologies are uncertain because of the problems connected with scaling up equipment and altering handling systems for each generation of substrates. in the move from second to thirdgeneration substrates, for example, it was necessary to move to new types of conveyor systems and automated guided vehicles to transfer partially processed glass substrates from one machine to another on the factory ˚oor. this was done to reduce both breakage and particle contamination rates.besides having to deal with technological and other uncertainties, manufacturers have to decide which suppliers to work with. this can be crucial because of the need to ramp up production quickly in order to exploit whatever temporary advantages might accrue to early investors. suppliers can fail manufacturers in a number of ways: materials suppliers might not be able to provide key inputs at the right time; equipment suppliers might not be able to deliver or maintain equipment that is crucial to raising yield and throughput. because of the extreme time pressures in this industry, most manufacturers work with established suppliers who have extensive experience with highvolume tft lcd manufacturing. only if a new and inexperienced supplier has a very important technological edge will a manufacturer be willing to work with them.consider the strategies selected by japan™s pioneer tft lcd manufacturer, sharp, in the early 1980s. sharp invested earlier than other japanese rms in the rst generation of tft lcd plants mainly because management believed that not innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 149having an internal source for crts had hurt sharp™s ability to compete with other japanese rms in the television business. as an early producer of handheld tvs and calculators, sharp saw a bright future for other devices that required information displays. sharp management accepted the risk of investing in an unproven display technology because they felt they had no other choice.sharp initially worked with only a few external suppliers and tried to develop its own manufacturing equipment. when the ibmtoshiba joint venture, dti, built a thirdgeneration plant in japan that outperformed sharp™s earliergeneration plants, it did so by relying more than sharp had done on external suppliers. as production moved from japan to korea to taiwan, rms in the other east asian countries generally became increasingly dependent on external suppliers, mainly because they lacked the ability to develop quickly all the necessary capabilities inhouse. in addition, they moved some of the more laborintensive processes, such as module assembly, to lowerwage locations, including china.thirdgeneration plants were considerably more automated than earliergeneration plants, so external equipment rms that could work with manufacturers to perfect their automation systems had an opportunity to become key participants in the industry. (we will later see how this approach worked for two u.s. rmsšapplied materials and photon dynamics.)during the bubble economy period in japan, most japanese rms were unable to invest in new plants. instead they retrotted their old plants to produce higher valueadded products like lowtemperature polysilicon tft lcds, which were mainly used for small displays such as those used in cell phones. later several of these rms moved their display operations to taiwan and china through foreign investment and technology transfers.the decision of the taiwanese rms to invest in fthgeneration plants when korean rms were investing in sixth and seventhgeneration plants requires some explanation. the logic of entry via the latest generation may not have held for taiwanese entry because of the ability of the taiwanese to nd other ways to become costeffective manufacturers. being the rst mover to a new production technology can be quite expensive, especially if the rest of the industry is not ready to make the jump. nevertheless, since their entry in the late 1990s, taiwanese rms have invested in latestgeneration plants as soon as they were able.the development and introduction of each successive production generation occurred in a variety of locations, but importantly the successful integration of each generation of production equipment depended on investment in highvolume production. this meant that developers of equipment had to work with whatever rms had decided to be early adopters of the latest generation in order to remain competitive. similarly, rms that supplied key inputs, like glass substrates and color lters, also had to do this.to be more specic, the development of lithographic equipment occurred primarily in japan, the united states, and western europe, even though installation and testing of that equipment was primarily in east asia from the 1980s innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.150 innovation in global industriesonward. similarly, liquid crystal materials were developed and fabricated primarily in western europe and then sold to east asian producers. chemical vapor deposition (cvd) equipment was developed primarily in the united states and western europe. testing equipment was developed mainly in japan and the united states. in short, new materials and equipment did not have to be developed in the same countries that invested in manufacturing, but rms that supplied the manufacturers had to work closely with them to remain competitive.unlike the semiconductor industry, where design and manufacturing became less integrated over time (in fabless rms and foundries), no such vertical disintegration of that part of the value chain occurred in the fpd industry. however, in other parts of the value chain it was possible for some disintegration to occur, particularly between the glassprocessing phase and the nal assembly phase of production.materials and equipment suppliers became more important over time because of the time pressures created by the rapid changeover from one generation of production technology to the next. korean and taiwanese rms were generally unable to emulate japanese leaders, mainly sharp and nec, in building their own production equipment; instead, they had to rely on external suppliers to a greater extent.the structure of innovationinnovation in this industry (as in other manufacturing industries) occurs in both the design of new products and the rening of manufacturing processes. for example, as tft lcds started penetrating the market for televisions, panels had to be improved to meet the need for wider viewing angles than is necessary for displays in notebook and desktop computers. a key innovation was ﬁinplane switchingﬂ technology because it increased viewing angles along with contrast ratios and brightness of displays. the response times required for realtime video in video games and television also required innovations in product technology. in 2001, nec developed its ﬁfeed forwardﬂ technology to speed up response times for televisions. various types of ﬁoverdriveﬂ or ﬁresponse time compensationﬂ technology were developed by samsung, lg philips, cmo, benq, and viewsonic for their displays.7 an example of a major recent innovation in process technology was the invention of ﬁone drop llﬂša new way of inserting liquid crystal material between the two processed glass plates of a tft lcd (kamiya et al., 2001). with every increase in the size of substrates came a demand for new processing and handling machines.while manufacturers must innovate both process and process technologies, they are often helped by suppliers. when suppliers who are not manufacturers themselves provide new materials or processing equipment, they must work 7 ﬁadvanced technology,ﬂ tft central, http://www.tftcentral.co.uk/advanced.htm.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 151closely with manufacturers to ensure that the materials and equipment will meet the needs of their customers. the intense competition in tft lcd enduser markets from other manufacturers and from alternative technologies means that manufacturers must bring new plants online as quickly and cheaply as possible, and to do this they increasingly turn to external suppliers.patenting activity can be used as a crude indicator of innovation. location of patenting activity in the tft lcd industry tends to follow investment in manufacturing with a lag (see figure 5). for example, the ve largest holders of u.s. lcd patents as of 2005 were sharp, lg philips, canon, hitachi, and seikoepson. lg philips™s u.s. patenting activity began in 2000 just as sharp™s patenting activity declined. samsung™s patenting activity was markedly lower than that of lg philips but it also took a turn upward from 1995 onward. between 2000 and 2005, the four major taiwanese rms (au optronics, chungwha picture tubes, chi mei optoelectronics, and hannstar display) successfully led for lcd patents in the united states but the total patents granted were considerably fewer in number than those held by japanese and korean rms (see figure 6).u.s. rms accounted for a decreasing percentage of total patents between 1969 and 2005 (see figure 6). this gure was generated by counting the annual number of u.s. patents for which patent holders were either u.s.owned rms or u.s.located laboratories and comparing that number to the total. even before ibm decided to exit the tft lcd market as a manufacturer, u.s. rms were not keeping up with the increased patenting activity of foreign rms.because of rapid technological change, the role of tacit knowledge, and the importance of proximity to physical production, much of the innovative flat panel5.epsbitmap imagefigure 5 u.s. lcd patents granted annually to the top ve patent holders, 19692005. source: u.s. patent ofce, http://www/uspto.gov/go/taf/tecasga/349tor.htm.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.152 innovation in global industriesfigure 6 number of lcd patents issued to u.s. rms or laboratories compared with total number of patents, 19692005. source: u.s. patent ofce, http://www/uspto.gov/go/taf/tecasga/349tor.htm.activity takes place within the manufacturing rms themselves and particularly within their associated laboratories. in east asia, most scientists and engineers employed by domestic rms are nationals of the home country. there is very little research and development (r&d) done by these rms outside their home countries. other than sharp™s laboratory in camas, washington, no major display research laboratory was established by an asian rm in the united states. this contrasts markedly with the nationality and location of scientists and engineers employed by u.s. and european rms. ibm japan operated an important display laboratory in yamato; philips acquired the laboratories of hosiden in japan and then worked in collaboration with lg in korea after the joint venture was established. many members of the top management of korean and taiwanese rms were previously employed by u.s. or european rms and received graduate training in u.s. and european universities. for example, the head of samsung™s tft lcd operations was jun souk, who had previously worked for ibm.some important innovations occur in government and university laboratories or in supplier rms and in collaborations between suppliers and manufacturing rms. to demonstrate this, i turn to a discussion of the historical importance of u.s. rms as both suppliers and manufacturers in the tft lcd industry.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 153u.s. participants in the industrythe story of tft lcd manufacturing in the united states began in the late 1960s with a number of important successes in the research efforts of major rms like rca, westinghouse, exxon, xerox, at&t, and ibm. however, none of these rms (except ibm) decided to invest in volume manufacturing of tft lcds. ibm decided in 1986 to invest in highvolume production only in japan and only in a joint venture with toshiba. during the 1980s, in the wake of the high dollar and japanese successes in semiconductors, u.s. rms (other than ibm) decided not to invest in tft lcd manufacturing. in contrast, all the major japanese electronics rms had invested in highvolume tft lcd manufacturing by the late 1980s.nevertheless, a number of u.s. rms decided to participate in the industry, most notably ibm, corning, applied materials, and photon dynamics (to name the four important rms). these rms remained key players in the market thanks to their ability and willingness to acquire knowledge by working collaboratively with manufacturers outside the united states.all u.s. manufacturers of tft lcds other than ibm were relatively small, niche producers.8 these rms engaged in a variety of efforts to catch up with the japanese leaders, some of which involved help from the u.s. government, particularly the advanced research projects agency of the department of defense. they failed mostly because u.s. governmental policies made it difcult for rms receiving government funds to work closely with manufacturers in asia. but government policy was not solely to blame for this. most u.s. rms had not grasped the essence of the problem: to succeed in entering the industry at this stage, they had to work with partners experienced in highvolume production.9 firms that understood thisšibm, corning, applied materials, and photon dynamicsšwere successful, as discussed next.ibmin 1986, ibm and toshiba entered into 2 years of joint research on tft lcd manufacturing. the research would be conducted jointly by researchers at ibm™s yorktown heights laboratories, ibm japan, and toshiba. each company would host the project for 1 year in its respective facilities in japan, starting at toshiba, where a rudimentary r&d line was to be erected as soon as possible. at the end of the joint research project, each company would be free to pursue its own manufacturing plans or to walk away. on the strength of these discussions, toshiba engineers apparently went immediately to work designing the line 8 my collaborators and i have written about these small manufacturers elsewhere (see, e.g., lenway et al., 2000).9 for details, see lenway et al. (2000) and ofce of technology assessment of the u.s. congress (1990).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.154 innovation in global industriesand ordering equipment. the contract was ofcially signed and work began on august 1, 1986. one month later the r&d line was up and running.by july 1988 both sharp (japan™s pioneer and stilldominant tft lcd manufacturer) and ibmtoshiba had developed 14inch tft lcd prototypes, demonstrating a potential for ˚at video reproduction that had seemed remote only 5 years earlier. sharp publicly announced its achievement, as is customary for japanese companies. ibmtoshiba did not at rst announce their achievement, which was consistent with ibm company policy.10 toshiba later prevailed, and an announcement was made in the wake of the sharp press conference. both companies claimed the laurels for largest size and best resolution.nearly a year after the ibmtoshiba prototype announcement, on august 30, 1989, the two companies announced their agreement to form a manufacturing alliance called display technologies, inc. (dti). the alliance was to be structured as a 50/50 joint venture between toshiba and ibm japan. the partners initially capitalized dti at about $140 million (los angeles times, 1989), of which $105 million was earmarked for a highvolume tft lcd fabrication facility. dti™s headquarters and rst fab would be located in himeji city, next to one of toshiba™s stn lcd fabs. dti ofcially started up on november 1, 1989. r&d for dti was conducted in three laboratories, one in the united states and two in japan: ibm™s thomas j. watson laboratory in yorktown heights, new york; ibm japan™s laboratory in yamato; and toshiba™s laboratory in himeji.thus, ibm was the only large u.s. rm to invest in highvolume tft lcd manufacturing. it is important to note that ibm decided to do this in japan with a large japanese partner, toshiba, partly because it believed this was the only way to become globally competitive. japan was where the tft lcd action was and where learning about the new industry could be maximized. the most important customer for ibm fpds was the ibm pc division in florida, so locating production in japan had little to do with servicing customers. ibm divested itself of its stake in dti in 2001 when it no longer saw a need to have an internal supplier of tft lcd panels. by then, there was plenty of competition in the global tft lcd market and no difculty nding the highquality displays needed for ibm end products. ibm was not interested in lcd television sales (although perhaps it should have been). like all the large japanese electronics rms, except sharp, ibm turned its attention to highervalueadded businesses, including veryhighdenition fpds, and to advanced services where potential prots and revenue growth were higher.1110 out of sensitivity to u.s. antitrust law, ibm has remained reluctant since the 1950s to announce technology breakthroughs prior to the availability of products in markets.11 to date there has been no highvolume production of ibm™s veryhighresolution displays. see ibm research, roentgen project page, roentgen introduction, http://www.research.ibm.com/ roentgen/.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 155corningin fall 1986, a group of top executives in corning held a meeting to decide on entering the market for lcd substrates. corning research in new york and the marketing organization in japan had followed fpd developments since the early 1980s through several major turning points. around the time of matsushita™s 1986 pocket television introduction, a number of senior managers in corning came to envision tft glass substrates as a major business opportunity for corning.corning gained experience selling glass in japan for stn lcds over many years, beginning in the early 1970s with sales to makers of watch and calculator displays. corning researchers made an effort to develop extremely thin sheet glass for these applications, using a product the company was selling for use as microscope slide covers for medical laboratories. corning had developed its proprietary fusion glassmaking technology as a method of fabricating extremely thin, opticaldefectfree glass without the need for grinding or polishing.early lcd technologies, however, did not require the advanced properties of fusion glass. most of corning™s sales for these applications continued to consist of glass manufactured using more conventional methods. but in the early 1980s, managers in corning japan noted with some surprise that the laboratories of several major electronics groups were placing regular, gradually increasing orders for a more advanced product, corning™s 7059 fusionformed borosilicate glass.corning™s proprietary fusion glass technology seemed uniquely matched to the apparent technological trajectory of tft lcds. corning japan™s managers had worked diligently to nurture relationships with japanese manufacturers. even a technologically wellmatched japanese competitor would have faced difculties building the same network and familiarity with market needs. for a competitor from outside japan, these barriers would be insurmountable.corning™s main research unit, located in sullivan park in corning, new york, developed new products and manufacturing processes for lcd glass substrates. the rst fusion glass machine was built there in the late 1970s. in 1982, sullivan park developed an ultrathin glassšcorning™s 7059 fusionformed borosilicate glassšthat was used in tft lcd laboratories around the world. sullivan park also developed the fusion glass process that was used in harrodsburg in 1984. the collaboration between sullivan park and harrodsburg continues to the present. the two locations recently codeveloped a new glass called eagle xg, which provides all the desirable properties required for tft lcd substrates but does not contain arsenic, antimony, or barium. eagle xg is therefore a greener product than its predecessor, eagle2000, which was introduced in 2000 and contained the three heavy metals. corning tries out all new tft lcd glass products and processes at harrodsburg before transferring knowledge to its other facilities.corning opened a new glass melting and nishing facility for tft substrates and a new tft research center in shizuoka prefecture in 1989. its growing tft customer base in japan would be served from both shizuoka and harrodsburg. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.156 innovation in global industriesas the industry grew, corning had to expand production rapidly. demand for thinner substrates resulted in volume production of 0.7mm glass in 1990 and 0.5mm glass in 1998.samsung corning precision (a 50/50 joint venture established in 1995 between the two rms) began to produce substrates for korean producers in kumi in 1996. a major expansion in production capacity in all three locationsšthe united states, japan, and koreašoccurred in 2000. a second korean plant was opened in cheonan in 2002 and reached volume production in 2003.12in 2004, the rm began to produce tft substrates in tainan, taiwan. it soon opened another plant in taichung to service the rapidly growing demand for substrates in taiwan. the governments of both korea and taiwan were concerned about the dependence of domestic tft lcd manufacturers on foreign suppliers and the impact of that dependence on the balance of trade. accordingly, they encouraged the establishment of domestic suppliers wherever possible but also urged foreign rms to establish local operations as soon as possible.corning broke ground for a substrate nishing plant in china in november 2006. apparently the rm had started its manufacturing operations in korea and taiwan with nishing plants before establishing melting operations. corning was waiting to see how rapidly the chinese tft lcd rms would be ramping up production before committing to a melting plant there.corning followed the shift in manufacturing of tft lcds as it moved successively from japan to korea to taiwan. corning had to move manufacturing and some research to east asia, but most of the research on fusion glass remained in the united states (guan, 2004). by 2004, roughly a third of corning™s total revenues ($3.8 billion) depended on the sales of tft lcd substrates (newsday, 2006). corning™s ability to remain a key participant in the tft lcd industry depended on its proprietary fusion glass technology.applied materials/aktapplied materials, the u.s. semiconductor manufacturing equipment maker, started a display arm called applied display technology in 1991. in 1993, applied materials initiated a strategic alliance with komatsu, the japanese heavy equipment maker, called applied komatsu technology (akt). akt developed and manufactured tft lcd manufacturing equipment in the united states using globally sourced components. the company maintained principal r&d and engineering facilities in santa clara, california; funded basic research in outside institutions such as universities; and also relied on the specialized r&d and basic research capabilities of its global supply network. in 1993, akt established its 12 samsung corning precision glass, ﬁcompany: general information: history,ﬂ http://www.scp.samsung.com.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 157headquarters in kobe, japan, and set up a technology center there but most r&d remained in california.13the motivation for forming akt did not revolve around the conventional joint venture criteria of market, technology, or capital seeking. the r&d was complete, the funds invested, and applied materials already enjoyed a prestigious position in japan™s semiconductor industry. rather, applied materials actively sought an alliance partner to address the personnel requirements of sustaining and growing the new business. the industry would grow rapidly (no one at applied materials knew how quickly at the time). to keep pace, the new venture would need to expand rapidly in its abilities to conduct site installations and testing as well as continuing servicing of its machines at the customers™ premises. applied materials offered to ally with komatsu after a rigorous search for a partner that shared its beliefs about the necessary marriage of cost effectiveness, quality, and technological advancement. komatsu invested $35 million initially in the new venture (electronic news, 1993).in october 1993, akt announced that its commercial cvd tool, the akt1600, was ready for sale, for delivery 68 months after an order was placed. beginning with the startup of the rst generation 2 manufacturing lines in mid1994, all tft lcd producers had the opportunity to benet from the innovations incorporated in the new cvd tool. the akt1600 sold for about $5 million for a fourchamber production system, which could process about 40 substrates per hour. highvolume generation 2 fabs needed about four of them.14 by year™s end, akt had captured cvd market leadership by a wide margin.shortly thereafter, hitachi approached akt for a design to process a 400  500 substrate, out of which they could make four 11.3inch displays. hitachi ended up with a cvd tool that could process 370  470 substrates, a modication of the dti design. by the end of the life cycle for generation 2, akt had modied the 1600 to accommodate 400  500 mm substrates for a generation 2.5 line that sharp started up in july 1995. even the largest manufacturers remained indecisive regarding the best display size to manufacture and the best substrate size on which to manufacture it, but by supplying these rms with tools that matched their diverse specications, akt acquired knowledge that would allow it to be the dominant supplier of cvd equipment for years to come. along with corning, it would become a key participant in the global effort to establish an industry consensus on standards for nextgeneration equipment. despite the movement of manufacturing from japan to korea and taiwan, development of 13 applied materials announced the joint venture™s creation on june 17, 1993. according to applied™s 1999 annual report, the venture ended in 1998. akt then reorganized as a wholly owned subsidiary of applied materials. since the reorganization, tetsuo iwasaki has served as akt™s chairman, in addition to his position as chairman and ceo of applied materials japan.14 material for this paragraph was taken from displaysearch equipment and materials analysis and forecast (austin, tex.: displaysearch, 1999).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.158 innovation in global industriesnew equipment was accomplished primarily in northern california even though machines had to be built and tested on factory ˚oors in east asia.photon dynamicsfounded in 1986 by francois henley and headquartered in milpitas, california, photon dynamics initially produced inspection and testing tools for semiconductor manufacturing and did not enter the fpd industry until 1991. the rm developed test, inspection, and repair systems for fpd manufacturing that were used to increase yield, reduce materials loss, get new designs from r&d into production, and assist in the rapid startup of new plants.for tft lcds, materials costs (for glass substrates, color lters, and polarizers, for example) represent at least 40 percent of the cost of production. as a result, test and inspection of substrates is a key part of improving manufacturing efciency. it is critical to identify defects and repair them as soon as possible prior to further processing to avoid wasting materials. when defects cannot be repaired, the substrate needs to be scrapped. the same goes for cells and assembled modules.photon dynamics was able to sell to highvolume manufacturers in japan, korea, and taiwan on the basis of being able to offer products and services competitive with those of its main competitors: micronics japan, akt, and shimadzu in array testing and nec, ntn, and hoya in cell and module testing. two proprietary technologies played a key role in the early success of photon dynamics: voltage imaging and naliasing image processing.15 the rm held over 20 patents in its intellectual property portfolio.unlike corning and akt, photon dynamics had no overseas research facilities. r&d was done mainly at its headquarters in san jose, california. in 2005, the rm maintained sales and customer support ofces in china (beijing), korea (seoul, daejeon, kumi, and cheonan), taiwan (hsinchu and taichung), and japan (tokyo and tsu). some repair equipment was to be manufactured in korea in 2007, but all other manufacturing was done in california.competition in two tft lcd supplier industriesthree u.s. suppliers were competitive in two industries that supplied important inputs to tft lcd manufacturing: corning in glass substrates, and akt and photon dynamics in manufacturing and testing equipment. corning™s main 15 voltage imaging produces a twodimensional image of the voltage distribution across the surface of a tft array. it greatly reduces the amount of time needed to test an array prior to assembly into a tft cell, which can greatly increase the yield and throughput of tft lcd production facilities. naliasing image processing refers to special software algorithms used to detect defects or anomalies in the images produced by visual imaging equipment.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 159competitors were asahi glass and nippon electric glass (neg), both japanese rms. neither asahi glass nor neg had developed fusion glass technology; therefore, they were at a disadvantage as the industry turned more and more to fusion glass as substrates grew larger. corning™s careful husbanding of its intellectual property rights in fusion glass technology was crucial to maintaining its competitive advantage.akt™s main competitors in cvd equipment in 2005 were unaxisbalzers of western europe and jusung of taiwan. photon dynamics™ main competitors were micronics japan, akt, and shimadzu in array testing and nec, ntn, and hoya in cell and module testing. both were vigilant in protecting the intellectual property rights associated with their equipment and occasionally engaged in patent infringement suits to protect those rights.all u.s. suppliers needed to locate warehouses and service facilities in japan, korea, and taiwan close to major customers. as the industry matured, suppliers also felt pressure to locate manufacturing and r&d facilities in east asia. these pressures arose because of governmental concerns about technological dependency and the impact of technological imports on the balance of trade. asian governments wanted key technologies to be developed domestically. if domestic rms were unable to do this, then foreign rms would be encouraged to locate their development efforts in the country. such pressures were generally resisted because the supplier rms wanted to maintain the core of scientic and engineering expertise closer to home. corning experimented with a joint venture with samsung that proved successful but the joint venture licensed fusion glass technology from corning and was not permitted to compete with the parent rm in other markets. corning located melting facilities in japan, korea, and taiwan and was pressured to locate melting facilities in china, but so far had declined to do so.public policy issuesin the background of this limited but important participation by u.s. rms in the tft lcd industry is the slow and steady relative decline of innovative activity in lcds in the united states (see figure 6). at the very beginning of the fpd industry, rca™s sarnoff lab was a key location for cuttingedge research. the sarnoff lab developed the dynamic scattering mode display that was used in the rst calculator with an lcd. sarnoff licensed the patent to sharp in 1973, the same year that it decided to end its lcd research program (castellano, 2005; johnstone, 1999). the westinghouse laboratory™s lcd r&d program, led by peter brody, was terminated in 1978 (brody, 1996). xerox™s display efforts lasted considerably longer, culminating in the formation of a spinoff rm named dpix in 1998, but dpix never attempted to compete in highvolume display markets. products based on its technology were too expensive for consumer markets.when the u.s. government decided to consolidate a number of r&d proinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.160 innovation in global industriesgrams relating to display technology in 1994, there was a ˚urry of research activity connected with the new emphasis on advanced displays, particularly on the part of the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa). some important technological developments came out of these efforts. for example, the deformable mirrors that eventually became texas instruments™ digital light processor technology now found in many projection televisions and data projectors were partially funded with the aid of darpa grants and contracts (most of the funding came from texas instruments itself). darpa provided some funding to rms like photon dynamics for tftlcd testing equipment. firms like ibm, akt, and corning, in contrast, did not participate in these programs, except as observers, and did not receive major funding for further development of their core technologies.a good example of decline in u.s. r&d capability in fpds was the closing of a major governmentfunded display laboratory at the university of michigan in the mid1990s that had been started with darpa funds but ended when the funding ran out.16 the decline in capability was the result of lack of will on the part of the republicancontrolled congress to fund fpd r&d efforts. globalization played a key role in the evolution of the industry because the newer entrants in korea and taiwan were not able to match the technological resources that were available to japanese rms and thus had to collaborate with rms in japan, western europe, and the united states to solve some of the formidable problems of becoming globally competitive. this need to collaborate provided some u.s. supplier rms with opportunities to remain at the technological frontier even though no u.s.owned rms were manufacturing tft lcds after the year 2001. however, since much of the innovation in the industry was connected with designing new commercial products and new manufacturing processes, u.s. rms who were not major suppliers to the industry and most u.s. laboratories and universities were increasingly unable to participate meaningfully in the industry.conclusionsin general, innovative activity has tended to follow investment in manufacturing in the fpd industry, but some important innovation continues to occur that is not necessarily located close to manufacturing. scientists and engineers in east asia have an important advantage over u.s. scientists and engineers because of the location of manufacturing there; nevertheless, some u.s. rms have remained key participants in the industry and their scientists and engineers have been able to contribute in very important ways to innovation in the industry. without rms like ibm, corning, applied materials, and photon dynamics, the fpd industry would not have been able to solve important scientic and technological problems. while the main benet to date from innovative activity in this industry 16 for further details, see murtha et al. (2001, ch. 6).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.flat panel displays 161has probably been captured mainly by rms and workers in japan, korea, and taiwan, a not insubstantial number of beneciaries can be found in the united states as well. the nearly 400 workers employed by corning in its fusion glass facility in harrodsburg, kentucky, are an example.a key lesson to be drawn is that u.s. supplier rms that are willing to establish service centers abroad and to work collaboratively with foreign rms wherever the latter are located can remain internationally competitive even in industries where manufacturing is primarily located abroad. such willingness to collaborate does not necessarily imply the offshoring of formerly u.s.based r&d, as the cases of corning, akt, and photon dynamics illustrate. on the contrary, the willingness to collaborate ensures that some important innovative activity will continue to occur in the united states. any government policies that prevent rms from doing this are likely to be highly counterproductive. u.s. rms have many strengths that derive from the emphasis on government sponsorship of basic research, relatively strict enforcement of competition and intellectual property laws, the availability of venture capital for startups, and a generally favorable climate for entrepreneurship. if the united states wants to participate in dynamic, globalized industries like the fpd industry, it has to keep its economic nationalists on a short leash.referencesbrody, t. p. (1996). the birth and early childhood of active matrix, a personal memoir. journal of the society for information display (april):117.cantrell, a. (2005). corning™s rosecolored glass, cnnmoney.com, december 2. available at http://money.cnn.com/2005/12/02/markets/spotlight/spotlightglw/.castellano, j. a. (2005). liquid gold: the story of liquid crystal displays and the creation of an industry. hackensack, n.j.: world scientic.electronic news. (1993). komatsu to invest $35m in applied™s display unit. september 20. available at http://ndarticles.com/p/articles/mim0ekf/isn1981v39/ai14415110.guan, w. (2004). china strategy of corning™s tftlcd business: interview with mr. nitin s. kulkarni, president of corning display technologies china. digitimes, december 23. available at http://corning.com/displaytechnologies/ww/en/mediacenter/featuredarticles/feature.aspx.hutchison, m. m. (1998). the political economy of japanese monetary policy. cambridge: mit press.johnstone, b. (1999). we were burning: japanese entrepreneurs and the forging of the electronic age. boulder, co: basic books.kamiya, h., k. tajima, k. toriumi, k. terada, h. inoue, t. yokone, n. shimizu, t. kobayashi, s. odahara, g. hougham, c. cai, j. h. glownia, r. j. von gutfeld, r. john, and s.c. alan lien. (june 2001). development of one drop ll technology for amlcds. pp. 13541357 in sid symposium digest of technical papers, vol. 32.lenway, s. a., t. murtha, and j. a. hart. (2000). technonationalism and cooperation in a globalizing industry: the case of ˚at panel displays. in coping with globalization, a. prakash and j. a. hart, eds. new york: routledge.los angeles times. (1989). toshiba, ibm set plant for large lcds. p. a3.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.162 innovation in global industriesmurtha, t., s. a. lenway, and j. a. hart. (2001). managing new industry creation. stanford, ca: stanford university press.newsday. (2006). fired corning, inc., employee pleads guilty to selling glass secrets to taiwanese rival. january 19. available at http://www.glassonweb.com/news/index/4187/.ofce of technology assessment of the u.s. congress. (june 1990). the big picture: hdtv and highresolution systems. washington, d.c.: u.s. government printing ofce.sharp corporation. (2005). sharp environmental and social report 2005. available at http://sharpworld.com/corporate/eco/report/2005pdf/sharp09e.pdf.softpedia news. (2005). the transition to tft lcd could cut down prices on cell phones. may 4. available at http://news.softpedia.com/news/thetransitiontotftlcdcouldcutdownpricesoncellphones1645.shtml.wood, c. (1992). the bubble economy: japan™s extraordinary speculative boom of the ‚80s and the dramatic bust of the ™90s. new york: atlantic monthly press.young, r. (2005). survival of the fittest: managing the peaks and valleys of supply/demand. presented at the 7th annual displaysearch u.s. fpd conference, austin, texas.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.163 5 lightingsusan walsh sandersonrensselaer polytechnic institutekenneth l. simonsrensselaer polytechnic institutejudith l. wallsuniversity of michiganyinyi lairensselaer polytechnic instituteintroductiononce a symbol of edison™s creative genius and the prowess of american innovation, the incandescent light bulb represents a mature technology, now mastered by new competitors and imported at pennies apiece from china. lamp (the industry name for a light bulb) manufacturing was dominated for decades by a few rms, notably philips, osram, and general electric (ge). related industry segments have typically been more fragmented, with thousands of rms producing xtures ranging from simple sconces to elaborate chandeliers. increasingly both lamp and xture manufacturing have been shifting to offshore locations, primarily in asia.not only are north american and european lamp and xture companies under the threat from lowcost imports, but solidstate lighting, a semiconductor instead of bulbbased technology with greater potential energy efciency and new capabilities, is poised to revolutionize the industry and change how we understand and use lightingša change that will affect both traditional lamp and xture producers. solidstate lighting is challenging incumbents and throwing leadership in the future industry up for grabs. as innovative products composed of light emitting diodes (leds) are developed, new features like colors that change on command are expanding architectural possibilities. other opportunities come from the convergence of lighting, information, and display technologies. in ber optics light is data, and ordinary ˚at panel indoor lighting can serve as data transfer hubs, sending information to computers and appliances. edison™s lamp, and its successors, may soon be replaced with glowing ceiling panels or even lightingenhanced wallpaper that changes patterns on command.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.164 innovation in global industrieswhich rms will successfully ride this new wave of innovation and what impact these changes will have on incumbents are not yet determined. although the rst wave of lighting innovation in the early 20th century spawned the development of global companies like ge, osram, and philips, these 21stcentury innovations will create challenges for incumbents. new rms are emerging at all levels of the value chain to address the opportunity presented by solidstate lighting technologies.in this chapter we contrast traditional lighting technologies with led technologies. traditional lighting technologies we dene as incandescent, gasdischarge, and electric arc lighting (which includes ˚uorescent, highintensity discharge, mercury and sodium vapor, metal halide, and neon lamps). we exclude lighting technologies such as chemiluminescence that yield insufcient light for illumination (such lights can be seen but not seen by). led technologies (including organic and polymer leds) are the only nontraditional technology considered because leds are the only alternative lighting approach that has reached sufcient maturity to be considered commercially viable in the trade, technology, and technical literatures.this chapter analyzes changes in lighting technology over the past two decades and its implications for u.s. industry competitiveness. we explore whether the rise of global competition is limited to lowcost manufacturing or whether strategic centers of decision making and research are moving away from the regions and rms that once dominated the industry. we examine the causes of these changes and what aspects of innovation in lighting, particularly in the arena of research and development (r&d), have changed since the 1990s. we speculate about the implications of these changes for rm strategy in the new era of intense global competition, we analyze how national policies have affected the development and diffusion of traditional and new lighting technologies, and we explore how public policy can best address the challenges and opportunities offered by solidstate lighting to aid countries in their struggles to conserve energy and reduce global warming.we are entering an era of fasterpaced competition as the lighting industry, which has been dominated by a few rms (at least in the lamp sector), faces competition from new technologies, rms, and regions. asian rms, as well as rms headquartered in the united states and europe, have performed strongly in patent invention for solidstate lighting and are making key contributions to these new technologies. both new rms and incumbents are investing heavily in solidstate lighting technologies, and it remains to be seen which rms will predominate.public policy will likely play an important role in future developments by stimulating demand for energysaving lighting, providing funding for r&d, and incubating startup companies as they seek to commercialize these new technologies. but retail rms like walmart are increasingly playing a role in the diffusion of energysaving lighting technologies. we compare the policies of countries innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 165supporting development and diffusion of new lighting technologies and speculate about how these efforts may affect the location of r&d, manufacturing, and headquarters of surviving lighting producers.evolution of the lighting industryglobalization of lighting productionthe global lighting market in 2004 was worth some $40 billion to $100 billion, about onethird of which represented lamps.1 u.s. apparent consumption of lamps, xtures, and other equipment totaled about $14.8 billion in 2004.2 u.s. production of lamps grew steadily until the early 1970s, then ˚uctuated over the next 20 years, stabilized during the 1990s at about 1970 levels, and nally fell somewhat at the start of the 21st century, as shown in figure 1.the eventual leveling off and downturn in u.s. lamp production in the 1990s can be explained, in part, by a steady increase in imports over the past two decades. total imports, as a percentage of u.s. apparent consumption, increased from less than 20 percent in 1989 to around 50 percent in 2004, as shown in figure 2.3about half of the imports come from china, mexico, and japan, with china representing the largest share as of 2004. in 1989, less than 3 percent of lamps were imported from china. by 2004, chinese lamp imports represented 26 percent of all lamp imports, having grown more rapidly than imports from any other supplier nation, and 10 percent of apparent lamp consumption in the united states. once concentrated in the hands of three large manufacturers, the incandescent bulb industry has new competitors, primarily lowcost manufacturers in asia.in the xtures industry, broken down in figure 2, these trends are more intense, with 86 percent of all xtures imports in the united states arriving from china by 2004. increased xture imports are the result of both incursion of lowercost chinese manufacturers and shifting production abroad by u.s. rms that seek lowercost manufacturing sites. an exception to this trend is genlyte 1 hadley et al. (2004) cite the gure of $40 billion, onethird of which represents lamps, but publicly available estimates of the size of the global lighting industry vary greatly, and the rm color kinetics in a communication with us cites the gure of $100 billion based on data from fredonia marketing research.2 apparent consumption equals u.s. production plus imports less exports, where u.s. production is measured as value of shipments from bureau of economic analysis data, and import and export data are from the u.s. international trade commission. 3 not shown in figure 2 is an additional trade category ﬁother lighting equipment,ﬂ for which imports increased from 38 percent in 1989 to 57 percent in 2004, with china™s share of imports growing from 24 percent in 1996 to 32 percent in 2004.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.166 innovation in global industrieslighting1.eps$0$500$1,000$1,500$2,000$2,500$3,000$3,500$4,000$4,500195819601962196419661968197019721974197619781980198219841986198819901992199419961998200020022004$millampsresidential fixturesother lighting equipmentfigure 1 u.s. shipments of lighting products (real 2004 values). sources: shipment values: national bureau of economic research (19581996), u.s. department of commerce, u.s. census bureau (19972001), bureau of economic analysis (20022004). producer price index from the bureau of labor statistics.thomas, the largest lighting xture and control company in north america, which manufactures 70 percent of its products in the north american region in order to keep close to its design centers and customers (genlyte thomas, 2005). genlyte thomas is introducing new energyefcient light xtures using compact ˚uorescent (cfl), highintensity discharge (hid), and led lamps and is conducting research on solidstate lighting to remain the premier xtures company while the industry transitions to new lighting technologies.the remaining area of growth for u.s. lighting production in the 1990s was in specialty lighting applications, such as christmas decorations, underwater lighting, and infrared and ultraviolet (uv) lamps. this sector grew steadily throughout the second half of the 20th century and, as figure 1 reveals, has surpassed the production value of lamps and of residential xtures.44 figures 1 and 2 use the denition of traditional lighting, as dened in the beginning of this article, for ﬁlampsﬂ based on sic (3641, 3648) and naics (33511, 335129), which includes all traditional lamp types including (regular and compact) ˚uorescent and hid lamps, but excludes led lamps.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 167lighting2.eps0%10%20%30%40%50%60%1989199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004lamp importslamp exportslamp imports from chinafixtures importsfixtures exportsfixtures imports from chinafigure 2 u.s. imports and exports of lamps and xtures, total and imports from china, as percentages of u.s. consumption. source: u.s. international trade commission.big three lamp producerswhile there are hundreds of small lamp producers, which usually specialize in one type of lamp, the global lamp market is dominated by three big players: koninklijke philips electronics (philips), osramsylvania (osram), and ge.5 all three rms produce a wide spectrum of lamps based on distinct technologies for most major commercial and residential markets. philips has the largest global market share in lamps, and ge has the largest u.s. market share (mintel, 2003).6in the united states, ge has been a dominant player in lighting since the industry™s inception (leonard, 1992). as early as the mid1890s, ge and westinghouse controlled a 75 percent market share. ge eventually gained even greater market dominance, so that by 1927 ge and its licensees held 97 percent of the u.s. lamp market. hygradesylvania, whose lighting operations would much 5 that most lamp producers specialize on a single type of lamp is apparent from industry directories such as www.lightsearch.com.6 philips lighting employs about 45,500 people and has 70 manufacturing facilities worldwide (philips, 2006, p. 38).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.168 innovation in global industrieslater be bought by a german producer to form osramsylvania, was ge™s largest lamp licensee. although ge™s market dominance fell in the latter half of the 20th century, it remained the largest u.s. lamp producer.in europe, the lamp market also became concentrated early (leonard, 1992). the leading rm was osram, formed in a 1919 merger of the three leading german lamp producers, and now wholly owned by siemens. second in the european market was the dutch company philips. in part through cooperation with a european cartel set up in the 1930s under swiss corporation phoebus s.a., ge made substantial inroads in europe and became the dominant worldwide producer.7 the big three lighting rms all maintained leading positions in traditional lighting technology.traditional electric lighting patent applications during the period 19901993 were identied using data for the united states and western europe.8 as noted earlier, we dene traditional lighting to include incandescent, gasdischarge, and electric arc lighting (which includes ˚uorescent, hid, mercury and sodium vapor, metal halide, and neon lamps). all of the big three were leaders in these traditional electric lighting technologies, with 257.8 patent applications by philips (credit is split equally in the case of multiple assignees); 232.1 applications by ge and by thorn, whose lighting business ge acquired in 1991; and 219.4 applications by osram, sylvania, and osram™s parent rm siemens. the big three each had more patent applications than any other rm.97 ge™s dominance varied substantially across nations. for example, in the united kingdom in 19651967, the leading producer was british lighting industries, followed by philips and osram (monopolies commission, 1968, p. 8).8 patents are included for international patent classications h01j6165, ﬁdischarge lampsﬂ; h01k, ﬁelectric incandescent lampsﬂ; and h5b31 and h5b3543, which cover ﬁelectric lighting . . . not otherwise provided forﬂ excluding electroluminescent light sources (which provide sufcient light to see an object but not to see by). patents are included for applications at patent ofces of the united states (1,589 applications), europe (976), austria (190), belgium (20), denmark (49), spain (976), finland (79), france (121), germany (1,798), ireland (3), italy (31), netherlands (51), norway (22), portugal (5), spain (194), sweden (20), switzerland (22), and the united kingdom (218). data are drawn from the european patent ofce™s worldwide patent statistics database, version april 2006 (with the coverage of the espacenet online database). equivalent applications in multiple nations, detected by the fact that they share an identical set of priorities (as in espacenet), were treated as a single application by weighting each application in inverse proportion to its number of equivalents (including itself).9 a german patent trust, patra patent treuhand (possibly associated with osram or siemens), had 185.7 applications. the next three rms in number of patent applications were toshiba with 70.2 applications, motorola with 36 applications, and matsushita with 33 applications. as in most areas of patenting, there were patent applications by many other individuals and companies (the total number of relevant patent applications was 3,236 during the period 19901993), and meaningful analyses are based on relative numbers, not on percentages of total applications. when gures are measured in terms of the number of patents actually granted from these applications (by the time of data collection), the conclusions are similar: philips received 213.6 patents; osram, sylvania, and siemens, 205; ge including thorn, 181.5; patra patent treuhand, 76.9; toshiba, 52.6; motorola, 35; and matsushita, 31.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 169evolving technologythe lighting industry has developed several types of lamps. the incandescent lamp, little changed in form since the edison era, is an evacuated glass tube (usually relled with a gas) in which an electric current passes through a thin lament, heating it and causing it to emit light. mercury vapor lamps, rst patented in 1901 by peter cooper hewitt, are highpressure gas arc lamps and a forerunner to ˚uorescent lamps. neon lamps were invented by georges claude 10 years later. fluorescent lamps, rst patented by meyer, spanner, and germer in 1927, use a glowing phosphor coating instead of glowing wires to increase efciency. special types of incandescent lamps, such as bulbs lled with halogen gas to increase lifetime and efciency, have also been developed.incandescent lamps account for a majority of household sales in the united states, but a smaller portion of total sales. in households, incandescent lamps represent 66.5 percent of sales revenues, whereas ˚uorescent and other lamps remain uncommon (mintel, 2003). residential sales, however, make up less than 10 percent of lighting demand measured in lumenhours. combining all economic sectors (residential, commercial, industrial, and outdoor), incandescent lamps represent 11.0 percent of lumenhours of light output, as compared to about 57.5 percent for ˚uorescent, 31.0 percent for hid, and 0.01 percent for solidstate lighting (navigant consulting, 2003a, p. 7).each of these lamp types has experienced a steady march of small improvements in materials, design, light quality, energy efciency, and manufacturing efciency throughout the past century. while early improvements were made by independent inventors in the united kingdom, more than threequarters of these improvements originated in countries where the big three were headquarteredšthe united states, the netherlands, and germany.10 in materials, for example, thorium oxide added to wires increased shock resistance, nonsag wire formulations made possible new congurations for brighter and more easily mounted incandescent laments, and safer phosphors replaced the highly toxic beryllium coating in ˚uorescent lights. examples of design changes include lling incandescent lamps with largemolecule gases to prolong lament lifetimes, new layouts of lament mounts to facilitate assembly and automated manufacture, and a proliferation of lamp varieties, shapes, and sizes. lightquality changes were achieved by choosing appropriate lament and phosphor materials and sometimes by blocking part of the emitted light to attain, for instance, a look similar to sunlight.energysaving lamps also progressed steadily but slowly. ge, for example, commercially introduced its rst energysaving incandescent lamp in 1913, but 10 we catalogued 134 improvements in lamp technologies between 1905 and 2005. sources: company websites of general electric (2006), osram (2006), siemens (2006), philips (2006), and toshiba (2006); websites of bellis (2006a,b,c), williams (2005), and arthur (2006), and bowers (1982).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.170 innovation in global industriesnot until 1974 was the rst energysaving ˚uorescent lamp introduced. manufacturing became increasingly efcient with machines and methods that allowed faster, higherquality production with less manual labor. automatic insertion and mounting of components, sealing, exhausting, basing, and ˚ashing were key process technologies. many of these and other improvements took place during the rst half of the last century and are documented by bright (1958, pp. 2230). in the latter half of the century, improvements focused largely on improved efciency and longer lamp lives. the discovery of substances such as narrowband phosphors led to the development of cfls, gases such as xenon yielded brighter lamps such as those used in automobiles, and similar improvements had medical uses including uv lamps.whereas lowering manufacturing costs and streamlining production were the key lighting challenges of the late 20th century, saving energy is the new driving force for 21stcentury development. lighting accounted for about 22 percent of total energy used in residential and commercial sectors in the mid1990s, as shown in figures 3 and 4 (doe, 1995, 1997). in 2001, 51 percent of the national energy consumption for lighting occurred in the commercial sector, 27 percent in residences, and 14 percent in industry; the remaining 8 percent was used in outdoor stationary lighting (hong et al., 2005, p. 2). almost half of the electricity used in commercial buildings is used in lighting, as figure 5 indicates.in the united states, residential homes largely use incandescent lamps (90 percent), whereas commercial and industrial sectors use mostly ˚uorescents (hong et al., 2005). if residential homes in the united states replaced all incanfigure 3 energy consumption in u.s. commercial sector, 1995. source: doe (1995).lighting23%space heating32%water heating15%other7%office equipment6%cooking4%refrigeration3%ventilation3%cooling7%lighting fig 3 newinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 171figure 4 energy consumption in u.s. residential sector, 1997. source: doe (1997).descent lamps with cfls, they would save an estimated 35 percent of electricity used for all lighting applications (doe, 1993).although advances in energysaving lighting technologies such as cfl have been an important part of the strategies of the big three lamp producers, the big three have had some difculty getting residential customers to give up incandescent bulbs and replace them with the more energyefcient but initially more expensive bulbs. the rate of adoption of cfls in u.s. residential households has been low, particularly compared to that of europe and asia. researchers attribute those differences to a variety of factors, including national coordination of promotional efforts, different cultural attitudes about resource consumption, and higher electricity prices (calwell et al., 1999). u.s. residential consumers lack awareness of and knowledge about cfls. consumer buying habits, negative perceptions, and skepticism about ˚uorescent lighting and relatively low electricity prices have meant that the united states is behind the rest of the world in adoption of energysaving lighting technologies (sandahl et al., 2006). this may soon change; for example, walmart ceo h. lee scott, jr., is committed to sell 100 million cfls a year by 2008 and the rm is making a concerted effort to change consumer behavior (barbaro, 2007).1111 walmart sold about 40 million cfls compared to 350 million incandescent light bulbs in 2005.lighting & other appliances22%space heating51%water heating19%refrigeration4%aircon4%lighting 4 newinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.172 innovation in global industriesfigure 5 electricity consumption in u.s. commercial sector, 1995. source: doe (1995).since lamp efcacy is central to which lamp types dominate the market, it is important to understand efcacy and its role in purchasing decisions. efcacy in lighting can be measured in terms of lumens produced per watt of electricity (lm/w). a standard 100watt incandescent lamp, for example, lasts about 1,000 hours and produces 15 lm/w. by comparison, a standard 30watt ˚uorescent lamp lasts 20,000 hours and produces 80 lm/w. a longerlasting and more energyefcient bulb is less costly over the long term but higher initial upfront costs and misconceptions about the efcacy of ˚uorescent lights (early ˚uorescents had poor color rendering and were noisy) have led to low adoption in residences. optimal lamp choice involves not only energy efciency but also replacement costs for burnedout lamps and labor costs to install lighting systems. in commercial and industrial settings, where lifecycle costs are important and companies can make upfront investments, ˚uorescents are usually chosen.radical innovation in lighting: ledsnature and advantages of ledsan led is a semiconductor diode. it is electroluminescent, emitting color that depends on the chemical composition of the semiconductor material or compound used and ranges along the spectrum from uv to infrared, as documented in table 1.lighting46%cooling13%office equipment13%other8%ventilation6%refrigeration7%cooking1%water heating2%space heating4%lighting 5newinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 173table 1 led color spectrum available from alternative materialssemiconductor materialcoloralgaas (aluminum gallium arsenide)redinfraredalgap (aluminum gallium phosphide)greenalgainp (aluminum gallium indium phosphide)orangered (bright)orangeyellowgreengaasp (gallium arsenide phosphide)redorangeredorangeyellowgap (gallium phosphide)redyellowgreengan (gallium nitride)greenpure green (emerald)blueingan (indium gallium nitride)bluish greenbluenear uvsic (silicon carbide) as substratesi (silicon) as substrate, under developmental2o3 (sapphire) as substrateznse (zinc selenide)bluec (diamond)uvaln (aluminum nitride)algan (aluminum gallium nitride)far uvsource: wikipedia (2006).the rst practical visiblespectrum led was developed in 1962 by nick holonyak (inquirer, 2004), and a variety of singlecolor leds followed. white leds have been a longstanding goal for researchers since they are most likely to replace traditional bulbs. white leds have been created by coating blue leds with a yellow phosphor, yielding a blue and yellow glow that appears white to the human eye. another approach, taken by ge, uses uv leds driving phosphors, and a third approach is to use multiple colors of leds and combine them to create white light. current white leds are costeffective only for certain applications, such as backlighting and ˚ashlights, and color leds remain more widely used.although incandescent and ˚uorescent lamps remain the predominant light innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.174 innovation in global industriessources, leds have several potential advantages. first, they use less energy: leds are three to fourfold more efcient than incandescent and halogen sources. however, with the exception of laboratory devices, leds still fall short of ˚uorescent sources for many white light applications. nevertheless, they are semiconductor devices and led lighting is thought to follow an equivalent of moore™s law in computing, advancing rapidly and continually because of the pace of electronic circuit improvements.second, in contrast to incandescent lamps, leds use most of their energy in lighting (herkelrath et al., 2005). leds also have a long life span, typically about 10 years of ontimeštwice that of ˚uorescent lamps and twenty times that of incandescent lamps. in terms of luminous efcacy (lm/w), leds by 2004 were already about four times as efcient as incandescent lamps, and by 2020 they are targeted to be about 12 times as efcient as current incandescent lamps and more than twice as efcient as current ˚uorescent lamps (hadley et al., 2004, p. 5; tsao, 2002, p. 4). in addition, leds light up many orders of magnitude faster than incandescent lamps, and, rather than burning out abruptly, they do so slowly. leds require little maintenance and are cool to the touch, durable, and ˚exible. furthermore, the technology is digitally compatible and, hence, can be integrated into digital networks, facilitating customizable electronic control.leds come in many shapes and sizes and have multiple uses. backlighting is one use, for cell phones, cars and other electronics, liquid crystal displays (lcds), and specialized lighting applications. specialty uses are possible since leds can be waterproofed, bent, shaped, multicolored, and dimmed.12 led applications are common in the entertainment industry, hotels, road signs, exit signs, pools, landscaping, and darkrooms.the main drawback of leds is that they have not yet achieved the efcacy necessary for many white light applications. they are also still costly because they are expensive to produce. but production costs are expected to decline as volumes rise and the technology advances. for example, in 2002, the total cost of led lamps (capital cost plus operating costs) was estimated at $16.00 per million lumen hours, compared to $7.50 for incandescent bulbs and $1.35 for ˚uorescent bulbs (hadley et al., 2004, p. 8; tsao, 2002, p. 8). however, by 2020, the total (capital plus operating) cost of led lamps is targeted to be reduced to $0.63 per million lumen hours (hadley et al., 2004, p. 8; tsao, 2002, p. 8).an additional limitation of leds, relative to incandescent lamps, is their imperfect color rendering, given the spectrum of light emitted. white light created by multiple color leds or by phosphors driven by leds involves a combination of wavelengths of light that differs from the color spectrum of traditional lamps and of sunshine, making objects with certain colors appear relatively dark. 12 leds can also be designed to trap insects (through the use of insectattracting colors) or to avoid attracting insects (since they do not generate uv light) (bishop et al., 2004).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 175however, ashdown et al. (2004, p. 8) indicate that color spectrum limitations are likely to be remedied as the technology progresses.13until recently, leds have been the only viable technology competing with the various types of traditional lamps as electricitydriven sources of illumination (hong et al., 2005). a recently emerged technology that may become competitive with leds is microwavedriven light bulbs, for which claims of efciency and low cost remain to be assessed; this technology emerged during the nal stages of our work and is not assessed here (economist, 2007a,b). our analysis (including patent data presented later) includes two newer types of leds: organic lightemitting diodes (oleds) and polymer leds. oleds, which are leds involving organic (carbonbased) chemicals, are promising but still in an early development stage. ching tang and steven van slyke of eastman kodak invented the rst oled in 1987 (howard, 2004). the materials in oled devices have broad emission spectra that provide an advantage over inorganic leds (minor changes in the chemical composition of the emissive structure can tune the emission peak of the device). it is believed that goodquality white light is achievable from oleds (olla, 2006a, 2006b).14 an important focus of current oled research is on improving operational life.in particular, oleds are of interest to display rms since they are capable of producing true black colors, something lcds cannot achieve since they require a backlight to function and are never truly ﬁoff.ﬂ oleds can produce a greater range of colors, brightness, and viewing angles than lcds because oled pixels emit light directly. the display industry, with more than 70 companies including oled pioneer eastman kodak, is set to commercialize oled technology including oled displays (hong et al., 2005).15 kodak launched the rst digital camera to use a fullcolor oled display in 2003. the big three traditional lighting companies have all set up joint ventures to prot from oled technology for the display market.13 other limitations of leds are areas of active work. for example, leds driven with sufcient power for automotive headlights and taillights require heat sinks because heat degrades leds; relevant heat sinks are improving.14 white oleds by 2006 had achieved claimed efcacy of 2564 lm/w (burgess, 2006; physorg.com, 2005; ledsmagazine.com, 2006). 15 in december 2007, sony released the rst commercially available oled televisions, although they remain far from pricecompetitive with liquid crystal display (lcd) televisions (eisenberg, 2007). samsung has also been demonstrating prototype oled displays (gizmodo, 2008). lcds, which are now dominant in televisions and computer monitors, are akin to (dynamically changing) stained glass windows behind which white light is projected, thus allowing some colors of light through the liquid crystals while blocking other colors. this means that light not allowed through the liquid crystals is wasted, turning electricity into heat, and that the liquid crystals require behind them a light source that adds to their thickness, weight, and cost. if oled displays and their production methods can be improved sufciently, therefore, they have potential advantages over led displays: the desired color can be produced at each location on an oled display with no wasted light and no liquid crystal layer. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.176 innovation in global industriesleds as a disruptive technology: diffusion among applicationsdisruptive technology has been dened in several ways, and leds match at least two of the denitions. first, disruptive technology may be dened as a new technology that lls a longstanding need and for which the expertise and resources of incumbent rms do little to help them with this new approach; in this case solidstate lighting lls the need for illumination using a technology that differs totally from traditional lighting technologies. second, disruptive technology may be dened as a technology in which new rms enter a market and threaten the market dominance of incumbent rms; in this case new rms have been entering the lighting market by creating products based on leds, and it has been unclear whether the leading existing lighting manufacturers can maintain strong market positions if purchases shift substantially to leds.leds are a novel technology in lighting. leds are semiconductors and so manufacture of leds has little in common with traditional lamp production. the supply chain to produce leds as indicated in our discussions with industry experts is quite disaggregated, as is the case for other semiconductor technologies. moreover, kevin dowling, chief technology ofcer at color kinetics, stated to us that ﬁthe vertically integrated giants of the semiconductor world such as intel and applied materials are becoming less numerous and rapidly becoming more the exception rather than the rule.ﬂ data on the participation of rms in each stage of the led supply chain are available from solidstatelighting.net (2006). we catalogued the participation of each rm in each stage of the supply chain and found that most rms participate in only a single part of the supply chain, although a few large rms are involved in many parts of the supply chain. this supply chain is illustrated in figure 6.semiconductor rms often specialize in specic stages of the supply chain, such as r&d, epitaxy, manufacturing, packaging, testing, and backend processing. each stage requires unique skills and equipment and signicant capital expenditure, which is one reason why rms tend to specialize rather than integrate along the supply chain. specialization is thought to drive down prices and improve performance, and this trend is similar among led manufacturers. the development of this new technology will likely create opportunities at all levels of the value chain.16the led market in general lighting is still small compared to traditional lamps. led applications command a high price, but relatively few units are sold and all are for specialty purposes. traditional lamps (incandescent, ˚uorescent, and hid) are estimated by navigant consulting (2003a, p. 7) to have used 41,051 trillion lumen hours of electricity in the united states in 2005 compared to only 16 as lighting moves to leds, traditional bulb manufacture may also be vertically disintegrating somewhat, judging from recent comments by jim campbell, president and ceo of ge consumer & industrial (general electric, 2007).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 177lighting6.epsraw materials (compounds)wafersgrow ingotsslice waferpolishwafer fabricationscoretestdeposition (growing, epitaxycoating)removal (etching)patterning (lithography)modification (doping)assemblycut wafer into diesattach to lead framebondingencapsulatetestbackend processinginterconnect (levels)testbox, label, shiparrays/ fixtures/ systems integratorsintegrated circuitpackagingmanufacturingr&dfigure 6 led semiconductor supply chain.5 for leds. nevertheless, the led market grew by 50 percent between 1995 and 2000 and has been forecast at $4.7 billion by 2007 (ashdown et al., 2004, p. 9).led technology has some clear advantages over traditional lighting, which have allowed led manufacturers to displace traditional lighting in niche markets (grifths, 2006). indicator lights were one of the earliest uses, with color led indicators predating the 1990s and white led indicators used from about 2000 onward. in 2001, 30 percent of led sales were for backlighting, 26 percent for automotive uses, 26 percent for signs and displays, 10 percent for electronic equipment, 4 percent for signals, and 4 percent for general illumination (maccagno, 2002, cited by ashdown et al., 2004, p. 9). by 2002, u.s. market penetration of leds was particularly high in exit signs (80 percent), truck and bus lights (41 percent), and trafc signals (30 percent) (navigant consulting, 2003b, p. xii; hadley et al., 2004, p. 9).other niches that leds have entered include video screen backlights in the mid1990s, decorative lighting in the late 1990s, and automobile lights including dashboard, interior, brake, and tail lights since about 2000. other recent uses include architectural lighting, outdoor advertising, and longlasting whitelight ˚ashlights. one example of the advantage of leds is in brake lights, where leds provide an extra 0.2second response time and therefore help to prevent accidents. although rst introduced in luxury cars, led brake lights are beginning to penetrate the more costconscious end of the market. another example is walinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.178 innovation in global industriesmart™s adoption of led lighting for refrigerated display cases, an application once dominated by ˚uorescents. as well as lowering operating costs, the led lights are amenable to added motion sensors so that lights come on only when shoppers are nearby. as a result, walmart is investing $30 million and expects a 66 percent reduction in freezer lighting energy costs (lightimes, 2006).17new led lighting innovatorsadvances in solidstate lighting offer an opportunity and a challenge for incumbent and startup rms. although the big three lamp manufacturers have been making substantial investments in solidstate lighting, pioneering inventors in led lighting come from universities, research labs, and companies, and r&d plays a vital role in development of these technologies.advances in red, yellow, and blue leds have been led by different research groups and companies. several companies have ﬁspecializationsﬂ in one industry sector, due to a combination of strategy and luck in pioneering key product or process innovations. nichia corp. in japan, for example, was one of the rst companies to develop blue leds, a key advance when only red, green, and yellow were available. it also produced the rst white leds in 1996 (walker, 2004). the company is an illustration of how small rms have been able to penetrate the burgeoning industry. nichia™s key researcher, shuji nakamura, now a professor at the university of california, santa barbara, was largely responsible for the development of the blue led. when nakamura was hired in 1979, nichia was a small rm in rural japan with only 200 employees and nakamura was assigned a project to synthesize a commercialgrade blue led, needed to complete the color palette. at the time, large japanese corporations were spending $85 million a year and nichia had a very small research budget. today nichia controls 80 percent of the blue led market with cree and toyoda gosei (cox, 2003). nakamura™s successful approach departed from the standard thinking in his eld and in his company. he chose gallium nitride, a material most researchers thought would not yield signicant results, as the basis for his research, and continued to work on blue leds for 10 years. nichia™s entry into the led market was a lucky outcome of their hiring a particular employee and of that employee™s actions.the role of individuals in innovative companies in pioneering new lighting technologies is typical of the early stages of a technology cycle in which r&d efforts are lengthy and costly. government grants have been instrumental to support startup companies and university research in the pursuit of emerging led technologies. government funding has lled key technology gaps, provided fund17 walmart installations developed in collaboration with ge and philips represent ﬁthe biggest investment to date in led lighting for interior application [$30 million], and it is also the single largest installation of white led lighting replacing ˚uorescent lighting in a display lighting applicationﬂ (grifths, 2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 179ing to develop enabling knowledge and data, and advanced the solidstate lighting technology base. a team of researchers from rensselaer polytechnic institute, for example, recently received $1.8 million in federal funding from the department of energy (doe) to improve the energy efciency of green leds, with a goal of doubling or tripling power output. the research was one of 16 projects selected for funding through the doe™s solidstate lighting core technologies funding opportunity announcement, which supports enabling and fundamental solidstate lighting technology for general illumination.ﬁmaking lighting more efcient is one of the biggest challenges we face,ﬂ says christian wetzel, the well˚eet career development constellation professor, future chips, and associate professor of physics at rensselaer (rpi, 2006). to meet aggressive doe performance targets that call for more energyefcient, longerlasting, and costcompetitive solidstate lighting by 2025, the team has partnered with startups such as kyma technologies and crystal is. kyma, a north carolina state university spinoff, specializes in gallium nitride substrates, while crystal is, founded by two rensselaer professors, specializes in blue and uv lasers based on singlecrystal aluminum nitride substrates. the doe grant has funded these startups and researchers.government support has also been important for building demand and aiding rms to improve quality and reduce pricesškeys to further diffusion. such programs promote early diffusion of energysaving technologies and are not unique to the united states. we will return to the role of national policies and government initiatives later in the chapter.corporate strategies toward innovationthe ﬁbig threeﬂthe big three traditional lighting manufacturers, philips, osram, and ge, have responded to the opportunities in led lighting by creating joint ventures with semiconductor rms that had preexisting expertise in these technologies. they later acquired these joint ventures outright. philips established a joint venture in optoelectronics with hewlettpackard (hp) in 1999 (when hp split in two in 1999, the optoelectronics group was assigned to a new rm, agilent technologies) and acquired the venture lumileds in 2005 for $950 million.18 osram established a joint venture with inneon technologies ag (formerly siemens semiconductors) in 1999, and acquired the venture in 2001, naming it osram opto semiconductors gmbh.19 ge established a joint venture, gelcore, 18 philips™ 2005 annual report states that lumileds is the world™s leading manufacturer of highpower leds.19 siemens gradually spun off its semiconductor division as inneon beginning in 1999, and sold its nal 18.23 percent stake in the company in 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.180 innovation in global industrieswith semiconductor maker emcore in 1999, and acquired gelcore in august 2006 for $100 million.20 additionally, philips and osram announced in january 2007 a crosslicensing agreement covering patents on leds and oleds (lightimes, 2007), and philips acquired the led lighting controls rm color kinetics in august 2007.historically, the locus of innovation for traditional (i.e., nonled) lamps originated in the primary r&d centers of the big three lighting rms in germany, the netherlands, and the united states. while these labs are still very important, in recognition of asia™s increasingly important role in the traditional lighting industry, the three rms have set up manufacturing, engineering, and r&d activity in other parts of the world, principally in japan and taiwan. efforts are also being made to penetrate the chinese market. ge, for example, began investing in china through joint ventures. the company combined a nished product purchasing center and an r&d center to form the ge asia lighting center in shanghai. by 2002, ge had four major plants in shanghai and one in xiamen, and had invested over $100 million in china for lighting, according to matthew espe, former president and ceo of ge lighting (zou, 2002).philips established an r&d campus with the shanghai science and technology commission with annual expenditures of $50 million, the majority of which is in lighting. between 1988 and 2005, philips lighting established nine solely owned and joint ventures and ve r&d centers, of which one conducts global level research while the other four mainly focus on the asiapacic region (chinesewings, 2005).osram china lighting, inc., 90 percent of which is owned by osram, was formed in april 1995 with an investment of 49.7 million euros. the company is located in foshan, china, and has two factories in china, employing 6,000. in february 2006, osram china lighting announced it would acquire foshan electrical and lighting co. ltd.21asian led producersbeyond their expanding importance in the traditional lighting industry, asian rms also play a signicant role in the global led market. japan™s led industry leads with $918 million in sales, or a world market share of 47 percent, although a portion of these revenues are shared with some u.s. companies through joint ventures. taiwan™s industry holds second place at $712 million, or a market share of 25 percent (taiwan economic news, 2004a,b). leds are the largest type of 20 although gelcore grew about 50 percent from 1995 through 2004, it nonetheless reported a net loss of $0.8 million in 2005. thus, when emcore sold its 49 percent stake in gelcore, it traded possible future value for immediate cash gains.21 source: ﬁosram china lighting™s announcement to acquire foshan electrical and lighting co. ltd.,ﬂ http://business.sohu.com/20060614/n243727208.shtml (in chinese).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 181compound semiconductor production in taiwan (liu, 2003). another source estimates the global led market at $5.4 billion in 2004, with japan™s share at 51.3 percent, taiwan™s 22.7 percent, the united states 12 percent, and europe around 9 percent (ledsmagazine.com, 2005b). data from www.solidstatelighting.net (2006) suggest that most led r&d is conducted in the united states whereas asia dominates manufacturing and packaging. for example, taiwan, china, and korea produced the majority of blue leds in the world, and more than 80 percent of the production of ingaalp highbrightness (hb) leds in 2004. china boasts about 600 enterprises directly related to the led industry in china, employing about 40,000 people (ledsmagazine.com, 2005a).because of the youth of the industry, quality remains variable across rms and is sometimes difcult to assess. quality for an led includes a long operating lifetime before substantial fading occurs, controls to ensure against defective chips, and consistency of operating characteristics including a claimed color emission spectrum, light intensity, voltage drop, and viewing angle (toniolo, 2006b). the led industry has seen a surge of new players, which has ˚ooded the market with lowquality leds (toniolo, 2006a). the result of such commodity production is intense price competition and a ﬁhuge overcapacityﬂ for lowerperformance leds (arensman, 2005). for highperformance leds, competition remains less intense. among consumers, lowquality leds may give a bad reputation to all leds.new venturesthe global semiconductor market was worth $262.7 billion in 2006 (gartner, 2007), considerably outstripping led industry revenues of $3.7 billion in 2004 (www.gelcore.com). a large number of materials, substrates, epitaxy, packaging, and manufacturing companies have entered the led market. in february 2006, lighting industry directory lightsearch.com listed 71 companies that produced led lamps.22 most companies operate at a single stage of the supply chain, illustrated in figure 6. for example, companies that perform epitaxy do not usually do manufacturing or packaging. likewise, most companies that focus on packaging do not produce raw materials or substrates. moreover, companies that focus on basic r&d do not operate in the rest of semiconductor production.23 even on a national level, specialization sometimes occurs. for instance, taiwan is strong in r&d and manufacturing of leds, whereas korea specializes in packaging, and china, a late entrant, is setting up epitaxy, and wafer and chip production 22 recall that ﬁlampﬂ as used in the traditional lighting industry means ﬁbulb,ﬂ and note that the former term is most appropriate for led lighting as no glass bulb is involved. lamp here means a lightproducing device, not a xture.23 based on information on semiconductor companies in the led industry gathered from solidstatelighting.net (2006). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182 innovation in global industries(wang and shen, 2005). in addition, some countries specialize in the production of specic led colors: taiwan holds a majority market share for blue gan leds at 34 percent, closely followed by japan at 33 percent, whereas the united states and korea lag with 19 and 12 percent, respectively (wang and shen, 2005).although leds are still a small subset of the semiconductor market, they have rapid growth in demand, making this an attractive market for new and existing semiconductor rms. leds offer opportunities for semiconductor rms to diversify into a new market that promises longterm growth potential. for example, avago technologies, the world™s largest privately held semiconductor company, recently announced three new series of hb fullcolor leds for the outdoor electronic signs and signals market (business wire, 2006).at the other end of the supply chain, led ﬁintegratorsﬂ like color kinetics play an important role in led lighting. since its establishment in 1997, color kinetics has built an impressive patented portfolio of these technologies, which it uses in led lighting systems. color kinetics has pioneered intelligent led systems that are networked and has created a new niche as a ﬁsystems solutionsﬂ and lighting control technology provider. color kinetics has initiated several major projects that integrate led lights with sound, movement, and rhythm through digital controls, and is working on white light systems. a subway tunnel in chicago, for example, is bathed in several colors of led light that periodically change (giving the impression of a sunset). the company leverages its strengths in innovation and engineering and works with selected chinese manufacturers to assemble systems. in august 2007, philips acquired color kinetics, which became philips solidstate lighting solutions, a business unit of philips lighting™s luminaires group.led lighting r&dthe big three producers are dominant in traditional lighting technology, as shown earlier using data on patents for these technologies. in this section we analyze the r&d positions of these and other rms for led lighting.methodology: analysis of patent datato assess trends in the global location of led lighting r&d we use patent data. patent data yield information on successful r&d outputs. although the information is partial because many inventions and innovations are not patented, within an industry patents are highly correlated with r&d spending and are indicative of r&d success. moreover, patents yield relatively defensible property rights and hence represent an important component of the value of rms™ r&d outputs.to analyze ledrelated patents that pertain to lighting, a search criterion is needed to identify relevant patents. choice of a criterion involves a tradeoff innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 183between nding a subset of mainly relevant patents versus nding all relevant patents mixed with many more nonled and nonlighting patents. we therefore chose a criterion to identify mainly relevant patents at the cost of excluding some led lightingrelated patents.24 all patents were identied whose title contains the key word or phrase ﬁled(s),ﬂ ﬁoled(s),ﬂ ﬁl.e.d.(s),ﬂ or ﬁlight emitting diode(s),ﬂ or the equivalents of the latter phrase in german, french, spanish, italian, or portuguese.25 other languages, including asiaspecic languages, effectively are almost always included in our search because for almost all other languages the database we used has english translations of titles. the search criterion includes led applications, including ledtype displays and (rarely) lasers, as well as leds whose glow is bright enough for general illumination. all patents granted are included regardless of whether they originated from rms, government programs, or university research labs.since both the traditional and the led lighting industries are global in terms of the rms involved and startup efforts, we obtained data for patents issued in most nations worldwide, although we focus initially on patents granted in the united states and europe.26 for logistical reasons (we had to look up information by hand from actual copies of thousands of patents), we restricted the sample in the latter analysis to patents whose title included either ﬁled(s)ﬂ and ﬁlighting,ﬂ or the phrase ﬁlight emitting diode(s).ﬂ our primary focus on u.s. and european patents addresses concerns that patents from other nations may face quite different approval requirements.patents are counted only once if the identical patent is led multiple times 24 international patent classication systems do not identify specic categories for leds or for led lighting, and we draw on international data for which this limitation applies.25 the nonenglish terms used are ﬁlichtemittierende diode(n),ﬂ ﬁleuchtdiode(n),ﬂ ﬁdiode(s) luminescente(s),ﬂ ﬁdiodo(s) electroluminoso(s),ﬂ ﬁdiodo luminescente,ﬂ ﬁdiodi luminescenti,ﬂ ﬁdiodo(s) emissores de luz,ﬂ and ﬁdiodo(s) emitindose claro(s).ﬂ the verb ﬁledﬂ sometimes appears in titles for reasons unrelated to light emitting diodes, so we read all patent titles and eliminated patents for which ﬁledﬂ was used as a verb.26 data are obtained from the espacenet worldwide patent database, maintained by the european patent ofce (epo). the data include patents granted by the relevant patent authorities in almost all nations worldwide (a detailed listing is available from the espacenet website), including not only the most developed world but also eastern european and developing asian, middle eastern, and african nations (or cooperating regions) with signicant innovative activity. the european patent authorities for which led patents appear in the primary sample are the european patent ofce plus the national ofces of austria, finland, france, germany, italy, sweden, and the united kingdom. patents from former sovietbloc nations are excluded. in our secondary sample of patents from patent authorities worldwide, patent authorities that actually granted patents in the data are (ordered by continent) the united states, canada, mexico; germany, great britain, belgium, france, netherlands, hungary, former soviet union, european patent ofce; japan, korea, taiwan, singapore, india, china, hong kong; australia, new zealand; and south africa.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.184 innovation in global industriesin different nations.27 patents granted in nations outside the united states and europe are considered after our main analyses.analysis of led patentingthe analyses that follow compare the headquarters nationality of patenting rms and also the national r&d locations where invention was carried out. the headquarters location of a rm was identied as the international headquarters nation of the rm to which a patent was assigned. if a rm was owned by a ﬁparentﬂ rm, we use the headquarters nation of the parent rm. rarely, patents were applied for by multiple rms or individuals, and assignee credit was divided equally among these applicants. the r&d location where invention was carried out was determined by the nation listed in the address of each inventor named on the patents. since inventors™ addresses are not generally available in electronic bibliographic data, we looked up the nation for each inventor using the original patent documents. rarely, different inventors of a single patent had addresses in different nations, in which case credit for each r&d nation was divided in proportion to the number of inventors in each nation.led patent data are compared in two 4year periods a decade apart, 19901993 and 20002003. these 4year periods ensure an adequatesized, representative sample of patent activity. comparing between periods facilitates analysis of trends in r&d activity in led lighting.as leds have developed growing markets in new applications, so has led r&d grown. based on u.s. and european patents, the number of led patents granted quintupled from 200 in 19901993 to 1,000 in 20002003, as shown in figure 7.28globalization of led r&d: u.s. and european patentsthe locations of inventors as reported on patent applications re˚ect where r&d occurred. we therefore assessed relative inventive activity in each nation, for 19901993 in figure 8 and 20002003 in figure 9, by determining the percent27 equivalent patents led in multiple nations are identied as catalogued on the epo™s espacenet patent web server, which denes equivalents based on identical priority claims.28 substantial growth also holds using our worldwide data for a narrower range of patent titles, with led patents granted growing from 438 in 19901993 to 1,114 in 20002003.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 185lighting7.eps19902000199120011992200219932003020040060080010001990s2000spatentsfigure 7 led patents in sample granted during 19901993 and 20002003. source: authors™ analysis of patents granted in the united states and europe (see text).figure 8 invention locations of led patents granted in 19901993. source: authors™ analysis of patents granted in the united states and europe (see text).us48%japan28%belgium1%netherlands1%other2%france2%sweden3%germany8%uk2%taiwan2%korea3%lighting 8 newinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.186 innovation in global industriesfigure 9 invention locations of led patents granted in 20002003. source: authors™ analysis of patents granted in the united states and europe (see text).ages of patents with inventors in each nation.29 in the period 19901993, inventors located in the united states predominated with 47 percent of all of the led patents. inventors in japan held second place with 27 percent of led patents. inventors in germany ranked third with 8 percent of led patents, followed by inventors in sweden, korea, taiwan, france, and the united kingdom, each with 23 percent of led patents.3029 when computing the percentages of led invention done in different nations, one concern is whether some nations™ inventions might be of systematically poor quality, so that while those nations™ inventors appear to accomplish a lot of r&d, in reality the value of their r&d output is much lower. one means to check whether this is the case is to examine only those relatively highvalue patents for which rms went to the expense and trouble of obtaining equivalent patents in multiple countries or on multiple continents. hence, we also examined patents using these criteria. these analyses yielded conclusions similar to the results reported in the text.30 percentages in this section often represent small numbers of patents, so readers are cautioned that small variations in patenting activity can sometimes lead to substantial changes in the precise percentages reported. our primarily conclusions, however, are robust to typical random variations, with statistical signicance tests reported in footnotes. differences in arrival rates of patents in 19901993 were statistically signicant between the united states and japan (p = .0014), between japan and germany (p .001), and (marginally) between germany and sweden (p = .0525), using exact pvalues from exact poisson regressions. (here and below, exact poisson tests are actually close approximations us46%taiwan15%italy2%korea1%china1%other3%uk2%germany11%japan13%canada2%france2%netherlands2%lighting 9 newinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 187in the period 20002003, u.s. inventors™ share of led patents remained dominant at 47 percent. rapid growth in inventions occurred in taiwan, whose inventors achieved a 15 percent share of led patents, ahead of japanese inventors whose share had fallen to third place with 13 percent of led patents. german inventors™ share grew slightly to 11 percent of led patents.31 other nations™ share of led patent invention remained at 2 percent or less.not only did led innovation become somewhat more international, but nonu.s. companies became more international in the locations where they carried out research. location of r&d (i.e., of inventors) is compared to locations of corporate headquarters in table 2 for 19901993 and table 3 for 20002003. during the period 19901993, the united states was the only country whose companies supported substantial led r&d abroad.32 led patents were led by inventors in japan, the united kingdom, and germany for rms headquartered in the united states. of the nine u.s. patents that had r&d locations abroad, eastman kodak was assignee for four, with inventors in japan, and the remaining ve had inventors in the united kingdom (twice), france, japan, and malaysia.by 20002003, more companies were supporting r&d across the globe. overall, companies in 13 countries sponsored led r&d abroad. u.s. companies, however, kept 95.1 percent of r&d within the united states. asian led invention sites for u.s. rms fell from 5.8 to 1.4 percent, and european sites for u.s. rms fell from 2.9 to 1.9 percent. in the period 20002003, u.s. companies™ foreigninvented patents had inventors in canada (1.6 percent) and nine other nations (each less than 1 percent). european companies began to support r&d in the united states, which now yielded 22.9 percent of european companies™ led patents. asian companies also began to carry out r&d in the united states, yielding 3.6 percent of asian companies™ led patents. furthermore, europe yielded 0.9 percent of asian companies™ led patents.33because they use roundedtointeger values of weighted patent counts, rather than making assumptions about statistical (in)dependence between locations of inventors of some patents.)31 the differences between taiwanese versus japanese, and japanese versus german, patent invention in 20002003 each involve 1617 patents, and it is difcult to tell whether these re˚ect statistically meaningful differences in nations™ propensities to generate led inventions; these nations™ rankings reported here should not be construed to indicate practically or statistically signicant differences. (exact signicance tests are not feasible to compute in these cases, because the numbers of patents involved make exact poisson calculations highly computationally intensive.) german inventors™ arrival rate of patents was statistically signicantly (p .001) greater than the highestranked of nations with less invention, using an exact pvalue from exact poisson regression.32 this difference between the united states and other nations is marginally statistically signicant, p = .059, using fisher™s exact test (twotailed). (the test is approximate because it uses roundedtointeger values of weighted patent counts, rather than making assumptions about statistical (in)dependence between locations of inventors of some patents.)33 use of inventors outside the home country in 20002003 was statistically signicantly less for united states patent applicants than for nonunited states rms (p .001 using fisher™s exact test as in the preceding footnote), with no signicant difference between united states and asian patent applicants.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.188 innovation in global industriestable 2 location of inventor vs. firm headquarters, 19901993location of hqlocation of r&dasiaeuropeu.s.otherasia98.4%1.6%europe100.0%u.s.5.8%2.9%91.3%other100.0%source: authors™ analysis of patents granted in the united states and europe (see text).table 3 location of inventor vs. firm headquarters, 20002003location of hqlocation of r&dasiaeuropeu.s.otherasia95.2% 0.9% 3.6% 0.3%europe 0.7%76.0%22.9% 0.4%u.s. 1.4% 1.9%95.1% 1.6%other100.0%source: authors™ analysis of patents granted in the united states and europe (see text).to a slight degree, the united states became an innovation hub for companies headquartered in other countries, mainly for philips. of the led patents assigned to dutch companies, 67.3 percent were led by inventors located in the united states, as were only 1.8 percent of patents assigned to german companies. germany also was an r&d source for 7.4 percent of dutch rms™ patents. these shifts largely re˚ect the internationalization of philips as it acquired other rms and joint ventures.there was a corresponding shift in the number of companies using inventors in other countries. in the period 19901993, six u.s.headquartered companies sponsored led research abroad, totaling nine patents, while only one european and one japanese company sponsored led research abroad with only one such patent each. in the period 20002003, 25 companies located in all parts of the world sponsored led research abroad, totaling 95 patents. this a substantial shift, but far from complete globalization, as even in 20002003 only 5.2 percent of led patents involved work outside companies™ headquarters nations; the vast majority of patents still used inventors in rms™ home countries.as table 4 shows, there was a shift from 19901993 to 20002003 in the dominant rms in led patenting.34 dominant rms are ranked here in led applications generally, including ledtype displays and led backlights, not just 34 the shift in rms™ rank ordering from 19901993 to 20002003 is statistically signicant (p < .001) using wilcoxon™s signedrank test.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 189table 4 leading firms in led patenting, 20002003 versus 19901993rank 20002003rank 19901993companyheadquarterscountrypatents 20002003132philips/lumiledsanetherlands/u.s.69.029osram/siemensbgermany41.03šge/gelcorecu.s.26.54šunited epitaxy/epistardtaiwan17.253xeroxu.s.14.5513okijapan14.571eastman kodaku.s.14.082hpeu.s.9.08špara light electronicstaiwan9.010šhon hai precisiontaiwan8.011šibmu.s.7.011šlite on electronicstaiwan7.0138samsungkorea6.814šnichiajapan6.01510creeu.s.5.3note: individuals and institutions were excluded from the table source: authors™ analysis of patents granted in the untied states and europe (see text). aincludes all patents by philips and its subsidiary lumileds, agilent as former joint venture partner of lumileds, and color kinetics acquired in 2007. bincludes all patents by osramsylvania and its parent company siemens, as well as 6.5 patents held by patra patent treuhand. cincludes all patents by ge and its subsidiary gelcore. dincludes all patents by united epitaxy, epistar with which it merged in 2005, and epitech with which it merged in 2007. ehp patents in the 1990s pertain to technology such as led print heads that may not have been owned by hp™s spinoff agilent, which became part of philips.leds for general illumination. the listed rms are unlikely to include materials makers because of the search criteria used. only 4 of the top 10 rms that led led patents in 19901993 remained in the top 10 a decade later (osram plus its parent rm siemens, xerox, eastman kodak, and hp) and 4 entirely new led patent assignees had appeared in the new top 10. all of the big three traditional lighting rms featured at the top of led patenting in 20002003 (philips ranked rst, osram second, and ge third). of these big three, philips and (through siemens) osram had led patents in 19901993. the emergence of the big three as the dominant led rms in 20002003 can clearly be attributed to their joint ventures that allowed them to enter fully into the semiconductorbased led market.many led patents came from rms not in the traditional lighting industry, including established semiconductor rms. semiconductor rm united epitaxy, founded in 1993, is one of several such taiwanese rms. firms™ ranks are innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.190 innovation in global industriesmeasured somewhat noisily here, because the sample of patents used does not cover every led patent (as noted in our earlier description of patent methods).35 nonetheless, the evidence shows an important role in led technology of asian rms, representing half the rms listed in table 4.36hence, the big three lighting rms have managed to established dominant positions in led lighting technology. nonetheless, if led technology develops as anticipated there may be greater participation by rms in japan, taiwan, and perhaps korea and other asian nations in the global lighting industry.globalization of led r&d: worldwide patentsthe results differ somewhat when patents from japan, taiwan, and other nations are included. these patents were initially excluded because of concerns over whether patents are of comparable quality and value in different nations and because the u.s. and european markets have been two of the world™s largest. however, focusing only on u.s. and european patents may introduce a bias because some applicants develop r&d competence but apply for patents only in their home countries. also there may be international differences in propensities to patent in different markets. filings by individuals (instead of companies) showcase the differences; in the period 20002003 almost four times as many patents were granted worldwide as in the united states and europe, and almost ve times as many individuals were granted patent rights, using our worldwide sample of data with a restricted denition of led patents. the majority of individual lings originated in taiwan (35.6 percent) and korea (28.6 percent).among our sample of led patent invention worldwide, in 19901993 japanese inventors led with 78.3 percent of led patents, the united states followed with 10.7 percent, and all other countries each invented less than 3 percent. a decade later in 20002003, japanese invented 41.6 percent of led patents, taiwanese 22.0 percent, americans 13.9 percent, and koreans 12.9 percent of patents. clearly by 20002003 more countries, notably taiwan and korea, were 35 errors in ranking could result if certain companies are less likely than others to include our search terms in their patent titles, and our purpose is not to compute exact rankings. however, the rankings computed conrm industry impressions and are approximately valid absent any odd variations in rms™ choice of terminology in patent titles: the difference between philips and osram in their arrival rate of patents was statistically signicant (p = .010), the difference between osram and ge was not statistically signicant at conventional levels (p = .114), the difference between osram and united epitaxy/epistar was statistically signicant (p = .002), and the difference between ge and united epitaxy/epistar was not statistically signicant (p = .174), using exact pvalues from exact poisson regressions.36 if cumulative measures of led patenting were considered, asia would likewise emerge as playing an important role. asian countries, particularly japan, had strong early led r&d, which is apparent in the 19901993 patent data.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 191locations for led r&d.37 hence, these results indicate a possibly greater role of asian inventors, when patents applied for in asian nations are considered along with those in u.s. and european nations.other indicators of r&dother indicators of globalization and asian strength in led innovation are international joint ventures and licensing agreements. joint ventures in leds occurred between each of the big three traditional lighting rms and other international rms, as discussed earlier, all in 1999, with all three subsequently acquiring the joint ventures. international crosslicensing agreements, listed in table 5, now exist between philips (dutch) and osram (german), philips and nichia (japanese), philips and toyoda gosei (japanese), osram and nichia, osram and seoul semiconductor (korean), osram and avago (american), cree (american) and nichia, and cree and seoul semiconductor. the table also indicates other international licensing, disputes, and strategic research partnerships. the evidence indicates considerable global dispersion and a growing asian contribution in led innovation.national programs as innovation driverspromoting r&dthe development and market penetration of leds is closely linked with government policies and national programs. this is not uncommon in the semiconductor industry. for example, japan saw extensive growth in semiconductor r&d, which displaced u.s. leadership in the dram market, following a mid37 japanese rms dominate the rankings when patents granted worldwide are considered. in the period 19901993, 9 of the top 10 ranked rms were japanese. the ve highest ranking rms by led patents were hitachi (35 patents), nec (31), toshiba (30), mitsubishi (27), and sanyo (23). eastman kodak (united states) was the only nonjapanese rm in the top 10 during the period 19901993. by 20002003, the top 5 ranking rms for led patents were also japanese: nichia (38), hitachi (30), sharp (29), showa denko (26), and citizen (25), and 8 of the top 10 were japanese. even among the japanese rms, however, only hitachi, sharp, and matsushita stayed in the top 10 ranking over the decade. the dominance of japanese rms could, however, re˚ect differences in patent systems such as how often multiple claims are combined in one patent, coupled with the fact that rms are typically most likely to apply for patents in their home countries as well as possible international locations. the two nonjapanese rms in the top 10 during the period 20002003 were taiwanese: epistar (founded in 1996) held sixth place with 24.5 patents, and united epitaxy (founded in 1993) held ninth place with 18.5 patents. the big three traditional lighting rms did not make the top 10 by this measure: philips/lumileds is ranked in 12th place, osram plus siemens in 15th place, and ge plus gelcore in 36th place. two korean rms, lg and samsung, were in the top 20. when only patents granted on multiple continents (a measure of high value) are considered, u.s. inventors are responsible for a slightly larger percentage of the sample than indicated here.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.192 innovation in global industriestable 5 globalization of led patents: licenses, alliances, and disputesphilips (lumileds)osramgeluminationcreenichiaseoul semiconductorphilips (lumileds)osramcrosslicensege luminationcreechip supply from creenichiacrosslicensecrosslicensestrategic alliancecrosslicenseseoul semiconductorcrosslicensecrosslicenselawsuitsepistardisputedispute (resolved)toyoda goseicrosslicensesettlementstrategic partnershipcitizendispute (resolved)white led licenserohmwhite led licenselicenseliteonwhite led licenselicensekingbrightlawsuitlicenseotherswhite led licenses; crosslicense; disputealicenses; lawsuitbinvestmentcnotes: crosslicenses are agreements to share rights to large numbers of led patents. a ﬁlicenseﬂ indicates that a rm acquired the right to use a patent owned by a rm at the top of the table. white led licenses pertain specically to patents for whitelightproducing leds. a ﬁdisputeﬂ indicates a patent lawsuit brought by a rm at the top of the table against another rm. the ﬁsettlementﬂ between nichia and toyoda gosei involves patent infringement lawsuits that had been brought by each rm against the other. strategic alliances and strategic partnerships are joint led technology development efforts involving the two companies indicated. aosram has white led patents licensed to harvatek, vishay, samsung sem, everlight, ya hsin, lednium (optek); a crosslicense with avago; and a resolved dispute against dominant. bcree has led patents licensed to cotco, and stanley and a lawsuit against bridgelux. cnichia has an investment in and chiplicense agreement with opto tech.source: ledsmagazine.com (2007).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 1931970s research program (macher et al., 2000). there appears to be a correlation between countries™ national research programs for leds and innovative activity in those countries. key led programs exist in the united states, japan, taiwan, and south korea, precisely those countries that dominate led patenting. china recently announced programs targeted toward led innovation and hightechnology industries in general. judging by the impact of similar research programs in other nations and import of u.s. and taiwanese talent, china may become an additional key player in the led industry.while national programs collaborate extensively with universities and research labs, such institutions account for only about 4 percent of all led patents, re˚ecting the limited funding available for commercializing their basic research. nonetheless, university spinoffs have often created major companies such as cree (with a market capitalization of $1.69 billion and revenue of $385 million in 2005). universities and research institutions appear most innovative in taiwan and korea, accounting for about onehalf and onefth, respectively, of all led patents led by universities and research institutions.38 the remainder is split fairly evenly among the united states, the united kingdom, japan, and belgium. interestingly, china also features, ling 9 percent of all led patents by universities and research institutions. with the exception of belgium, each of these countries has a national program dedicated to development of led lighting, with goals to improve energy efciency and gain market share in general illumination, as outlined in table 6.often the dedicated lighting program benets from other supporting legislation or programs. for example, the u.s. initiative to develop leds may be partly driven by programs such as vision 2020, an industryled program to develop a technology roadmap for lighting, initiated by the u.s. department of energy. the program™s goals are to develop standards for lighting quality; increase demand for highquality lighting solutions; strengthen education and credentials of lighting professionals; provide r&d incentives to accelerate market penetration of advanced lighting sources and ballast technologies for superior quality, efciency, and costeffectiveness; and develop intelligent lighting controls and ˚exible luminaries/system delivery platforms (doe, 2000). apart from aims to establish integrated energyefcient lighting systems, the program has also launched the energy star voluntary labeling program designed by the environmental protection agency (epa) and the national appliance energy conservation act that bans lowefciency magnetic ballasts. grants awarded by the doe in 2006 totaled nearly $60 million, with a further $12 million provided by contractors 38 research output at universities has often been measured by journal publication rather than patents, but it would be difcult to use a publicationbased measure here without possible languagerelated biases (nonenglish speakers frequently publish in nonenglish journals not catalogued in available publications databases). our measure of patents rather than publications may be more pertinent to applied than to basic research. the numbers are based on all patents (including national patents) during the period 20002003.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.194 table 6 major national research programs pertaining to ledscountry, fundsaprogramphase & objectivesfundingorganizationsusabestimated $42.1 mil/year (20032013); includes anticipated extension of fundingenergy act of 2005: next generation lighting initiative (ngli)ł  20072009: support research, development, demonstration, and commercial applications$50 mil/year authorized from 2007 to 2009partnership doe, industry, universities & laboratoriesł  20102013 extensionextended authorization to allocate $50 mil/year from 20102013ssl project portfolio (current projects in ngli)ł  completed projects 20032005: six key research areas: quantum efciency, longevity, stability and control, packaging, infrastructure, and cost reductionł  current projects through 2008: led and oledtotal: $70.9 milpartnership doe, industry, universities & laboratoriesjapanestimated $7.5 mil/year (19982008)light for the 21st century, new energy and industrial technology development organization (nedo)ł  19982002 (rst phase): develop ganbased led technology for lighting applications yen 6 bil ($52 mil)japan r&d center of metals (jrcm)ł  develop 13% market penetration by 2010 (over 477 new patents already led in one year)13 companies and universitiesł  produce 120 lm/w and 80% efciency by 2010ministry of education, culture, science & technologył  financial year 2004: develop medical equipment and therapeutic techniques based on ledsyen 500 mil ($4.6 mil)several universities, more than 20 companiesł  similar amounts of funding expected next 4 years (20052008): establish the yamaguchiube medical innovation centre (yumic)$4.6 mil/year 20052008ł  white hbledssouth koreacestimated $59.4 mil/year (20012008); excludes equipment value, and half of led valley as ﬁbertohomeﬂsemiconductor lighting national program & kopti (korea photonics technology institute)ł  19931996 (r&d by lg, samsung, universities, and korea research institute): reduce use of glass, phosphors, heavy metalskopti receives $20 mil/year in fundingkopti™s costs covered 73.1% by government, 16.5% by gwanju ﬁcity of light,ﬂ 10.4% by industrył  19992000 (business phase, jvs, production runs): meet environmental regulations july 2006kopti equipment value: $65 milł  save $20 bil on energył  2001 (activation phase, growth to more than 340 companies): produce 80 lm/w white led by 2008led valley projectł  20052008: develop hbled$100 mil (rst phase)gwanju ﬁcity of light,ﬂ mix of national and local government and privatesector investmentł  20052008: second phase of a photonics industry project for hbleds$430 mil (second phase hb led & bertohome)ł  deploy bertothehome networks taiwanestimated $4.0 mil/year (20022005)next generation lighting projectł  20042005 (40 lm/w): improve performance of white leds20042005: nt$383 mil ($11.5 mil)consortium of 11 companiesł  second phase (60 lm/w): 100 lm/w output in labsnational science councilł  circa 20022004: producing highly efcient ledsnt$12 mil ($0.4 mil)nsc department of science & engineeringł  led to 14 new patents and 20 new manufacturing process technologiesinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 195table 6 major national research programs pertaining to ledscountry, fundsaprogramphase & objectivesfundingorganizationsusabestimated $42.1 mil/year (20032013); includes anticipated extension of fundingenergy act of 2005: next generation lighting initiative (ngli)ł  20072009: support research, development, demonstration, and commercial applications$50 mil/year authorized from 2007 to 2009partnership doe, industry, universities & laboratoriesł  20102013 extensionextended authorization to allocate $50 mil/year from 20102013ssl project portfolio (current projects in ngli)ł  completed projects 20032005: six key research areas: quantum efciency, longevity, stability and control, packaging, infrastructure, and cost reductionł  current projects through 2008: led and oledtotal: $70.9 milpartnership doe, industry, universities & laboratoriesjapanestimated $7.5 mil/year (19982008)light for the 21st century, new energy and industrial technology development organization (nedo)ł  19982002 (rst phase): develop ganbased led technology for lighting applications yen 6 bil ($52 mil)japan r&d center of metals (jrcm)ł  develop 13% market penetration by 2010 (over 477 new patents already led in one year)13 companies and universitiesł  produce 120 lm/w and 80% efciency by 2010ministry of education, culture, science & technologył  financial year 2004: develop medical equipment and therapeutic techniques based on ledsyen 500 mil ($4.6 mil)several universities, more than 20 companiesł  similar amounts of funding expected next 4 years (20052008): establish the yamaguchiube medical innovation centre (yumic)$4.6 mil/year 20052008ł  white hbledssouth koreacestimated $59.4 mil/year (20012008); excludes equipment value, and half of led valley as ﬁbertohomeﬂsemiconductor lighting national program & kopti (korea photonics technology institute)ł  19931996 (r&d by lg, samsung, universities, and korea research institute): reduce use of glass, phosphors, heavy metalskopti receives $20 mil/year in fundingkopti™s costs covered 73.1% by government, 16.5% by gwanju ﬁcity of light,ﬂ 10.4% by industrył  19992000 (business phase, jvs, production runs): meet environmental regulations july 2006kopti equipment value: $65 milł  save $20 bil on energył  2001 (activation phase, growth to more than 340 companies): produce 80 lm/w white led by 2008led valley projectł  20052008: develop hbled$100 mil (rst phase)gwanju ﬁcity of light,ﬂ mix of national and local government and privatesector investmentł  20052008: second phase of a photonics industry project for hbleds$430 mil (second phase hb led & bertohome)ł  deploy bertothehome networks taiwanestimated $4.0 mil/year (20022005)next generation lighting projectł  20042005 (40 lm/w): improve performance of white leds20042005: nt$383 mil ($11.5 mil)consortium of 11 companiesł  second phase (60 lm/w): 100 lm/w output in labsnational science councilł  circa 20022004: producing highly efcient ledsnt$12 mil ($0.4 mil)nsc department of science & engineeringł  led to 14 new patents and 20 new manufacturing process technologiescontinuedinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.196 country, fundsaprogramphase & objectivesfundingorganizationschinadestimated $248.8 mil/year (20052010); only includes initial investment for ve parks and the 5year plan; not directly comparable to other nations™ gures as this includes manufacturing site investmentssemiconductor lighting projectł  five parks established in shanghai, xiamen, dalian, nanchang, shenzhen: establish industrial parks with up, mid, and downstream products; rst phase likely to be 20052010: collaboration with taiwan and specialists from taiwan and u.s.; anticipate $19 bil led industry by 2010total investment: yuan 10 bil ($1.2 bil), allocated as follows: xiamen: $1.9 mil (with focus on optoelectronics), dalian: $150 mil, shenzhen: initial investment 3 bil yuan ($375 mil); total 20 bil yuan ($2.5 bil) over 35 years (20052010)xiamen: three companies and government & cooperation with taiwan; dalian: jv between companies and science & technology group; shenzen: university, local city government support & 200 companiesnational solid state lighting project as part of 11th 5year planł  2015 goals: savings from largescale conversion to led; 100 bil kw/h annually by 201520062010: $44 mil15 research institutions & 2,500 companiesł  150 lm/w led and capture 40% of incandescent marketł  reduce environmental pollutionł  develop strong industrial base ł  international cooperation if necessarye.u.estimated $16.332.5 mil/year (20022006) est. assuming 510% dedicated toward ledsixth framework programł  strengthen science & technology base for international competitiveness$1.3 bil earmarked for nanotechnology (with ist section) athe yearly fund ˚ow was estimated as an annual mean of all funding programs over the entire time range of the programs. all gures in us$. bpresidential budget for scal year 2006 includes request of $11 mil for ssl. ckorea also has a national program for lcd and displays, from 20042008. key players are lg and samsung. no funding information. dchina™s ﬁ863 program,ﬂ or national high technology research & development program, includes development of oleds as a focus.sources (in order of table): doe (2005, 2006), japan research and development center of metals™ national project (2000), stevenson (2005), compound semiconductor (2004), chiu (2004), yahoo! news australia & nz (2004), tang (2006), ledsmagazine.com (2005c, 2005a), steele (2006), european commission community research (2002).table 6 continuedinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 197(doe, 2006). some 65 percent of the doe grants were awarded to rms, with the remainder split about equally between research laboratories and universities.similarly, japan has an led association that promotes r&d and standardization in the led industry. as well as aiming for energyefcient lamps, the association has established a medical innovation center that conducts r&d on led use in medical equipment and therapeutics. a 1979 energy conservation law in japan, updated in 1999, has been a key driver of energy conservation in factories, buildings, machinery, and equipment. japan is the secondlargest government supporter of r&d in general, after the united states, investing $90.3 billion in 1997. of this budget, $6.8 billion was allocated toward national energyrelated r&dš64 percent public sector and 36 percent private sector (dooley, 1999).south korea™s lighting program is supported by a governmentbacked organization, korea photonics technology institute, which aims to produce 80 lm/w white leds by 2008 and invests $20 million per year. funding stems mainly from the government (73.1 percent), but also from industry (10.4 percent) and the ﬁcity of light,ﬂ gwanju (16.5 percent). gwanju is the center of the led valley project in korea, aimed at penetrating leds into television backlighting by 2006, car lighting by 2008, and domestic lighting by 2010. investment is signicant at $100 million for the development of hb leds (plus $430 million partly for bertothehome) from 2005 through 2008. in addition, the korean private sector, namely samsung and lg, are investing in lcds and oleds, using korea™s led infrastructure as a platform. chaebols such as samsung and lg are doing so through their business units and research labs, as well as a partial spinoff in the case of lg, in which it still has a 60 percent equity stake. but there have also been new startups for epiwafer foundries, substrates/gaas ics, and ber optic componentsšmany set up by researchers from samsung and lg or by university professors (whitaker and adams, 2002).taiwan has had support from the national science council for led research. together with a consortium of 11 companies, taiwan invested $11.5 million in led research and development during the period 20032005. the second phase, to produce highefciency leds, is expected to receive $0.4 million in funding. the goal is to produce 100 lm/w output efciency of led bulbs in laboratories. in addition, taiwan has a 6year national initiative on nanotechnology worth $700 million, some of which is dedicated toward leds (liu, 2003).china has budgeted $44 million to address solidstate lighting r&d needs as part of its 11th five year plan. the program will include 15 research institutions and university labs, and more than 2,500 companies involved in led wafers, chips, packaging, and applications (steele, 2006). the country expects to be the largest market for leds in the world, although it acknowledges a 6 to 20year lag behind japan, europe, and the united states in led device technology (steele, 2006). the key driver behind the lighting project is energy savings. the goal is to penetrate 40 percent of the chinese incandescent lighting market with 150 lm/w leds. the program was responsible for the establishment of ve ininnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.198 innovation in global industriesdustrial parks in china during 2004 and 2005, backed by government, company, and university investment. the objective of the program is to save 30 percent of energy spent on lighting, the same as generated by the three gorges project, in the next 1520 years. an underlying national solidstate lighting project by the ministry of science and technology aims to reduce environmental pollution and improve technology to develop a strong industrial base. apart from its dedicated semiconductor lighting project, china is investing heavily in the semiconductor and advanced material industries in general. china is also focused on collaborating internationally to develop its semiconductor industry, recruiting talent particularly from taiwan and the united states.one aspect that stands out among national led programs is that europe appears to be lagging behind the united states and asian countries. the european union™s fifth framework program funds ve research areas: nanotechnology, genomics and biotechnology, information technology, aeronautics and space, and food safety and health risk. the funding for the period 20022006 is $17.5 billion. of this, $3.4 billion is assigned to the information society technologies program, which includes research into semiconductor technologies and leds. the program funds research institutions, universities, and other organizations. the lack of specic initiatives for led innovation may explain european countries™ minor share of led patents.some european countries have more specic programs dedicated toward leds. in september 2006, for example, the german ministry of education and basf inaugurated a new research lab, the joint innovation lab (jil) (basf, 2006). the jil is a cooperative effort between 20 basf experts and industrial and academic partners researching new materials in organic electronics, concentrated particularly on oleds for organic photovoltaics and appliances in the lighting market (opal). the german ministry of education and research intends to invest around $800 million in the opal project. in addition, basf spends over $1 billion on r&d each year. it is hoped that the projects will strengthen germany™s position in the emerging market of organic electronics and create the scientic and technological basis for initiating the production of oledbased lighting (a to z of materials, 2006).in the newer technology of oleds, much of the work is concentrated in research institutions and academia, both domestically and abroad. to be commercially viable, oled research requires substantial infusion of capital. foreign industry, heavily funded by their governments, could develop an insurmountable lead in the technology, making it very difcult for u.s. manufacturers to compete, if the u.s. government does not provide comparable support. with appropriate support from government and industry, commercialization could occur in as little as 5 to 8 years (tsao, 2002).a push is also being made to pursue good white leds, the ﬁholy grailﬂ of led lighting. analysis of pida data compiled by digitimes shows that each of the aforementioned countries is investing in white leds. the united states innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 199is investing $50 million over 10 years, korea $23.4 million over 5 years, japan $10.7 million over 5 years, taiwan $4.6 million over 3 years, china $3.3 million over 3 years, and europe $1.0 million over 4 years (wang and shen, 2005).demand driversto spur innovation indirectly, regulations and incentives for energysaving technologies can enhance demand for new lighting technologies. in a study comparing u.s. and japanese lighting industry conservation measures, akashi et al. (2003) found that conservation can be encouraged by regulation, incentives, and awareness campaigns. the u.s. energy policy act of 1992 prohibited manufacturing and import of lamps that do not meet efciency standards and mandated that lamp lumen output, efciency, and life be printed on packaging, making it easier for consumers to compare and select more energyefcient products. nevertheless, consumers still experience considerable confusion in choosing lighting, particularly for residential settings. in new construction, builders have generally installed basic lighting packages that lack energy efciency and other quality improvements in favor of lower capital costs (rather than lower operating costs). bridging the gap between available lighting technology and consumer knowledge is a signicant challenge and one that in japan is met jointly by government and industry initiatives.future diffusion of led lighting may re˚ect patterns now apparent for cfls, which, although more efcient than incandescent and halogen lamps, have achieved low penetration in the u.s. market. only about 2 percent of sockets nationwide, and 4 percent in california, now use cfls. flicker, color, upfront cost, and other drawbacks have contributed to their slow adoption, so that greater energy efciency alone seems insufcient to penetrate much of the market, although the efforts of walmart to promote cfls may result in a signicant change in consumer behavior.implications and policy recommendationsthis chapter has documented a shift taking place in the lighting industry. traditional lamps are being replaced with cfls. while the early traditional lighting industry was dominated by three big companiesšge, philips, and osramšas production of lamps became commoditized competitive pressures in lighting increased. lower prices and margins shifted production of traditional lamps to asia, especially china, the largest source of lamp imports in the united states. improvements in lamp efciency led to the development of ˚uorescents and other types of lamps, which successfully penetrated commercial and industrial markets and are poised to enter u.s. residential markets after years of delay among consumers who lacked awareness and were unwilling to spend money up front for savings later on.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.200 innovation in global industriesa new lighting technology, leds, is leading to a shift in how we view lighting. leds have already penetrated enduse markets for automobile brake lights, signs and displays, backlighting, and trafc signals. investments in the development of white leds are setting the stage for the use of leds as general illumination and threaten the traditional lighting industry and its three big players. leds are a disruptive technology that has allowed many new players to enter the lighting market. while japan and the united states dominate the led market in terms of r&d and revenue, their market share is being eroded by fastgrowing entrants, especially from taiwan. taiwan leads global production of blue (gan) leds (wang and shen, 2005), had the second or thirdlargest amount of led patents by our counts in 20002003, and has two rms high on our led patent ranking tables.philips, osram, and ge were not involved in the early stages of led technology development. it was only in 1999 that the big three decided to enter the led market through a series of joint ventures that the companies later acquired. these rms may further build their strengths in this technology through acquisition. in midjune 2007, philips acquired color kinetics for approximately $791 million.39 these big three rms appear to have established dominant positions in led technology, judging from our patent analyses. however, it remains to be seen whether the big three will replicate the tight oligopoly they held in the traditional lighting industry in most of the 20th century. partly this is because the semiconductor supply chain is fragmented as rms in this sector are typically not vertically integrated; by specializing, companies are able to keep costs down. our analysis indicates that led producers likewise operate at various stages of the supply chain and do not integrate vertically. this means that the led market has witnessed many new entrants and has also created opportunities for new ventures in areas such as system controls and integration.although leds have some clear advantages over traditional lamps, such as added ˚exibility, integration with digital systems, and higher energy savings, they are also still costly to produce. the question remains when (indeed whether) white leds will successfully displace traditional general illumination technologies, especially among residential buyers. evidence from cfl, hid, and other efcient traditional technologies shows low penetration rates among consumers. to aid success of led lighting, therefore, governments might not only fund basic r&d but also promote awareness among consumers so that led lighting products diffuse in the residential market. governments worldwide are making signicant investments into led r&d and promotion of the technology. government programs, such as the one in the united states, have allowed small startups 39 at the time of the announcement color kinetics had 71 patents granted and over 15,000 installations. the merged entity will operate under the name philips solidstate lighting solutions, with intelligent and premium led product lines ultimately cobranded philips/color kinetics (color kinetics, 2007).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 201and university research labs to make progress on led r&d and gain a foothold in this new market.u.s. and asian government programs, in particular, have made the largest investments. china, which is still at the early stages of ramping up capacity and technology to produce leds and therefore lagging behind other countries, is addressing r&d in solidstate lighting as part of its 11th five year plan and is setting up ve business parks dedicated to these new lighting technologies. china has a strong interest to meet its own energyefciency needs. already, there is a trade imbalance between china and the united states for semiconductors generally. in 2002, the united states imported $6.4 billion worth of semiconductor products from china, while exporting only $2.2 billion worth (holtzeakin, 2005). given its investments in r&d, china might become an important player in the global led market.analysis of these trends indicates that asian countries such as japan and taiwan, and possibly china and korea, are poised to take an increased role in r&d, production, and diffusion of led technology. evidence provided by the patent analysis suggests a potential shift toward these asian nations. extensive public and private investment will help if the united states is to keep up with the opportunities presented by these new technologies. moreover, efforts to encourage consumers to use solidstate lighting as it becomes efcacious in new applications may help domestic markets to grow and support the commercialization of these important energysaving technologies.acknowledgmentspartial funding is gratefully acknowledged from the alfred p. sloan foundation and from the center for future energy systems at rensselaer polytechnic institute. insightful comments on an earlier draft were kindly provided by kevin dowling, jeffrey macher, bill mcneill, klaus minich, david mowery, and david simons. we also thank our discussants and anonymous referees at each stage of development of this work.referencesakashi, y., l. russell, m. novello, and y. nakamura. (2003). comparing lighting energy conservation measures in the united states and japan. working paper, lighting research center, rensselaer polytechnic institute.arensman, r. (2005). led market lights up. electronic business 31(4):24.arthur, a. (2006). a unique history of the light bulb. available at http://www.contentmart.com/contentmart/content.asp?linkid=19298&catid=328&content=1. accessed december 2006.ashdown, b. j., d. j. bjornstad, g. boudreau, m. v. lapsa, b. shumpert, and f. southworth. (2004). assessing consumer values and supplychain relationships for solidstate lighting technologies. report ornl/tm2004/80, oak ridge national laboratory, oak ridge, tenn.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.202 innovation in global industriesa to z of materials. (2006). basf open organic electronics research laboratory, 11 september. available at http://www.azom.com/details.asp?newsid=6627. accessed september 22, 2006.barbaro, m. (2007). powersipping bulbs get backing from walmart. new york times, january 2.basf. (2006). joint innovation labœorganic electronics: research with customers and academic partners. press release, september 11.bellis, m. (2006a). the history of ˚uorescent lights. available at http://inventors.about.com/library/inventors/bl˚uorescent.htm. accessed december 2006.bellis, m. (2006b). timeline of electrical lighting. available at http://inventors.about.com/od/lstartinventions/a/lighting2.htm. accessed december 2006.bellis, m. (2006c). the history of the incandescent lightbulb. available at http://inventors.about.com/library/inventors/bllight2.htm. accessed december 2006.bishop, a. l., r. worrall, l. j. spohr, h. j. mckenzie, and i. m. barchia. (2004). response of culicoides spp. (diptera: ceratopogonidae) to lightemitting diodes. australian journal of entomology 43(2):184188.bowers, b. (1982). a history of electric light & power. peter pergrinus.bright, j. r. (1958). automation and management. boston, ma: harvard university.burgess, d. s. (2006). efcient white oled employs downconversion. led focus, may 2006. available at http://www.photonics.com/content/spectra/2006/may/led/82586.aspx. accessed december 2006.business wire. (2006). avago technologies introduces new high performance extra bright oval leds for outdoor electronic sign and signal applications. september 19.calwell, c., c. granda, l. gordon, and m. ton. (1999). lighting the way to energy savings: how can we transform residential lighting markets? volume 1: strategies and recommendations. prepared by ecos consulting for the natural resources defense council, san francisco, calif.chinesewings. (2005). philips celebrate the shanghai innovation and technology park lighting project. august 1.chiu, y. t. (2004). optical devices to replace toxic lighting mechanisms. taipei times. april 16.color kinetics. (2007). color kinetics announces acquisition by philips. press release, june 19.compound semiconductor. (march 2004). taiwanese suppliers target white led improvements. compound semiconductor.compoundsemiconductor.net. (2004). japanese led project targets medical uses. available at http://compoundsemiconductor.net/articles/news/8/7/26/1.cox, j. b. (2003). semiconductormaker cree gets boost from taiwan court ruling on patents. knight ridder tribune business news. september 26, p. 2.doe (u.s. department of energy). (1993). housing characteristics 1993. energy information administration, ofce of energy markets and end use, report doe/eia457.doe. (1995). commercial buildings energy consumption survey. energy information administration, ofce of energy markets and end use, report doe/eia871.doe. (1997). commercial buildings characteristics 1995. energy information administration, ofce of energy markets and end use, report doe/eise0109.doe. (2000). vision 2020, the lighting technology roadmap. a 20year industry plan for lighting technology. ofce of building technology, state and community programs, energy efciency and renewable energy.doe. (2005). energy act authorizes next generation lighting initiative. available at http://www.netl.doe.gov/ssl/083105.html. accessed december, 2006.doe. (2006). 2006 project portfolio: solid state lighting. d&r international ltd. for building technologies program, lighting research and development, ofce of energy efciency and renewable energy.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 203dooley, j. j. (1999). energy r&d in japan. prepared for u.s. department of energy, contract deac0676rlo 1830. pacic northwest laboratory, battelle memorial institute. document no. pnnl12214.economist. (2007a). an environmentally friendly bulb that may never need changing. the economist june 19.economist. (2007b). everlasting light. the economist, technology quarterly insert, september 6.eisenberg, a. (2007). the television screen, sliced ever thinner. new york times. december 23.european commission community research. (december 2002). the sixth framework programme in brief. brochure available at http://ec.europa.eu/research/fp6/pdf/fp6inbriefen.pdf. accessed december 2006.gartner. (2007). gartner™s final semiconductor market share results show industry grew 10 percent in 2006. available at http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=503221. accessed january 2008.general electric. (2006). lighting: the last 125 years. available at http://www.gelighting.com/na/businesslighting/educationresources/learnaboutlight/historyoflight/lastyears.htm. accessed december 2006.general electric. (2007). consumer & industrial announces intention to restructure its lighting business to capture another century of growth and leadership. press release, october 4. available at http://www.genewscenter.com/content/detail.asp?releaseid=2704&newsareaid=2. accessed november 1, 2007.genlyte thomas. (2005). annual report, 2005.gizmodo. (2008). samsung™s 31inch oled is biggest, thinnest yet. available at http://gizmodo.com/342912/samsungs31+incholedisbiggestthinnestyet. accessed february 20, 2008.grifths, t. (2006). solid state lighting success is niche to niche. lighttimes online, december 11, p. 1.hadley, s. w., j. m. macdonald, m. alley, j. tomlinson, m. simpson, and w. miller. (2004). emerging energyefcient technology in buildings: technology characterizations for energy modelling. prepared for the national commission on energy policy. oak ridge national laboratory, u.s. department of energy.herkelrath, m., a. laksberg, and l. woods. (2005). a brighter future: advances in led energy efcient lighting technology. manuscript, university of washington.holtzeakin, d. (2005). economic relationships between the united states and china. congressional budget ofce testimony, statement before the committee on ways and means, u.s. house of representatives, april 14.hong, e., l. a. conroy, and m. j. scholand. (2005). u.s. lighting market characterization, volume ii: energy efcient lighting technology options. technical report prepared for building technologies program, ofce of energy efciency and renewable energy, u.s. department of energy by navigant consulting.howard, w. e. (2004). better displays with organic lms. scienti˚c american 290(2):7681.inquirer. (2004). inventor of led honoured in his own day, strike a light. april 27.japan research and development center of metals™ national project. (2000). light for the 21st century: the development of compound semiconductors for high efciency optoelectronic conversion, year 2000 report of results. (english translation, 2002).ledsmagazine.com. (2005a). china promotes benets of solidstate lighting. available at http://ledsmagazine.com/features/2/2/5/1. accessed june 2005.ledsmagazine.com. (2005b). led industry in taiwan set to grow by 16 percent. available at http://ledsmagazine.com/news/2/3/36/1. accessed april 2007.ledsmagazine.com. (2005c). shenzhen starts to build led manufacturing base. available at http://ledsmagazine.com/news/2/6/22/1. accessed april 2007.ledsmagazine.com. (2006). oled focus for osram opto, efcacy reaches 64 lm/w. available at http://www.ledsmagazine.com/news/3/8/8. accessed february 2008.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.204 innovation in global industriesledsmagazine.com. (2007). seoul and osram sign led patent crosslicense deal with osram opto semiconductors. available at http://ledsmagazine.com/news/4/8/33. accessed october 2007.leonard, r. s. (1992). lighting the path to prot: ge™s control of the electric lamp industry, 18921941. business history review 66(2):305335.lightimes. (2006). walmart sees cold cash in led holiday lighting and led lighting for refrigerator cases. november 21, p.1.lightimes. (2007). quiet big news announces cross licensing of all osram and philips inorganic and organic leds. available at http://www.solidstatelighting.net/lightimes/?date=20070202. accessed february 2, 2007.lightsearch directory. www.lightsearch.com. accessed june 2006.liu, y. s. (2003). iiiv compound semiconductor industry and technology development in taiwan. international conference on compound semiconductor manufacturing. gaasmantech, inc.maccagno, p. (2002). overview of the high brightness led market. in light emitting diodes 2002: the strategic summit for leds in illumination, conference proceedings, san diego, calif., october.macher, j. t., d. c. mowery, and d. a. hodges. (2000). semiconductors. pp. 245285 in u.s. industry in 2000: studies in competitive performance, d. c. mowery, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.mintel. 2003. lightbulbsšu.s.šmay 2003. mintel international group.monopolies commission. (1968). second report on the supply of electric lamps. london: her majesty™s stationery ofce.navigant consulting. (2003a). energy savings potential of solid state lighting in general illumination applications. technical report prepared for building technologies program, ofce of energy efciency and renewable energy, u.s. department of energy.navigant consulting. (2003b). energy savings estimates of light emitting diodes in niche lighting applications. technical report prepared for building technologies program, ofce of energy efciency and renewable energy, u.s. department of energy.olla project report. (2006a). demonstrate a white pin type oled. high brightness oleds for ict & next generation lighting applications funded under the ist priority (contract nr 4607) of the european 6th framework programme. february 2006.olla project report. (2006b). white pinoled with improved polymer injection layer and efciency above 10 lm/w. high brightness oleds for ict & next generation lighting applications funded under the ist priority (contract nr 4607) of the european 6th framework programme. august 2006.osram. (2006). highlights from 100 years of the osram brand. available at http://www.osram.com/cgibin/press/archiv.pl?id=450. accessed december 2006.osram china lighting ltd. available at http://www.osram.com.cn/aboutus/index.jsp (in chinese). accessed december 2006.philips. (2006). annual report 2005.philips. (2006). a history of philips and lighting. a century of innovation at philips lighting. available at http://www.lighting.philips.com/gben/about/subfeature4. php?main=gben&parent =1&id=gbenabout&lang=en. accessed december 2006.physorg.com. (2005). universal display first to achieve 30 lumens per watt white oled. august 5.rpi (rensselaer polytechnic institute). (2006). rensselaer researchers aim to close ﬁgreen gapﬂ in led technology. press release, august 23.sandahl, l. j., t. l. gilbride, m. r. ledbetter, h. e. steward, and c. calwell. (2006). compact fluorescent lighting in america: lessons learned on the way to market. research report prepared for the u.s. department of energy under contract deac0576rlo 1830. pacic northwest national laboratory, richland, wash.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.lighting 205siemens. (2006). lighting. available at http://w4.siemens.de/archiv/en/innovationen/licht.html. accessed december 2006.solidstatelighting.net. (2006). directories. available at http://www.sslighting.net/cts/. accessed june 2006.steele, b. (2006). china pours millions into solidstate lighting program. ledsmagazine.com, july 25. available at http://ledsmagazine.com/news/3/7/21/1. accessed december 2006.stevenson, r. (2005). oilfree korea prioritizes solidstate lighting project. available at http://compoundsemiconductor.net/articles/magazine/11/4/4/1. accessed december 2006.taiwan economic news. (2004a). taiwan poised to retain no. 2 place in world led production. march 24.taiwan economic news. (2004b). taiwanese led suppliers threatened by japanese rivals™ bold expansion plans. april 29.tang, y. k. (2006). lighten up: china™s resolve to embrace energyefcient lighting unleashes a powerful market potential. beijing review, march 2, updated december 13, 2006. available at http://www.bjreview.com.cn/science/txt/200612/13/content506542.htm.toniolo, t. (2006a). shining a light on quality. product design & development 61(11):1415.toniolo, t. (2006b). what determines an led™s quality? electronic products (june).toshiba. (2006). the history of toshiba lighting. available at http://www.tlt.co.jp/tlt/english/company/company.htm and http://www.toshiba.co.jp/worldwide/about/ history.html#1875. accessed december 2006.tsao, j. y., ed. (2002). light emitting diodes (leds) for general illumination: an oida technology roadmap update 2002. optoelectronics industry development association.walker, r. c. (2004). cutting through the buzz production of hbleds in taiwan, south korea and china. compoundseminews. available at: http://www.compoundsemi.com/documnts/article/news/3850.html. accessed may 2006.wang, m., and j. shen. (2005). leds lighting the future: q&a with biingjye lee, president of epistar. ledsmagazine.com, november.whitaker, t., and b. adams. (2002). korea is the new compound semiconductor boom region. compoundsemiconductor.net, april.wikipedia. (2006). lightemitting diode. available at http://www.wikipedia.org/wiki/led. accessed august 30, 2006.williams, b. (2005). a history of light and lighting. edition: 2.3. available at http://www.mts.net/~william5/history/hol.htm. accessed december 2006.yahoo! news australia and new zealand. (2004). china launches 50 semiconductor lighting projects. available at http://au.news.yahoo.com/040722/3/q08l.html, july 22. accessed december 2006.zou, h. (2002). envoy of brightness. shanghai star. january 24.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.207 6 pharmaceuticalsiain m. cockburnboston university and national bureau of economic researchintroductionpharmaceuticals is a highly globalized industry, dominated by multinational companies that engage in signicant business activity in many countries and whose products are distributed and marketed worldwide. historically, the industry has been dominated by vertically integrated rms performing almost all of the activities in the value chain, from basic research through to sales and marketing. but it is far from clear that these activities should necessarily be geographically colocated; these rms have generally operated globally, with many aspects of their operations spanning several countries. in recent decades the industry has undergone dramatic structural changes, with the rise of the biotechnology sector, substantial growth in demand driven by demographics and substitution away from other therapeutic modalities such as surgery, and increased competition from globally active generic manufacturers. these changes have led to some degree of disintegration and geographic dispersion, but innovative activity is nonetheless highly geographically concentrated, re˚ecting the economic signicance of factors such as localized knowledge spillovers and the strength of patent protection, as well as the in˚uence of government policies such as price regulation, state procurement of drugs, and health and safety regulation. rising research and development (r&d) expenditures in the face of health care cost containment pressures and apparently slowing research productivity give pharmaceutical companies a powerful incentive to seek out cost savings and new models for innovation, and to the extent that ﬁoffshoringﬂ can raise research productivity it will generate substantial benets to u.s. consumers and taxpayers. however, although we see some evidence of costdriven geographic redistribution of r&d into new lowcost locations, this process has thus far been limited.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208 innovation in global industriesglobal distribution of activitymany, though not all, new pharmaceutical products are marketed worldwide. ﬁblockbusterﬂ productsšthe relatively small fraction of drugs that realize global sales in the range of billions of dollars per yearšare normally sold in most middle and highincome countries. patients in organisation for economic cooperation and development (oecd) countries ultimately have access to 8090 percent of these products, albeit with longer delays in countries with more stringent price controls or weaker intellectual property (ip) protection. ﬁminorﬂ productsšthose products with global sales below $1 billion per yearšare typically launched in fewer countries; patients in the average country ultimately gain access to well under half of the total number of drugs introduced worldwide within 10 years of their rst sale. new drugs are signicantly less likely to be launched in poorer countries and, even if they do ultimately become available, it can take many years. some countries are noticeably different in these respects; for example, japan and italy have much higher frequencies of singlecountry products.1 countryspecic regulatory requirements and differences in health care delivery systems may require drug companies to make signicant investments in local capacity in regulatory affairs and sales and marketing, even where promotion of pharmaceutical products is highly restricted.drug manufacture is also a multinational phenomenon, with an active global trade in intermediates (specialty chemicals), active pharmaceutical ingredients, and nished products. stringent regulatory requirements for manufacturing imposed by government agencies in major markets such as the united states have extended quality standards worldwide, and several countries have become major loci of manufacturing activity that supplies global markets, notably ireland and puerto rico, as well israel and india for generic products.r&d, by contrast, is much more geographically concentrated; the bulk of all r&d expenditure occurs in the united states, a handful of european countries, and japan. table 1 provides one measure of the global allocation of aggregate industrial pharmaceutical r&d expenditures. unfortunately, reliable nationally comparable statistics on r&d spending in pharmaceuticals are difcult to obtain. national trade associations for the industry often report global rather than national spending by their members, and use varying denitions of r&d. for smaller countries, particularly emerging economies, data are simply unavailable, intermittently available, or of very questionable quality. with these caveats, aggregate statistics based on government censuses may nonetheless be informative, and they suggest a relatively stable share of the allocation of total industry r&d expenditure among developed countries, though even these numbers are difcult to compare due to differences in industry denitions, reporting standards, and data collection methods as well as exchange rate issues.1 see lanjouw (2005), kyle (2006, 2007), and danzon et al. (2003).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 209table 1 business expenditure on pharmaceutical r&d by country1990199520002004total berd at ppp (current million $), of which:16,85324,58733,78146,216usa37.3%41.5%38.3%36.5%eu1539.8%36.3%40.4%39.0% uk12.1%11.8%13.3%11.1% france6.4%8.5%7.8%7.6% germany8.1%5.0%6.7%7.5% italy5.5%2.5%1.9%1.5% sweden2.1%2.7%3.7%3.6%japan16.2%14.9%14.3%14.8%other developed countriesa6.7%6.3%5.8%8.0%ﬁnew europeﬂbš.0.8%0.9%1.2%other emerging economiescš.0.1%0.4%0.6%notes: in 2004, data for australia, france, greece, japan, mexico, sweden, and turkey are inferred from 2003 values and the average annual growth rate (aagr) of berd over the past 5 years in that country. in 2003 data for austria, denmark, greece, and iceland are inferred from adjacent year values and the 5year aagr of berd in that country. the same applies to austria in 1990 and 1995, and belgium in 1990. data for switzerland may not be consistent over time. aaustralia, canada, iceland, korea, norway, singapore, and switzerland. bczech republic, hungary, poland, and slovenia. ctaiwan, mexico, and turkey.sources: oecd main science and technology indicators vol. 2006 release 02, and uk pharmaceutical industry competitiveness task force: competitiveness and performance indicators 2005.data published by oecd on business expenditure on r&d in pharmaceuticals are one basis for examining the global distribution of research effort in the industry. these data are converted to u.s. dollars using purchasing power parity (ppp) exchange rates and are based on the geographical location of spending rather than the ﬁnationalityﬂ of the parent corporation. as shown in table 1, there was almost a threefold increase in total nominal r&d between 1990 and 2004. however, shares by country or region were relatively constant, with both the united states and the european union (eu) countries accounting for about 40 percent each of ﬁworldﬂ r&d expenditure, japan about 15 percent, and other developed countries (principally switzerland) about 7 percent. the emerging economies and former soviet bloc countries present in this database have a small but increasing share of this total. it is important to note, however, that there is some r&d activity in countries that are not included here. india and china may account for as much an additional $1.5 billion or more of r&d spending in 2004,2 and other indicators suggest small, though rapidly growing, levels of 2 oecd reports over $1 billion in pharmaceutical r&d in china in 2000 but other sources suggest much lower gures. the china statistics yearbook on high technology industry 2006 published by china national bureau of statistics, national committee of development and reform, ministry innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210 innovation in global industriesactivity in the russian federation and other eastern european countries such as romania and the slovak republic, in some parts of latin america, as well as countries in southeast asia.note that table 1 excludes contributions to the development of new drugs from publicly nanced r&d and research supported by private nonprot organizations. noncommercial r&d is critically important to the industry and is a major source of ﬁupstreamﬂ technology in the form of knowledge externalities from basic research, or spinoff products and entrepreneurial companies. internationally comparable data on these forms of r&d expenditure are not available for many countries; however, data collected by the oecd suggest that medical sciences account for 20 to 30 percent of academic r&d expenditure in most developed countries. given that the united states accounts for at least onethird of global publicsector research, it seems clear that the u.s. share of the total global research expenditure in pharmaceuticals from all sources would be signicantly higher.3focusing on u.s. pharmaceutical companies, selfreported data compiled by phrma, the u.s. trade association, indicates that a signicant share of r&d spending by u.s.based companies was incurred outside the united states. (phrma members are largely though not exclusively u.s.headquartered companies.) in 2005, these companies spent just under $9 billion outside the united states (21.5 percent of their total r&d spending), almost all of which was in western europe and scandinavia. table 2 summarizes these data.4interestingly, the exu.s. share of total r&d spending has been quite stable: while total nonu.s. r&d spending reported by these companies increased by 633 percent in real terms between 1980 and 2005, over this period the ﬁabroadﬂ share ˚uctuated between 17 and 22 percent, with no obvious trend over time.innovation in the pharmaceutical value chainthe pharmaceutical value chain encompasses many activities, ranging from basic scientic research to marketing and distribution. innovation in the industry is tightly linked to basic biomedical science, and many companies participate actively in basic scientic research that generates new fundamental knowledge, data, and methods. r&d activity is conventionally divided into two phases: of science and technology, for example, reports just under 1.4 billion yuan of intramural r&d in pharmaceuticals in 2000šabout $700 million at ppp. (however, more than 20 percent of this was for ﬁprocessing of traditional chinese herbal medicine.ﬂ) the same source gives total pharmaceutical r&d in 2005 at just under 4 billion yuan, a remarkable increase.3 in 2004, for example, u.s. expenditure on academic r&d was more than $42 billion out of a total for oecd member countries of $125 billion. in addition, the united states has one of the highest shares of medical sciences in total academic r&d. source: oecd main science and technology indicators database.4 comparable data are not available for nonu.s.based companies.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 211table 2 exu.s. r&d spending by phrma members, 2005area$ millionshare (%)africa28.00.3canada479.35.4latin america and caribbean174.92.0asiapacic (except japan)117.51.3india and pakistan10.90.1japan1,025.411.5australia and new zealand144.61.6europe6,524.773.4central and eastern european nations, including russia244.62.8middle east37.70.4uncategorized101.31.1total8,888.9100.0source: phrma prole 2007, table 6.discovery and development. drug discovery includes basic science and research on disease physiology, identication and validation of ﬁdruggable targetsﬂ in the body where therapeutic molecules may affect disease processes, identication and optimization of drug candidates, and preclinical testing. the development phase of research focuses on testing in humans, from the rst smallscale trials directed at establishing basic physiological data in healthy volunteers through to largescale trials on patients with the disease, which are designed to provide data on safety and efcacy to support applications for regulatory approval of the drug. following marketing approval, research often continues to develop improved formulations of the product and to establish safety and efcacy in treatment of additional diseases or patient populations. re˚ecting extraordinary advances in biology since the 1970s, the industry has become progressively more scienceintensive, relying closely on fundamental advances in physiology, biochemistry, and molecular biology rather than ﬁbrute forceﬂ application of largescale resources. if anything, this process has accelerated over the past decade as the industry has focused on complex and systemic diseases such as cancer, autoimmune diseases, and psychiatric conditions. particularly in drug discovery, industrial and publicly funded research efforts are deeply intertwined.5though the bulk of innovative activity is concentrated in drug discovery and development, some r&d is also directed at manufacturing technologies and process improvement. however, stringent regulation of manufacturing processes inhibits experimentation and innovation, and for many drugs manufacturing costs are a small fraction of sales. this limits returns to investing in process innovation 5 see gambardella (1995) and cockburn and henderson (1998). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.212 innovation in global industriesas opposed to investing in developing new products. in some cases advances in manufacturing technology can be important to allow use of advanced delivery systems or new formulations, but for many products innovation in manufacturing and production processes is largely conned to generic producers who compete fundamentally on costs.6 by contrast, for other drugs, particularly the ﬁlargemoleculeﬂ therapeutic proteins based on biotechnology, manufacturing costs are substantial and production processes are more tightly linked to research activity (grabowski et al., forthcoming).while the industry continues to be dominated by large integrated rms that conduct much of this innovative activity inhouse, recent decades have seen signicant vertical restructuring of the industry and these rms increasingly rely on externally sourced r&d in both the discovery and the development phases of research. in drug discovery, an active entrepreneurial sector that bridges academic and publicly funded research and industrial science has become a very important supplier of drug candidates and tools for performing r&d. in the development phase, specialist rms (contract research organizations) now play a signicant role in conducting clinical trials on behalf of the sponsor of a drug. the causes of this restructuring of r&d activity are complex, ranging from changes in patent law and practice that have extended exclusionary ip rights into ﬁupstreamﬂ science, nancial market innovations that have eased access to capital for earlystage companies, and the development of institutions that have encouraged universities and public laboratories to actively promote commercialization.7one consequence of these changes is that pharmaceutical innovation now relies heavily on a complex web of contractual agreements linking a variety of actors at various stages of the drug development process. danzon et al. (2003) found that over onethird of new drugs approved between 1963 and 1999 originated in alliances between industry participants. data on strategic technology alliances show an explosion of collaborative activity in the biomedical sector since the early 1990s. while the total number of new industrial technology alliances captured per year in the catimerit database grew by 76 percent between 1990 and 2003, the number of new alliances per year in ﬁbiotechnologyﬂšwhich likely captures much of the external sourcing of drug discovery by pharmaceutical companiesšincreased by 818 percent.8 furthermore, many of these alliances spanned national boundaries: between 1990 and 2003, 45 percent of the alliances in this database in which u.s.headquartered companies participated were ﬁu.s.onlyﬂ 6 this is not to say that process innovation cannot generate large aggregate savings for the industry. macher and nickerson™s (2006) benchmarking study of pharmaceutical manufacturing suggests that adoption of processanalytical technologies, greater use of it, and complementary work practices could generate cost savings of up to $50 billion per year.7 for a lengthier discussion, see cockburn (2004).8 see national science foundation science indicators 2006, table at0437. note that many of these alliances may be relatively shortlived, and the ﬁcoverageﬂ of alliance formation in this database is difcult to assess.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 213(i.e., all participants had u.s. headquarters), 23 percent of the alliances in which europeanheadquartered companies participated were europeonly, and only 8 percent of the participated alliances in which japan headquartered companies were ﬁdomestic.ﬂ9forces driving location of innovative activitypharmaceutical companies have always been able to operate r&d facilities largely independently from other activities: though a typical large pharmaceutical rm operates as an integrated economic entity, it normally conducts r&d in multiple locations around the world. the nature of the product development process, along with historically strong ip rights, and relatively straightforward licensing practices, has allowed pharmaceutical companies to ﬁdecoupleﬂ manufacturing and marketing from r&d. this has been the case for many decades, but increased vertical disintegration in r&d activities since the mid1980s has further relaxed organizational constraints on the location of research activity, permitting extensive geographic reorganization of r&d across countries and regions as well as vertical reorganization within rms. in the united states, for example, ﬁupstreamﬂ rms specializing in new technologies for drug discovery are now often located in different locations (such as boston and the san francisco bay area) than those historically used by the ﬁbig pharmaﬂ rms concentrated in philadelphia, new jersey, connecticut, and the midwest.10many factors drive these r&d location decisions, and the observed geographical distribution of research re˚ects complex tradeoffs among them. one the one hand, economies of scale and scope in performing r&d, the presence of internal knowledge spillovers, and costs of coordinating activity across dispersed units suggest that, all else equal, rms should limit geographic dispersion of r&d. furthermore, some locations may be more intrinsically economically attractive because of lower costs, access to government subsidies, or favorable tax treatment of r&d. proximity to centers of academic excellence and other forms of noncommercial research also appears to convey benets such as raised research productivity (see furman et al., forthcoming). on the other hand, these economic factors, which tend to concentrate r&d, are offset by political considerations. in some countries, pharmaceutical companies face strong political pressure to maintain domestic r&d. some countries, such as the united kingdom, have explicitly linked the stringency of price regulation to local r&d spending 9 these marked differences in alliance activity are presumably driven by the relative concentration of potential partners (i.e., biotech companies in the united states).10 it is unclear whether the extent of vertical specialization and accompanying geographic reallocation of effort are more or less pronounced in the united states than elsewhere. the united states has attracted the lion™s share of investment in new enterprises in biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, but there is no evidence that u.s.headquartered rms rely more or less heavily on external r&d than, say, those headquartered in europe.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214 innovation in global industrieslevels; in other cases, such as in canada, local r&d spending re˚ects a political bargain to avoid compulsory licensing.historically, the united states has been perceived by the industry as a very attractive location for pharmaceutical r&d because of its very limited use of price regulation and government purchasing, and its strong patent rights.11 in contrast, in the late 1990s, eu governments became very concerned that overly aggressive price controls and hard bargaining by state purchasers were driving away investment in pharmaceutical r&d and adversely affecting the competitiveness of eubased companies, though there is little evidence (see table 1) of any major shift in r&d spending away from europe. episodes such as canada™s experience with compulsory licensing of pharmaceuticals in the 1970s and 1980s, or more recent examples such as the periodic heated disputes between oecdbased companies and governments of developing countries over pricing of antiretroviral drugs, suggest that r&d location decisions can be quite sensitive to government policies directed at lowering the cost of acquiring pharmaceuticals. notwithstanding its long tradition of excellence in medical and pharmaceutical research, and substantial historical investments by multinational drug companies, canada experienced a steep decline in domestic r&d activity in pharmaceuticals when it introduced its compulsory licensing regime. only when full patent rights were restored, and a relatively loose drug price regulation scheme was instituted, did commercial r&d spending return to previous levels. countries such as australia, which have relatively stringent drug price controls, continue to face major challenges in attracting signicant r&d investment by multinational drug companies, in spite of strong academic research capabilities, an attractive business environment, and substantial public support of commercial biomedical research.beyond these ﬁpriceﬂ drivers, several other factors have been identied as in˚uencing r&d location decisions. these often work through indirect, or unpriced, effects such as knowledge spillovers that are conveyed by ﬁopenﬂ publications, geographic proximity, or communication through informal professional networks rather through economic transactions. for example, drug discovery labs sites tend to specialize in therapeutic areas or scientic disciplines12 and, since 11 the hatchwaxman act lowers the costs of generic entry and provides incentives to challenge pharmaceutical patents, but it also provides certain protections to patent holders. the united states also has provisions that extend the duration of pharmaceutical patents to offset time lost waiting for regulatory approval.12 for example, in 2000 hoffman la roche operated six major drug discovery facilities: kamakura, japan; penzberg, germany; basel, switzerland; welwyn garden city, united kingdom; nutley, new jersey; and palo alto, california. a research center in basel focused on basic research in genomics, proteomics, and bioinformatics, while the kamakura, penzberg, and nutley labs specialized in oncology, basel and nutley in metabolic disorders and vascular diseases, basel and palo alto in central nervous system disorders, welwyn garden city in virology, and palo alto in in˚ammation and genitourinary diseases. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 215proximity to publicly funded science appears to be an important determinant of research productivity, these often re˚ect local academic centers of excellence in particular elds. furman et al. (forthcoming) show that patenting by pharmaceutical companies is positively correlated with the volume of academic publications by ﬁlocalﬂ publicsector scientists.13 the very substantial levels of publicly funded biomedical research in the united states, the united kingdom, and some other countries has therefore played an important role in sustaining similarly high levels of commercial investment in drug discovery in these countries.more generally, like other knowledgeintensive activities, discovery research appears to display substantial agglomeration externalities. drug discovery activity tends to ﬁclusterﬂ in a small number of locations around the world: many major discovery labs are located in the new york/new jersey/connecticut standard metropolitan statistical area, boston, the san francisco bay area, the suburbs of philadelphia, research triangle in north carolina, the rhine valley, the suburbs of london, stockholm, and tokyo/kansei. these are conspicuously not lowcost locations, so this clustering suggests substantial offsetting economic benets derived from being colocated with other rms. beyond the role of localized knowledge spillovers, benets from colocation with other pharmaceutical rms include access to skilled labor and ﬁinfrastructureﬂ in the form of specialized services and suppliers, and efcient interaction with collaboration partners.14a nal factor that may affect r&d location decisions is the strength of ip protection. though there is no obvious connection between the degree of patent protection in the local product market and the productivity of r&d conducted in any given country, the nature of a country™s ip regime appears to affect multinationals™ willingness to conduct r&d activities there. this may be because weak patent protection for products often correlates with weak legal protection of other forms of ip such as trade secrets and associated contractual agreements with employees and suppliers, and limited avenues to enforce these rights. both patent and nonpatent protection of ip play an important role in maintaining exclusive access to, and control over, proprietary knowledge, and in countries with weak ip companies may have wellfounded concerns about ﬁleakageﬂ of valuable information to local competitors. zhao (forthcoming) argues that weak 13 to some degree, drug discovery labs operated by different rms within the same region appear to specialize in particular therapeutic classes or scientic disciplines. cockburn et al. (2002) report, for example, that for their sample of rms commercial r&d in new jersey was primarily, though not exclusively, focused on cardiovascular therapies, whereas that conducted in the suburbs of london was primarily in antipsychotics. 14 returning to the example of hoffman la roche in 2000, of nine important collaborators identied by the company, tularik, affymetrix, clontech, and incyte (plus its majorityowned subsidiary genentech) were geographically proximate to its palo alto lab, curagen and progenics were close to its nutley lab, and vernalis, imperial college, and oxford university were close to welwyn garden city. in a study of crossregional collaborations by a broad set of biomedical technologies, zhao and islam (2007) document increasing geographic dispersion of r&d activities of large rms, but also increased internalization of knowledge spillovers within these rms. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.216 innovation in global industriesip regimes need not deter r&d investment by multinationals: absent strong ip rights, companies can nonetheless develop alternative mechanisms for realizing returns on innovation and ip. these mechanisms include rapid ﬁinternalizationﬂ of knowledge through efcient internal organizational processes and control of complementary assets and may make it possible to protably exploit low prices of r&d inputs and underutilized domestic innovation capabilities. however, this argument is most appealing for technologies that have a substantial tacit component, are strongly complementary to other protected assets held by the rm, and have rapid development cycles. this is not the case for pharmaceutical r&d, where results from r&d are often easy to ﬁexternalizeﬂ and imitate, and product life cycles are measured in decades.not surprisingly, therefore, r&d activity in pharmaceuticals has historically been concentrated in countries with strong and enforceable ip and has only just begun to grow in countries that have recently adopted oecdstyle patent systems under the provisions of the traderelated aspects of intellectual propoerty rights (trips) agreement. compliance with trips requires all world trade organization (wto) members to (ultimately) adopt key features of the patent systems of wealthy industrialized countries, such as a 20year term, nondiscrimination across elds of technology and nationality of applicants, and effective enforcement procedures. strong patent protection for pharmaceuticals is controversial in many of these countries (see discussion of india which follows), and the degree to which domestic political pressures will limit the enforceability of patents, or push the limits of the trips agreement by, for example, instituting compulsory licensing of drugs, remains to be seen. patent rights obtained by multinationals in countries such as india give these companies the ability to exclude generics and to set prices above marginal cost. but patents also provide protection for domestic rms conducting r&d, and political choices to weaken or limit patent protection on the products of multinationals may have serious consequences for nascent research sectors in these economies.impact of industry restructuring on innovationstructural change in the pharmaceutical industry has given pharmaceutical companies more opportunities and much greater ˚exibility to improve r&d performance by reallocating r&d effort between internal and external projects, and across different locations both within countries and around the world. whether greater globalization of r&d has been caused by this vertical disaggregation of the industryšor vice versašis an open question. clearly the two phenomena are closely linked and, beyond the industryspecic factors that have driven vertical disaggregation discussed earlier, more general phenomena affecting many industries (such as improvements in communication technologies, greater international mobility of labor and capital, innovation in capital markets, and international harmonization of ip rules following the trips agreement) have also played a innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 217role in creating new opportunities for collaborative r&d and specialist providers of r&d inputs.there are many reasons to believe that industry restructuring and globalization may generate substantial gains in r&d performance. r&d outcomes depend critically on resource allocation (which projects to pursue, how much to spend, which to shut down), which at one time was done almost entirely through internal decisions of large vertically integrated rms. in today™s industry, market transactions and the price mechanism play a much greater role in resource allocation, with specialization and competition in the supply of research inputs and services. capital markets play an important role in pricing risk and provide highpowered incentives to entrepreneurial rms, and strong ip rights support a global ﬁmarket for technology.ﬂ these powerful economic forces may well result in signicantly faster/better/cheaper drug development.on the other hand, industry restructuring and globalization may be responsible for some inefciencies that limit any gains in r&d performance. there is no guarantee that the market for technology (i.e., licensing and collaboration deals) creates reliable price signals, and marketdriven resource allocation may therefore generate worse results than those obtained by the internal capital markets of large rms.15 the struggle between entrants and incumbents in the industry may also be wasting signicant resources in bargaining costs; payments to intermediaries such as lawyers and bankers; extra organizational overhead dedicated to seeking out, structuring, and operating collaborative ventures; or in defensive investments to improve bargaining and so forth.16while the ultimate impact of restructuring and globalization on r&d performance will surely take decades to become apparent, it is clear that this more open competitive environment presents severe challenges. heightened competitive pressure, greater cost transparency, and global competition have contributed to an extraordinarily high failure rate among wouldbe entrants to the industry. of the many thousands of wellnanced entrants with strong patent portfolios and exciting science that have attempted to gain a foothold in the industry as a supplier of technology or competitor to the established multinational incumbent rms, only a few hundred have survived. the prospects for new players in the industry based in emerging countries are therefore mixed. success in the global pharmaceutical industry requires (among other things) substantial and sustained investments in r&d capacity, ip portfolios, and access to leadingedge science. it will likely take many years before new competitors appear on the world stage to present a serious headtohead challenge to existing oecdbased rms.15 markets for ﬁknowledge goodsﬂ have long been understood to be subject to numerous forms of market failure such as imperfect and asymmetric information, nonexcludability, limited numbers of buyers and sellers, exernalities, and so forth. 16 see cockburn (2004, 2007) for further discussion.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.218 innovation in global industriesevidence on offshoring of pharmaceutical r&drapid growth in technological capabilities in lowcost emerging economies is presenting new opportunities and challenges for pharmaceutical companies. some geographic redistribution of r&d activity does appear to be taking place. on the one hand, companies located in countries such as india and china are performing more inhouse r&d oriented toward developing new drugs, rather than reverseengineering existing products or improving production efciency. on the other hand, re˚ecting the general trend in the industry toward greater specialization and external sourcing of r&d services, oecdbased companies are beginning to look to lowcost countries as suppliers of contract research services, and growing numbers of clinical trials are being conducted in emerging economies. india and china are the two countries most frequently mentioned in this regard; however, by some indicators signicant growth in activity also appears to be taking place in some eastern european countries, argentina, brazil, taiwan, south africa, and israel.data on this activity are limited. as discussed earlier, internationally and intertemporally consistent aggregate statistics on r&d expenditure in this industry are often not available for lowcost locations, and their reliability is difcult to assess. the experience of specic countries may nonetheless be informative, and the case of india is presented in the next section.case study: india™s pharmaceutical industryindian pharmaceutical companies have attracted much attention. chaudhuri (2005) discusses the development of the indian pharmaceutical industry in detail, charting the rise of companies such as ranbaxy and dr. reddy to their current position as signicant global players in generic drug manufacturing. many of these companies have developed advanced capabilities in lowcost manufacturing, re˚ecting local expertise in chemical engineering and a historically processoriented patent regime. (the success of these companies also re˚ects their mastery of the regulatory approval process for generic drugs, and associated litigation, in foreign markets.) sustained protability, together with the introduction of domestic product patents for pharmaceuticals in 2005 as part of the trips agreement,17 has prompted some of these companies to increase r&d spending and take on drug development projects. chatterjee (2007) analyzes nancial statements of indian pharmaceutical manufacturers and nds very high growth rates of r&d spending for the 4050 rms that have obtained u.s. patents and/or food and drug administration (fda) approval of manufacturing processes, and attract the 17 the trips agreement was reached as part of the uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations in the mid1990s. india and other countries with weak or nonexistent ip regimes agreed to put in place oecdstyle patent protection by 2005 as a condition of retaining full participation in the wto.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 219attention of domestic stock analysts. these rms increased their r&dtosales ratio by a factor of 10 to 20 between 1990 and 2000, and doubled it again between 2000 and 2005 to reach respectable average levels of 56 percent of sales. among these, a handful of ﬁeliteﬂ rms have raised r&d spending to 10 percent per year or more in 2005, with compound average growth rates of r&d spending over the past decade of 3050 percent per year.18some of these rms have made signicant investments in productoriented research since the mid1990s, with some proportion of increased r&d expenditure directed toward generating novel compounds to be tested as drug candidates (often referred to as new chemical entities [nces]). as of early 2006, more than 60 molecules developed by indian companies were reported to be in late stages of preclinical research, and 16 had reached the clinical trials stage, though none have yet completed phase iii or been approved by the fda.19 indian rms have also entered into a small number of highly publicized product development partnerships with multinational r&doriented rms: examples include dr. reddy™s outlicensing of diabetes candidates to novo nordisk and novartis in 1997, glenmark™s 2004 outlicensing agreement with forest labs to develop a candidate drug for asthma, and nicholas piramal™s 2007 agreement with eli lilly to conduct clinical trials and regional marketing for various candidates for treatment of metabolic diseases. as with such deals in oecd countries, many of these agreements have been terminated or otherwise failed to generate signicant licensing revenue for the indian partner (frontline, 2002). note also that all of these nces appear to be ﬁsmallmoleculeﬂ chemistrybased drug candidates rather than the ﬁlargemoleculeﬂ products characteristic of leadingedge biotechnology research.indian pharmaceutical companies are also reported to be playing a growing role as contract research providers to researchbased multinationals. indian companies have strong capabilities in medicinal and analytical chemistry, process engineering, and organic synthesis developed originally to support generic manufacturing. though the nature of the r&d activities covered by these contract research agreements are unclear, expertise in chemistrydriven r&d activities positions these companies well to support the sourcing company™s core product innovations by developing efcient manufacturing processes, ﬁtweakingﬂ candidate molecules for better bioavailability, or developing formulations optimized for specic marketing purposes. indian companies are also developing expertise in toxicology and animal studies to support preclinical research, and total expenditure on clinical research in india has been estimated as $100 million per year for 2005. small but signicant investments are being made by oecdbased compa18 some caution may be warranted in assessing these data. accounting standards for dening r&d may vary over time, some of the growth in expenditure may re˚ect cost in˚ation, and a certain amount may re˚ect ﬁwindow dressingﬂ to attract attention from outside investors or potential joint venture partners.19 ﬁpharmaceuticalsﬂ report by ernst & young for the india brand equity foundation, 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.220 innovation in global industriesnies in captive research facilities located in india and in longterm collaborative discovery partnerships with indian companies.but though these ventures may signal a new phase in the development of india™s pharmaceutical industry, with an increasingly signicant role in global innovation, it is important to note that the scale of this activity is currently very small. to put india™s current scale of activity in drug discovery and development (at most 100 earlystage candidates since 200020) in perspective, it is worth noting that worldwide several thousand molecules enter preclinical research and phase i trials every year. the total expenditure on pharmaceutical r&d in india from all sources is growing rapidly but is unlikely to exceed $500 million per year in the near future, which is less than 1 percent of expenditure in oecd countries. notwithstanding substantially cheaper inputs to r&d in india (labor costs for skilled scientists are claimed to be as little as oneseventh of u.s. levels), the scale of india™s r&d effort is still very small.complying with the trips agreement, india has now implemented an oecdstyle patent system. effects on domestic prices are as yet unclear, but availability of product patents appears to be increasing the number of drugs available to indian consumers and decreasing the amount of time elapsed between their rst worldwide launch and availability in the indian market.21 patent protection may also be playing a role both in stimulating r&d by domestic rms and in supporting multinational companies™ participation in contract research agreements and licensing deals. but drug patents are politically controversial in india, and it remains to be seen whether the operation of the indian patent ofce and enforcement in domestic courts will provide adequate ip protection for product innovators.22other evidence on the scope and volume of global r&dthough comprehensive and reliable data on global r&d expenditure are not available, the location of discovery and development activity can be tracked using proxy indicators such as patent applications, academic publications, or databases that document clinical trial sites.20 hsbc securities, cited in ibef (2006).21 see lanjouw (2007).22 novartis is currently ghting a closely watched legal battle to secure indian patent rights on gleevec, its breakthrough cancer drug. novartis™ application for patent rights in india was rejected by the indian patent ofce in 2006. ﬁthe patent ofce ruling in the gleevec case has sent two farreaching signals on the new tripscompliant law: first, that india will not grant product patent [sic] for any drug unless it was invented after january 1, 1995. second, that the standards set by the indian law for grant of product patent for drugs could be more exacting than even those of advanced countriesﬂ (times of india, february 24, 2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 221discoverypatent applications provide some information on the location of drug discovery activity. because the united states is largest single pharmaceutical market, u.s. patent protection is likely to be sought for most promising drug candidates. therefore, both the location of the patent assignee and the address of the inventors listed on u.s. patents are useful indicators of the location of drug discovery activity.23 table 3 shows the geographic distribution over time of granted u.s. applications for pharmaceutical patents assigned to corporations. these data are not comprehensive, since they cover only a single class of patents (ipc a61k), and the sample excludes patents where the country of the assignee cannot be determined. data are tabulated by the date of application, which induces truncation of the sample in later years to due the application/grant lag.patenting in this sample is dominated by u.s. and european companies. although the number of patents in this sample that are assigned to corporations based in india and china has grown quite rapidly, as the table shows this growth is from such a small base that the share of companies based in these countries remains very small.table 4 shows results from a slightly different exercise, breaking down the regional share of drug discovery activity based on the location of the inventors listed on drug patents. again, although the volume of activity in india and china has grown very rapidly since 1990, it still represents a tiny share of total activity. in 1990, for example, france alone accounted for 661 instances of ﬁinventorship,ﬂ whereas india had 20 and china had 22.these indicators provide little evidence of substantial global relocation of activity in drug discovery. as more current data become available, we are likely to see substantially increased levels of activity in countries like india and china. but although activity in these countries is growing quite quickly, it will be many years before the share of the locations where drug discovery has traditionally been concentrated is materially affected.developmenta somewhat different picture emerges, however, for clinical development. for this aspect of innovative activity in pharmaceuticals, the location of clinical trial sites provides some insight into the global distribution of activity. berndt, cockburn, and thiers (2007) report results from tabulating the location of more than 65,000 trial sites participating in the clinical trials that have been registered on clinicaltrials.gov since 2001. table 5 summarizes this measure of clinical development activity. because registration is not compulsory for all trials, the 23 ﬁhome biasﬂ may in˚ate the u.s. share, and language barriers or lack of experience with the u.s. patent system may result in underrepresentation of some countries.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.222 innovation in global industriestable 3 location of corporations obtaining u.s. pharmaceutical patentsapplication year1990199520002002total number of patents in sample3,4149,2777,0733,257regional share of patents based on location of assignee (%) united states55.163.358.357.2 eu1524.621.722.322.8 japan15.37.59.09.5 other oecd2.85.06.26.5 india0.00.10.71.3 china0.10.00.10.2notes: table entries based on the count of u.s. patents in ipc class a61k assigned to corporations whose country can be identied. source: author™s calculations based on u.s. patent and trademark ofce (uspto) data.table 4 location of inventors on u.s. pharmaceutical patentsapplication year199019952000total pharmaceutical inventorshipsaregional share (%)10,58230,135b23,923 united states42.856.754.4 eu1528.625.024.8 japan21.210.410.7 other oecd3.15.36.0 india0.20.21.1 china0.20.10.2 other4.03.02.8 aan inventorship is an instance of an inventor being listed on a patent application; therefore, a single patent with three inventors will generate three observations. b1995 saw a surge of applications at the uspto in order to secure various procedural advantages before the passage of patent reform legislation.source: author™s calculations based on uspto data. table entries are based on the number of instances of inventorship for patents falling in ipc class a61k, by country of the inventor and date of application for the patent.table 5 clinical trial sites by regionyear2000200120022003200420052006total sites2,3854,1396,6778,03414,22423,53633,045share of (%) united states51.448.850.949.154.649.545.2 eu1532.229.428.925.723.126.326.8 japan0.00.01.62.12.02.52.7 other oecd7.58.210.38.07.48.07.2 india0.00.10.30.80.70.91.0 china0.00.40.20.50.30.50.9notes: table entries are based on the number of sites participating in clinical trials registered on clinicaltrials.gov. the average number of sites per trial is 7.6.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 223extent to which these data are representative of all trials is unclear. (in 1997 the fda began requiring ex ante registration of trials for lifethreatening diseases, and community norms have encouraged participation in trial registries, but it was only when a consortium of editors of the major medical journals [icmje] agreed in 2004 to require ex ante registration of trials as a condition of publication that the volume of registrations appears to have begun to approach full coverage.) growth in the total number of trials, particularly in the early years of this sample, largely re˚ects increases in the coverage rate rather than increases in the volume of activity. but provided nonregistration does not vary systematically across countries, shares of activity are nonetheless a reasonable metric for the extent of a country or region™s involvement in clinical research.as table 5 shows, the united states, the eu, and japan continue to account for the bulk of clinical trial activity, but india and china had a signicant and rapidly growing share of activity.overall, emerging economies and lowcost locations are a relatively small share of global activity, but this is changing rapidly. table 6 shows the share of global trial sites by geopolitical region and by traditional versus emerging countries. in 2002, more than 90 percent of trial sites were located in ﬁtraditionalﬂ countries (north america, western europe, and scandinavia), but this proportion has fallen rapidly in recent years, with the share of nontraditional countries in the total number of trial sites rising from 7 to 17 percent. growth in this form of r&d activity has been particularly strong in eastern europe and asia. between 2003 and 2006, for example, malaysia, philippines, bulgaria, chile, turkey, argentina, the russian federation, thailand, mexico, and latvia more than quadrupled their share of global trial sites, and india and china™s shares more than tripled.in a regression analysis of factors driving the global allocation of clinical trials, berndt, cockburn, and thiers (2006) nd that changes in countries™ share of table 6 regional share of worldwide clinical trial sites (%)year20022003200420052006north america58.254.159.854.349.5western europe30.626.724.127.427.6oceania3.34.03.24.54.6latin america1.73.53.73.34.3eastern europe3.87.44.95.98.1asia1.13.12.53.24.0middle east0.30.30.70.70.6africa1.00.80.91.01.0ﬁtraditionalﬂ countries92.485.087.486.482.0ﬁemergingﬂ countries7.114.211.812.617.1others0.50.90.91.00.9source: clinicaltrials.gov.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.224 innovation in global industriestrial sites were negatively associated with a measure of cost per patient, but positively associated with changes in the strength of patent protection for biomedical inventions. two or fourfold differences in the cost per patient of conducting trials in emerging countries rather than in traditional countries thus appear to be driving a substantial expansion of activity in these locations. interestingly the share of emerging countries in this activity is highest for large, conrmatory trials (phase iii of the drug development process) and lowest for small, earlystage trials that are more closely connected with basic biomedical science, suggesting that some types of clinical research are much less strongly in˚uenced by the clustering and proximity to leadingedge academic research effects that drive the location of drug discovery. turning to ip issues, the positive association found here between changes in patent protection of biomedical inventions and growth in share of global clinical trials may re˚ect concerns of both multinational and domestic r&d performers about imitation of their products and their ability to appropriate returns from innovation. even though sales in these countries are only a very small share of the global pharmaceutical market, and their current protability is therefore unlikely to be a major driver of r&d decisions, it is clear that they have huge potential for future growth in sales. changes in patent protection may therefore be important as a guarantee of future protability in much larger markets, attracting r&d, which will realize returns far in the future. one critical connection between local r&d and local future sales may be the role that latestage trials can play in building future demandšby familiarizing key opinion leaders in the local medical community with a product, the sponsor of the trial may realize higher volumes or better reimbursement prices once the product is launched.one question of great interest is whether participation in global clinical trials has ﬁspilloverﬂ effects in the sense of building local capacity to conduct independent clinical research in support of domestic drug development programs. clearly, sustained participation in this activity will allow clinical researchers to gain experience, credibility, and skills, and to promote development of supporting infrastructure and services. but it is likely to take considerable time before emerging countries are able to design and conduct complex trials on a routine basis and develop competitive capabilities in ﬁtranslational medicineﬂšthe benchtobedside combination of clinical investigation with basic research that plays a critical role in drug development. this type of r&d activity relies heavily on participation by skilled physicians, who are a very scarce resource in emerging countries relative to medical needs. substantial expansion of clinical research will require these countries to make signicant investments in medical schools and training programs in order to meet increased demand both for routine care for larger and wealthier populations and for an emerging clinical research sector. it is far from clear how fast or extensive this supply response will be, or what will be the impact of rapid economic growth and consequent expansion of health care on the market for physician services.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 225manufacturing and process innovationwhile product innovation remains the major focus of the industry, it is worth noting that process innovation capabilities may play an increasingly important role in the future. generic products account for a very large proportion of drug consumption, and this will likely grow in the future as patents expire for the current set of ﬁblockbusterﬂ products. suppliers of these products compete on costs, and indian manufacturers in particular appear to have acquired worldleading capabilities in developing lowcost manufacturing processes, which positions them to play a dominant role in supplying lowprice products to both developed and developing countries. looking further into the future, new generations of largemolecule biotech drugs will likely displace the current set of chemistrybased products, particularly for diseases such as cancer. but these drugs are notoriously expensive and difcult to produce, suggesting an important future role for manufacturing innovation that should bring costs down to the point at which these products can be protably supplied to large lowerincome markets. clusters of activity and development of these manufacturing innovation skills are already occurring in ﬁnewﬂ locations such as singapore, which may become important locations for this type of manufacturing in the same way that they have for other technologies such as semiconductors.discussion and conclusionsglobalization is not a new phenomenon in pharmaceuticals. at least since the 1950s, innovation in this industry has been geographically dispersed, with pharmaceutical companies conducting r&d in multiple locations around the world. over the past 25 years, however, gains from specialization in different aspects of the drug discovery and development process, changes in ip rules, easy access to venture capital, and the renement of collaborative business models have driven greater vertical disaggregation of the industry, along with greater geographic dispersion of r&d. pharmaceutical companies now have more opportunities and much greater ˚exibility to reallocate r&d effort between internal and external projects and among different locations both within countries and around the world. while the industry continues to be dominated by vertically integrated multinational rms whose activities span the entire chain of research, from basic science to postapproval epidemiology, these rms compete, collaborate, and interact with a wide variety of new actors.this interaction is not conned by national boundaries, and the development of highquality, lowcost research capabilities outside the united states and europe presents signicant opportunities for multinational r&dbased pharmaceutical companies to outsource some aspects of the innovation process. the available evidence suggests that emerging countries are playing a rapidly growing role in the global research effort, albeit currently very small compared to the scale of innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226 innovation in global industriesactivity in the united states and europe. in large part, this role has been enabled by structural change in the industry creating opportunities for collaboration and markets for specialized skills and services. but it has also been facilitated by the general trends in the world economy that are driving globalization of many industries, including factors such as improvements in communication technologies, greater international mobility of labor and capital, accumulation of human capital and business infrastructure in lowcost emerging economies, and harmonization of ip rules following the trips agreement.from a u.s. perspective, this ﬁoffshoringﬂ of pharmaceutical r&d has potential benets to be considered as well as the costs from any loss of the stable, highwage employment characteristic of this industry. the pharmaceutical industry currently faces what some commentators have termed a ﬁproductivity crisis.ﬂ the number of new drugs approved each year appears to be stagnating, with limited progress made in recent decades in treating some major diseases, yet r&d expenditure has been growing very rapidly. one widely used indicator of research productivity is the cost per new drug approved, accounting for failed projects and the time value of money, which has been rising at an alarming rate. the most recent in a series of studies from the tufts center for the study of drug development (dimasi et al., 2003) estimates the present value of r&d expenditures to bring a new drug to market to be $802 million per fdaapproved new drug. in constant year 2000 dollars, this $802 million is more than double the $318 million estimated in an earlier 1991 study, and almost six times larger than the $138 million gure obtained in a 1979 analysis. recent industry estimates are now well in excess of $1 billion per successful new drug.there are good reasons to believe that this ﬁcrisisﬂ may not be as severe as some media accounts suggest. for example, simply counting the number of new drugs approved is not very helpful if the ﬁqualityﬂ of each new drug measured in terms of health impact is changing over time.24 nonetheless, there are serious grounds for concern. to support these continued investments in r&d in the face of these rising costs, pharmaceutical companies need to realize very substantial sales revenues, which may be difcult to sustain in the face of political pressure around the world to restrain increases in health care expenditure. to the extent that the drug development process can be made more efcient through greater ˚exibility in resource allocation, more experimentation in business models, and greater use of lowcost inputs, offshoring of some aspects of r&d has the welcome potential to reduce the cost of developing new drugs.furthermore, at least in the short term, there are limits to the types of activity that are likely to be relocated outside the industry™s traditional locations. substantial offshoring of r&d activities is most likely to occur where the research activity is relatively routinized, uses large amounts of relatively lowskilled labor, and does not need to be tightly integrated or colocated with other r&d 24 see cockburn (2007) for a fuller discussion.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 227activities. largescale, latestage clinical trials with ﬁlowtechﬂ endpoints (such as measuring blood pressure) are examples of this kind of activity, and indeed the global allocation of research effort in these areas shows signs of a signicant response to cost differences across countries. as suggested earlier, greater use of, for example, india™s chemistryoriented r&d capacity presents a ﬁwinwinﬂ opportunity for u.s.based companies to improve r&d efciency by contracting out relatively routine work on process engineering, compound synthesis, and medicinal chemistry while focusing on other aspects of r&d.these other aspects of the innovation processšless routinized, more scienceintensivešare much less likely to relocate to lowcost locations. decisions about where to locate scienceintensive drug discovery appear to be much less sensitive to labor costs and may be driven primarily by factors such as proximity to leadingedge academic research and ﬁclusterﬂ externalities. the benets of colocating r&d labs along with competitors in locations such as baltimore/washington, boston, or the san francisco bay area, which feature agglomerations of commercial research, university science, and academic medical centers, coupled with ﬁthickﬂ local markets for specialized inputs and human capital, are very substantial. any labor cost savings from relocating r&d labs to countries such as india and china are unlikely to compensate for the negative effect of losing access to these benets.substantial geographic redistribution of core r&d effort in this industry therefore seems likely to occur only if and when these offshore locations develop their own critical mass of academic biomedical science and supporting complementary infrastructure. some countries, such as singapore and taiwan, have put in place major programs to create research infrastructure and attract leading academic researchers, but this will take signicant amounts of time and money. emerging countries such as india and china, which have pockets of academic excellence in biomedicine but have had historically relatively low levels of public support for biomedical research, face an uphill struggle to develop this national capacity. the united states enjoys a dominant position in the world in publicly funded biomedical research. provided u.s. taxpayers continue to fund this level of support, and public policy sustains the institutions of open science that support the productivity and vitality of academic science, the united states seems likely to remain the location of choice for scienceintensive pharmaceutical r&d.open science, with its curiositydriven, investigatorinitiated agenda and priority and publicationbased incentives, is a distinctive and vital component of the biomedical innovation system. but, particularly in the united states, science has become increasingly ﬁpropertizedﬂ by the extension of the patent system into basic research and the enthusiastic participation of universities and individual academics in patenting and entrepreneurial activity in life sciences. while this activity has clear benets in terms of facilitating technology transfer and attracting venturebacked investment, it also carries with it less obvious costs in terms innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.228 innovation in global industriesof weakening the institutions of open science, limiting access to research tools and data, and forcing congruence between the agenda of academic research and commercially attractive areas of inquiry. the longrun competitiveness of the u.s. pharmaceutical industry may therefore require careful management by policy makers of con˚icts between exclusionoriented ip rights and traditional academic norms.patent policy may play a somewhat different role in in˚uencing r&d location decisions through its effect, in conjunction with price regulation and government purchasing, on domestic returns to pharmaceutical r&d. as discussed earlier, policy efforts to restrain pharmaceutical spending in the united statesšfor example, through changes to the medicare drug benet or reform of the hatchwaxman actšshould therefore carefully consider the impact of such measures on r&d location decisions. of course, government actions elsewhere in the world directed at lowering drug prices may work in the opposite direction. ﬁunenthusiasticﬂ implementation of the trips patent provisions in emerging countries and unpredictable operation of these new patent systems in practice may cause multinationals to rethink decisions to expand r&d activity in these countries. the closely watched gleevec case in india has major implications for the future of pharmaceutical r&d in that country, whether performed by domestic competitors on their own account or in partnership with multinationals. similarly, current efforts by the government of thailand to force one u.s.based company (abbott) to lower the price of some its drugs to thai consumers are unlikely to encourage multinational companies to engage in r&d activities in thailand in the future. widespread actions of this kind may have a signicant negative impact on offshoring trends.major changes in the existing international allocation of innovative effort in the pharmaceutical industry are unlikely, particularly in the short run. compared to other technologies, this industry moves relatively slowly: very long product development cycles, and necessarily conservative organizational structures and processes imposed by health and safety regulation, make it difcult for pharmaceutical companies to make large, transformative changes to their business as fast as some rms can in other industries. recent rapid expansion of research capacity in lowcost emerging countries will benet u.s.based multinationals (and u.s. consumers of pharmaceuticals) by lowering r&d costs in some activities, but this rapid expansion is highly unlikely to cause a ﬁtsunamiﬂ of professional job losses in pharmaceutical research. in the long run, emerging countries may succeed in developing a large enough base of local academic and publicly funded biomedical science to threaten the substantial competitive advantage that the united states currently enjoys in this area. commercial r&d location decisions are tightly linked to publicly funded science; therefore, it will be necessary for public policy in the united states to play close attention to vitality and viability of academic and governmentsupported biomedical science if the united states is to retain global leadership in the pharmaceutical industry.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.pharmaceuticals 229acknowledgmentsi thank ernst berndt, jeff furman, jeffrey macher, and david mowery for helpful discussions and suggestions.referencesberndt, e., i. cockburn, and f. thiers. (2006). intellectual property rights and the globalization of clinical trials for new medicines. seminar presentation, rand institution, santa monica, november 2006.berndt, e., i. cockburn, and f. thiers. (2007). the globalization of clinical trials for new medicines into emerging economies: where are they going and why? conference paper, unumerit conference on micro evidence on innovation in developing countries, maastricht, may 31, 2007.chatterjee, c. (2007). fundamental patent reform and the private returns to r&dšthe case of indian pharmaceuticals. manuscript, heinz school, carnegie mellon university.chaudhuri, s. (2005). the wto and india™s pharmaceuticals industry: patent protection trips and developing countries. new delhi: oxford university press.cockburn, i. m. (2004). the changing structure of the pharmaceutical industry. health affairs 23(1):1022.cockburn, i. m. (2006). blurred boundaries: tensions between open scientic resources and commercial exploitation of knowledge in biomedical research. chapter in advancing knowledge and the knowledge economy, b. kahin and d. foray, eds. cambridge: mit press.cockburn, i. m. (2007). is the pharmaceutical industry in a productivity crisis? chapter in innovation policy and the economy, vol. 7, a. jaffe, j. lerner, and s. stern, eds. cambridge: mit press for the national bureau of economic research.cockburn, i. m., and r. henderson. (1998). absorptive capacity, coauthoring behavior, and the organization of research in drug discovery. journal of industrial economics 46(2):157182.cockburn, i. m., j. furman, r. henderson, and m. kyle. (2002). geographic location and the productivity of pharmaceutical research. conference paper, nber summer institute, july 2002.danzon, p., y. r. wang, and l. l. wang. (2003). the impact of price regulation on the launch delay of new drugsševidence from twentyfive major markets in the 1990s. nber working paper 9874.dimasi, j.r. hansen, and h. grabowski, 2003. the price of innovation: new estimates of drug development cost. journal of health economics 22:151185.drug trials and questions. (2002). frontline 19(19). september 14.furman, j., i. cockburn, r. henderson, and m. kyle. (forthcoming). public & private spillovers, location, and the productivity of pharmaceutical research. annales d™economie et statistique.gambardella, a. (1995). science and innovation. cambridge university press.grabowski, h., d. ridley, and k. schulman. (forthcoming). entry and competition in generic biologicals. working paper, fuqua school of business. managerial and decision economics.ibef (india brand equity foundation). (2006). pharmaceuticals. report by ernst and young for the india brand equity foundation/confederation of indian industry/ministry of commerce and industry.kyle, m. (2006). the role of rm characteristics in pharmaceutical product launches. rand journal of economics 37(3):602618.kyle, m. (2007). pharmaceutical price controls and entry strategies. review of economics and statistics 89(1):8899.lanjouw, j. (2005). patents, price controls, and access to new drugs: how policy affects global market entry. nber working paper 11321.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.230 innovation in global industrieslanjouw, j. (2007). patents, price controls and the arrival of new drugs: how policy affects international launch patterns. paper presented at uc berkeley lanjouw memorial conference, march 2007.macher, j., and j. nickerson. (2006). pharmaceutical manufacturing research project. available at http://faculty.msb.edu/jtm4/pmrp%20results/. accessed december 12, 2006.zhao, m. (forthcoming). conducting r&d in countries with weak intellectual property rights protection. manuscript, university of minnesota. management science.zhao, m., and m. islam. (2007). crossregional ties within firms: promoting knowledge flow or discouraging spillover? working paper, stephen m. ross school of business.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.231 7 biotechnologyraine hermansnorthwestern university and etla research institute of the finnish economyalicia löfflernorthwestern universityscott sternnorthwestern universitynational bureau of economic research (nber)introductionover the past decade, the biotechnology industry has been the focus of increasing academic and policy interest as a potential source of regional and national economic development (cortright and mayer, 2002; feldman, 2003). although the current size of the industry is quite small, particularly in terms of employment, both local and national policy makersšin the united states and abroadšhave proactively encouraged local and regional investment in the biotechnology industry. in many cases, policy interest in biotechnology is grounded in the belief that, whereas traditional sectoral sources of jobs and investment are increasingly subject to erosion due to globalization, the biotechnology industry is associated with superior wages and a high level of economic prosperity and growth (battelle and ssti, 2006). the proliferation of biotechnology investment programsševen within regions that have little current activity in the industryšraises concerns about the effectiveness of biotechnology as a driver of regional economic development. moreover, these policy initiatives will have a longlived impact on patterns of regional development and on the evolution and longterm structure of the industry.the geography of this industry, and the impact of globalization on biotechnology, will be shaped not only by policy initiatives but also, perhaps more important, by fundamental features of the economic, strategic, and institutional environment. this chapter provides an overview of the drivers, patterns, and consequences of the globalization of biotechnology and offers a preliminary assessment of historical and contemporary patterns of the geographic dispersion of biotechnology innovation. our analysis of the distinctive nature of the globalizainnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.232 innovation in global industriestion of biotechnology motivates policy implications aimed at ensuring continued leadership and dynamism in the american biotechnology sector.while there has been a great deal of academic and policy interest in the biotechnology industry, the scope and extent of the industry are loosely dened, and measures of its scope, size, and patterns of geographic activity depend on the specic denitions that are used (kenney, 1986; orsenigo, 1989; cockburn, et al., 1999; cortright and mayer, 2002; van beuzekom and arundel, 2006). at the broadest level, biotechnology is an industry that includes the commercialization of life science innovations in the health, agriculture, and industrial sectors, which are often referred to as the ﬁred,ﬂ ﬁgreen,ﬂ and ﬁwhiteﬂ biotechnology sectors, respectively. while the international biotechnology industry incorporates activities in all three biotechnology spheres, the bulk of policy and academic analysis have focused on ﬁredﬂ (i.e., healthoriented) biotechnology. furthermore, although the majority of privately and publicly funded biotechnology enterprises have been located in the united states, the pattern of regional and international development is quite distinct for the red, green, and white divisions. despite ambiguities in the scope of the industry and variation across the three subsectors, ﬁclusterdrivenﬂ growth in biotechnology has emerged as a key economic development strategy for regions and nations at all levels of economic and technological prosperity (cortright and mayer, 2002; feldman, 2003). beyond its importance for economic development policy, biotechnology is also the setting for a very active debate across several social sciences about the drivers of clustering and the impact of globalization on the importance of location in innovation.in this chapter we examine trends related to the geographic distribution of industrial biotechnological activity, focusing on the following broad questions: what are the key drivers of innovation within biotechnology, and how do these drivers in˚uence patterns of regional development? what are the drivers of location and clustering within the biotechnology industry, and how does globalization impact the geography of the biotechnology industry? what are the main locational patterns within the biotechnology industry, both in terms of employment and rm formation and in terms of innovation and sales? what are the main strengths and limitations of publicly available data on the biotechnology industry? finally, how does the current geography of the biotechnology industry impact contemporary debates over the potential for biotechnology to serve as a source of regional development, innovation, and improvements in human welfare?overall, our analysis suggests that biotechnology remains a clustered economic activity and relies strongly on interaction with sciencebased university research. however, the number of active clusters in biotechnology is increasing over time. an increasing number of distinct locations in the united states are home to a signicant level of biotechnology activity, and an increasing number of countries around the world support modest to signicant activity within the biotechnology industry. more notably, while many countries around the world now ﬁhostﬂ a biotechnology industry of varying importance, the activity within most innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 233countries is highly localized and often centered in a single city or metropolitan area. although the data are inadequate to allow for a comprehensive analysis, qualitative and quantitative evidence suggests that the number of biotechnology clusters that host a signicant number of viable private companies and serve as a recurrent source of innovation has increased; this increase in the number of clusters with ﬁcritical massﬂ is re˚ected in the increased dispersion of biotechnology employment, entrepreneurship, and measured innovations.this central insightšan increase in the number of regional clusters, rather than a simple dispersion of biotechnology activityšholds a number of implications. first, the impact of globalization on biotechnology seems to be distinct from the pattern observed in traditional manufacturing sectors. while the globalization of many industries seems to re˚ect the increasing availability of lowcost locations for performing lowmargin activities that had previously been conducted in the united states or europe, the globalization of biotechnology re˚ects a ﬁcatching upﬂ process. a few regions around the world have established infrastructure and conditions to attempt to compete ﬁheadtoheadﬂ with leading regions in the united states. second, the analysis highlights the small absolute size of the biotechnology industry. using a relatively inclusive denition, total biotechnology employment in the united states accounts for less than 200,000 fulltime employees, which itself accounts for well over 50 percent of global employment (van beuzekom and arundel, 2006). in contrast, a single company in information technology (it) such as hewlettpackard employs more than 150,000 workers (hewlettpackard, 2006). while globalization may affect the broader economy through its impact on sectors such as it or traditional manufacturing, the small scale of the biotechnology industry precludes it from having a signicant employment impact on the u.s. economy, at least at the present time. in other words, while an increasing number of policy initiatives focus on the role of biotechnology in encouraging job creation and employment, the simple fact is that, if the biotechnology industry remains at roughly the same scale it has achieved after the past decade of rapid growth, it is unlikely to be a major driver of employment patterns and overall job growth, either in the united states or abroad.finally, the analysis raises several interesting questions for further study. the most important issue is one of data collection. while our understanding of the biotechnology industry is greatly facilitated by detailed public and private datagathering efforts (including the extremely useful organisation for economic cooperation and development [oecd] biotechnology statistics program), there seems to be an important gap between qualitative evaluations focusing on the role of subnational clusters and the fact that most international statistics are measured only at the country level. while there have been several ambitious attempts to document the clustering of biotechnology activity among regions within the united states, there is no single source of data or unambiguous approach that allows for a comparison of biotechnology clusters on a global basis. second, although most analyses of the industry focus on the red biotechnology innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.234 innovation in global industriessector, patterns of locational advantage and the impact of globalization are quite distinct for the green and white sectors. for example, countries such as japan and denmark hold leading positions in the industrial applications of biotechnology. moreover, in contrast to the high level of academic entrepreneurship that characterizes the red sector, the green sector is largely dominated by a small number of large rms such as monsanto and dupont. these alternative patterns make it problematic to extrapolate from detailed studies of the healthoriented sector in analyzing the growth and geographic evolution of the industrial and agricultural sectors of the industry.the remainder of the chapter is organized as follows. the second section provides a concise introduction to the biotechnology industry and the key drivers of innovation in this industry. among other issues, we highlight the importance of proximity to the creation of knowledge in fostering agglomeration. we then turn to an explicit discussion of the drivers of location and clustering in the industry, extending the ﬁdiamondﬂ framework (porter, 1990, 1998). in adapting that framework to the biotechnology industry, we highlight the potential for catchup by lagging regions, the potential for disagglomeration as the industry or segments of it mature, and the potential for a leading region to establish itself as a global ﬁhubﬂ for biotechnology research and innovation going forward. in the fourth section, we consider broad patterns and data regarding rm location, employment, and sales in the biotechnology industry. as discussed earlier, the data illustrate the small size of the industry overall and the dominance of the united states within the industry. we then turn in the fth section to an empirical assessment of the geography of innovation, in terms of both patenting behavior and commercial sales. a concluding section discusses the key ndings and implications for policy.the drivers of innovation in the biotechnology industrythe origins and scope of the biotechnology industrybiotechnology is a relatively young and still emerging sector of the economy that is focused on the application of cellular and biomolecular processes to develop or make useful products (biotechnology industry organization, 2006).1 1 there is no single denition of the industry, and different criteria are often used to dene the scope of the biotechnology industry in different countries. for example, the oecd employs both a functional denitionšﬁthe application of science and technology to living organisms, as well as parts, products and models thereof, to alter living or nonliving materials for the production of knowledge, goods and servicesﬂšand listbased denitions in which rms or workers are included in biotechnology if their activities fall within the scope of a set of listed categories (van beuzekom and arundel, 2006). to the extent possible, we are careful to dene the denition and sample by which international or intranational comparisons are made.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 235the origins of the biotechnology industry can be traced back to a con˚uence of technological, economic, and institutional shifts during the late 1970s and early 1980s: the development of recombinant dna technology and other fundamental advances in life sciences research during the 1970s; a signicant increase in funding and resources for life sciences research (both public and private, in the u.s. and abroad); and a set of policy decisions, such as the 1980 diamond vs. chakrabarty supreme court decision and the bayhdole act, that allowed the assertion of intellectual property rights over innovations based on genetic engineering, even those funded by the public sector.the conceptual ideas underlying biotechnology date back almost 12,000 years with the domestication of plants and animals through selective breeding. however, it was not until 1973, when stanley cohen, stanford university, and herbert boyer, university of california san francisco, demonstrated the ability to manipulate genetic material in a practical way, that the potential for commercial applications from the science of molecular biology became apparent. indeed, herbert boyer himself was one of the founders of one of the rst and among the most successful biotechnology companies, genentech. while the discoveries of the 1970s represented fundamental scientic breakthroughs and offered isolated commercial applications, such as the development of synthetic insulin and human growth hormone (mckelvey, 1996; stern, 1995), the growth of the biotechnology industry has relied on a series of complementary technological and scientic breakthroughs of similar magnitude. these include but are not limited to the development of rapid genetic sequencing methods such as the polymerase chain reaction in the 1980s to the use of increasingly advanced it in bioinformatics in the 1990s and the ability to integrate genomic information through initiatives such as the human genome project. biotechnology represents the con˚uence of many emerging disciplines and relies on discoveries from academic and government laboratories as well as commercial institutions. while the precise boundaries of the industry are admittedly fuzzy, it is useful to consider three related but distinct spheres: healthoriented, agricultural, and industry biotechnology, which are referred to as red, green, and white biotechnology, respectively.healthoriented biotechnology (ﬁred biotechﬂ)private investment in healthoriented biotechnology has been concentrated in a small number of regional clusters, which are also home to leading universities and other research institutions. on the one hand, publicly funded life sciences research serves as an extremely important source of discoveries for healthoriented biotechnology and is dispersed broadly across universities and research institutes in the united states and abroad. however, privatesector investment in the healthoriented biotechnology industry is much more regionally concentrated. in the united states, a small number of regional clusters in areas such as san francisco, boston, and san diego have served as the origin for a large share of all biotechinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.236 innovation in global industriesnology innovative investment and activity (cortright and mayer, 2002). although the healthoriented biotechnology sector is concentrated largely in regional clusters in the united states, there are a signicant number of small to mediumsized clusters outside of the united states, including concentrations around cambridge (uk), the medicon valley (sweden/denmark), singapore, sydney, and melbourne, among other locations. more generally, although the commercialization of healthoriented biotechnology innovation has largely involved cooperation with more established rms (many of which are pharmaceutical rms located outside of the regional clusters), healthoriented biotechnology has been closely associated with academic entrepreneurship, whereby leading university research faculty are associated with the creation of new biotechnology rms.agricultural biotechnology (ﬁgreen biotechﬂ)the second major application segment in biotechnology is associated with the development and commercialization of ﬁgreen,ﬂ or agriculturefocused, biotechnology products, particularly the development of new seed traits for staples and specialized agricultural products, from corn to papayas. while clusterdriven entrepreneurship has also played a role in this sector, the bulk of investment and commercialization has been centered around a small number of large, established players, including companies such as monsanto and dupont. relative to healthoriented applications, the earliest commercial applications for agricultural biotechnology were not brought to market until the mid1990s. while diffusion of products such as pestresistant corn and soybeans was rapid in the united sates, there was signicant opposition to the adoption of these technologies in international markets, particularly in europe, which enacted a ban on most products until 2004. in other words, both development and initial use of agricultural biotechnology have been centered in the united states, and companies and farmers who invested in these technologies at an early stage have beneted as markets for genetically modied organisms have globalized over the past several years.industrial biotechnology (ﬁwhite biotechﬂ)industrial biotechnology is the application of biotechnology for industrial purposes, ranging from more effective enzymes in the chemical and textile sectors to biofuels to bioremediation (i.e., environmental applications). by and large, industrial biotechnology has served as a useful source of process innovation in established industrial settings. for example, in the chemical sector, bioengineered enzymes signicantly enhance yields in chemical manufacturing by lowering costs and raising productivity. relative to the other two spheres, white (i.e., industrial) biotechnology applications appear to be far more geographically dispersed than those of red biotechnology. for example, while industrial biotechnology applications are found in the united states, leading users of these innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 237technologies are also located in denmark, japan, and finland. over the past few years, increased interest in biofuels and biotechnology solutions for the energy industry has greatly increased the level of policy interest in this third sphere of the biotechnology industry.in the remainder of this section, we emphasize some of the distinctive features of the industry, each of which will in˚uence the ultimate geographic dispersion of activity within the industry.the nature of biotechnology researchone of the most distinctive and pervasive characteristics of innovation in biotechnology is duality. duality arises when biotechnology research makes a simultaneous contribution to both basic research and applied innovation (rosenberg, 1974; stokes, 1997). for example, the developments in recombinant technology and cloning in the 1970s and genomics in the 1990s allowed scientists to understand the fundamental mechanisms of gene expression and also served as the foundation for novel therapies, diagnostics, transgenic crops, biofuels, and so on. the impact of duality is extensive and undermines some of the implications of the traditional linear framework for science, technology, and innovation.2 while the linear framework allows for a concise formulation of the relationship between the nature of knowledge and the incentives provided for its production and distribution, it fails when knowledge has both basic and applied value. stokes (1997) reformulated the traditional linear distinction between basic and applied research by highlighting the duality of research; a discovery could simultaneously have both applied and basic characteristics (figure 1). stokes identied the importance of research in ﬁpasteur™s quadrantﬂ: louis pasteur™s research on fermentation simultaneously offered fundamental insights that led to the germ theory of disease and was of immediate practical signicance for the french beer and wine industry. stokes argues that, rather than placing research on a single linear dimension ranging from basic to applied, it is more useful to consider two dimensions: in terms of whether research is dependent on ﬁconsiderations of useﬂ or, separately, on a ﬁquest for fundamental understanding.ﬂ most biotechnology research takes place in pasteur™s quadrantšindividual discoveries both rely on and have in˚uence on science and commercialization.the production of ﬁdualpurposeﬂ knowledge, particularly in the disciplines 2 in the traditional ﬁlinearﬂ model, the norms and institutions supporting the production and use of basic versus applied research are separable and distinct. under this model, applied research exploits publicly available basic research as an input, transforming that knowledge into innovations with valuable application. although the linear model has been sharply criticized (klein and rosenberg, 1986), most formal theoretical and empirical economic research remains premised on the linear model, from assessment of the impact of university research (jensen and thursby, 2001; mowery et al., 2001; narin and olivastro, 1992; zucker et al., 1998a,b) to the impact of science and basic research on economic growth (adams, 1990; romer, 1990).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.238 innovation in global industriesbiotech1.epschanged type in dark blue boxes to white for legibilityuseinspired basic research(pasteur)pure basic research(bohr)yespure applied research(edison)noyesnoconsideration of use?quest for fundamental understanding?useinspired basic research(pasteur)yesnoyesnoconsideration of use?quest for fundamental understanding?that underpin modern biotechnology, raises important new challenges for policy makers. for example, the past decade has seen a signicant rise in the use of intellectual property rights (iprs) over research that had traditionally been disclosed only through scientic publication. the increased role of ipr has sparked a vigorous academic and policy debate over the ﬁanticommons effect.ﬂ on the one hand, some argue that such expansions of iprs (in the form of patents or copyrights) ﬁprivatizesﬂ the scientic commons, reducing the benets from scientic progress (argyres and liebskind, 1998; david, 2004; heller and eisenberg, 1998; murray and stern, 2007). on the other hand, a signicant amount of research suggests that iprs may also facilitate the creation of a market for ideas, encourage further investment in ideas with commercial potential, and mitigate disincentives to disclose and exchange knowledge that might otherwise remain secret (arora et al., 2001; gans and stern, 2000; merges and nelson, 1990, 1994; lerner and merges, 1998). while there are many questions surrounding the use and misuse of iprs, particularly at the interface between university and industry research, its availability may allow startup biotechnology rms to focus on the earlystage research and contract with pharmaceutical, agricultural, and chemical companies for downstream activities, including manufacturing, marketing, and distribution (arora et al., 2001; gans and stern, 2003).the biotechnology value proposition and the structure of the value chainwhile the size of the biotechnology industry is still quite modestšrelative to, say, employment or revenue in the automobile industryšthe potential figure 1 pasteur™s quadrant. the traditional ﬁlinearﬂ framework fails when knowledge has both basic and applied value. since its inception, biotechnology research has been at the center of pasteur™s quadrant, and so individual discoveries rely on and in˚uence both science and commercialization. source: adapted from stokes (1997).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 239global demand for biotechnology products is large, mostly driven by the needs of a growing and aging world population. the promise of biotechnology to nd solutions to some of the critical problems arising from population growth and demographic change, from new medical treatments to improving agricultural output and developing new sources of energy, creates a favorable environment for this sector. the world™s population is not only growing, but is, in aggregate, growing older.3 as life expectancy increases, a need to nd new approaches to treat chronic diseases that affect a more elderly population will increase. at the same time, rising global trade and travel, highly porous international borders, increased urbanization, and an uneven distribution of wealth are creating optimal conditions for outbreaks of new infectious diseases with no available treatments. similarly, the need to increase the productivity and efciency of agricultural products to feed the rising population is becoming a critical global issue for which biotechnology may offer important solutions. the pressing need for new treatments is creating a great demand for biotechnology innovations. likewise, global climate change, caused in part by economic development and population growth, has intensied the need for nding solutions for alternative sources of energy. industrial biotechnology could provide some means of producing environmentally friendly biofuels.despite these promising opportunities, the industry faces a series of distinctive challenges in translating innovations into commercialized products and services for global markets; at least in part, these challenges are a consequence of duality. on the one hand, close interinstitutional collaborations in biotechnology contribute to the need for geographic proximity around centers of research excellence. moreover, one manifestation of the complex networked relationship between biotechnology rms and other institutions is that many researchers in biotechnology work not only at the convergence of multiple scientic elds but also at the boundaries of multiple institutions. while these overlapping institutional afliations are most apparent in the area of healthoriented biotechnology (zucker et al., 1998b), agricultural and industrial biotechnology innovation also 3 demographic projections estimate world population gains from 6.5 billion in 2005 to 7.9 billion in 2025 (united nations, 2004). the greatest growth in total population is projected in the rising nations of china and india, whose populations are expected to benet from improved socioeconomic conditions and should drive increased needs for biotechnology innovations. the global population is also growing older. individuals over age 60 represented 10.4 percent of the world™s population in 2005; by 2050 this segment is expected to grow by 1 billion, with a total number representing 21.7 percent of a much larger total population. this trend will undoubtedly spur greater demand for new biomedical innovations and treatments worldwide. today, the u.s. population over age 65 consumes 40 percent of the nation™s biomedical output products and it is reasonable to expect similar trends worldwide. persons aged 60 and over comprised 10.4 percent of the global population in 2005; by 2050 this component will amount to 21.7 percent of a much larger total population. by midcentury, the number of persons aged 60 and older will grow by 1 billion. the greatest advance is expected in the rising nations of china and india, whose populations will come to benet from drug treatments and medical devices formerly available mainly to consumers in the united states and europe (magee, 2005).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.240 innovation in global industriestakes place at the universityindustry interface (graff et al., 2003). biotechnologists often need to have both scientic and commercialization acumen; they work for and with multiple organizations and institutions.at the same time, while proximity to scientic and commercial knowledge led to the rise of concentrated geographic clusters for biotechnology innovations, the jobs created by the products of these innovations are far more dispersed. in each of the three areas of biotechnology, the value chain is highly fragmented and requires signicant capital expenditures, meaning that an entrepreneurial innovator can rarely afford or nd it worthwhile to commercialize an innovation independently all the way to market. as a result, the downstream users of biotechnology (e.g., physicians, farmers, or industrial managers) may have only limited if any interactions with the initial innovators or research teams. as a consequence, in each of the three segments of biotechnology, the location of innovation may be very different from the location of application and greatest use.this pattern is most apparent in red biotechnology (figure 2). close connections with university and public researchers, as well as more geographically dispersed relationships with those that commercialize innovation, have contributed to a highly entrepreneurial structure in red biotechnology. this structure, combined with the presence of multiple revolutions in science and technology, has kept the industry in a state of ﬁperpetual immaturity.ﬂ the continuous ˚ow of scientic innovations and the fragmentation of the value chain encourage the biotechnology sector to create new companies continuously. since its inception and looking across all three industry segments, the biotechnology sector had around 1,300 companies in the united states and around 5,000 worldwide (burrill & company, 2004). although successful individual biotechnology companies in the healthoriented sector have grown from startups to large rmsšgenentech and amgen being the prime examples, each with a market cap in excess of $50 billionšthe sector as a whole is a study in dynamism, with new entrants appearing on the scene every year, attracting capital from both public and private sources. once companies in the red biotechnology sector establish a proven commercial path, they often consolidate or partner with established companies for development and distribution. consolidation, however, does not result in a gradual winnowing of companies. this trend is offset by the continuous rate of company formation that keeps the sector fragmented, particularly in healthoriented applications. the biotechnology supply chain is lled with specialized players. firms often do not integrate vertically but instead continue to play within specic and limited stages of the value chain.though not as extreme as red biotechnology, green and white biotechnologies are also characterized by a reliance on the combination of university research, startup innovators, and established rms. for example, monsanto, the leading agricultural biotechnology rm, initiated its efforts to diversify from its agrochemicals business through the establishment of research partnerships with leading universities such as washington university in st. louis (culliton, 1990; innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 241biotech2.epsdiscoveryproof ofconceptmarketlaboratoryvalidationreal worldvalidationproductdesignedproductvalidatedscaleupconceptbasic science labsmanufacturing / regulatorypreclinicalphase iphase ii/iiiuniversitieslarge corporationsstartupsinnovationfigure 2 typical value chain for a biotechnology product. commercialization takes many steps, and, while there is geographic con˚uence between universites and startups, the value chain is both complex and fragmented. biotechnological product development in biotechnology is a long and fragmented process. for example, it is estimated that an agricultural biotechnology product might take 10 years to bring to the market and an investment of $50 million to $200 million (mcelroy, 2004). similarly, a drug might take about 12 years and around $800 million (dimasi et al., 2003). rarely the innovator has the resources to bring the product to the market and outlicense or sell their technology to a large pharmaceutical company, which can more feasibly undertake the most expensive development (i.e., approval) phases. the value chain is fragmented with smaller companies specializing at the innovation and discovery stages and larger companies specializing in the development and distribution stages.nelkin et al., 1987). since that time, monsanto has developed signicant inhouse research and commercialization capabilities in agricultural biotechnology and relies on an extensive network of strategic partnerships and licensing relationships. in other words, although large established companies such as monsanto and dupont are ultimately responsible for the commercialization of agricultural biotechnology innovations, the origins of those innovations are divided among university research projects, startup innovators, and internal development (pierrebenoit, 1999). a similar pattern, but one that is less documented in the academic and business literature, is the case for industrial biotechnology, although there seems to be a smaller role for the university sector. for example, hermans, kulvik, and tahvanainen (2006) document the licensing and alliance relationships innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.242 innovation in global industriesbetween startup innovators and more established users of industrial biotechnology products in the finnish context.overall, across the three distinct segments, the industry exhibits a highly dynamic structure. the dynamism of the biotechnology industry is based on its foundations in rapidly emerging scientic disciplines; its potential to address important social needs while creating signicant commercial value in health, agriculture, and industry; and its orientation in terms of the commercial application of knowledge that is simultaneously of independent scientic interest.the drivers of location and clustering of biotechnology innovationas mentioned earlier, the drivers of the geography of biotechnology industry and innovation are complex and changing over time. on the one hand, the geography of biotechnology re˚ects broad factors relating to the overall orientation of an economy to support innovative activity. the geography of innovation of the biotechnology industry is consistent with the role of location and institutions emphasized in the national innovation systems literature (lundvall, 1992; mowery and nelson, 1999; nelson, 1993). this national innovation systems literature focuses on the role that national policies and local institutions play in shaping the location and effectiveness of innovative productivity and emphasizes the important preconditions that must exist for innovative investment to be effective. such policies and institutions include an effective intellectual property system, the availability of highquality human resources and risk capital, and institutions (and publicprivate partnerships) that encourage investment and innovation in particular regions.while the aggregate national innovation system sets the basic conditions for innovation, the development and commercialization of new technologies take place, disproportionately, in clustersšgeographic concentrations of interconnected companies and institutions in a particular eld. over the past two decades, there has been an explosion of research concerning the structure and dynamics of industrial clusters and the role of location in industrial activity and innovation (see, among others, breschi and malerba, 2005; krugman, 1991; porter, 1990, 1998; audretsch and feldman, 1996; saxenian, 1994).the biotechnology industry has been of particular interest to research on industrial clusters, for several reasons.4 first, within the united states, biotechnology companies and investment are clustered in a small number of regions, such as san diego, boston, and san francisco (see figure 3). moreover, the activities and investments by companies in biotechnology clusters are focused on 4 the case study and empirical literature on the regional clustering of innovation activities in biotechnology is quite large and cannot be adequately reviewed here. for a very useful recent review, see cooke (2002).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 243biotech3.epsbitmap imagefigure 3 biotech clusters in the united states. the colored states indicate where there are both large and specialized rms in two of the three biotechnology subsectors (pharmaceuticals, research and testing, and medical devices). sources: the brookings institution; cortright and mayer (2002).research and innovation (audretsch and stephan, 1996). internationally oriented case studies have also documented that, within individual countries, biotechnology innovation tends to be regionally clustered in other countries (cooke, 2002; hermans and tahvanainen, 2006; swann et al., 1998). regional clustering of innovationoriented activity in biotechnology is particularly striking since companies do not rely on hardtoaccess natural resources, and the sciences underlying biotechnology are dispersed at universities and research institutions across the united states and abroad (audretsch and stephan, 1996; feldman and francis, 2003). a rich and nuanced literature has developed emphasizing some of the key patterns and dynamics associated with biotechnology clusters in the united states and abroad, with an emphasis on the importance of collaboration and networks among universities, startup innovators, and established rms (koput et al., 1996; powell et al., 2005), and the crucial role played by scientists who bridge the universityindustry divide (audretsch and stephan, 1996; zucker et al., 1998a,b). as well, there has been signicant interest in the science policy community in the distribution of research in biotechnology, often focusing on clustering in specic locations around the world (hoffman, 2008).to organize our discussion of the clustering of biotechnology activity and integrate the insights of these studies of clustering in biotechnology, we build on porter™s seminal work on clusters (porter, 1990, 1998). in porter™s ﬁdiamondﬂ framework (figure 4), four attributes of the microeconomic and strategic enviinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.244 innovation in global industriesbiotech4.epsclimate for innovationbased local rivalryclimate for innovationbased local rivalryclusters of related and supporting industriesclusters of related and supporting industriesfactor (input)conditionsfactor (input)conditionsdemand conditionsdemand conditionsclimate for innovationbased local rivalryclimate for innovationbased local rivalryclusters of related and supporting industriesclusters of related and supporting industriesfactor (input)conditionsfactor (input)conditionsdemand conditionsdemand conditionsfigure 4 the ﬁdiamondﬂ framework adapted from porter (1990).ronment surrounding a cluster support its overall competitiveness and innovative vitality: (1) the presence of highquality and specialized inputs, (2) a local context that encourages innovative investment and intense rivalry, (3) pressure and insight emerging from sophisticated local demand, and (4) the local presence of highquality related and supporting industries. the four elements of the diamond framework highlight the key resources and dynamics associated with the emergence and sustainability of leading clusters in all segments of the biotechnology industry. first, as mentioned earlier, the development of biotechnology innovation requires access to specialized inputs, including researchers, risk capital, biological materials, and even intellectual property. by and large, accessing these resources is most easily accomplished within a regional context, rather than across long distances or political boundaries. for example, the development of the agricultural biotechnology cluster surrounding st. louis depended on the ability of companies such as monsanto to draw upon and reinforce the signicant expertise and research capabilities of washington university in st. louis.second, a key driver of effective clustering in the biotechnology sector seems to be competition among locally based biotechnology companies. these companies compete on the basis of attracting talent, publishing highquality scientic research, and attracting investment and interest from venture capitalists and downstream commercial partners, many of whom are located outside the cluster. this is perhaps most apparent in some of the clusters associated with healthinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 245oriented biotechnology; for example, the massachusetts biotechnology cluster includes more than 400 different rms, 235 of which are developing therapeutic drugs (massachusetts biotechnology council, 2007).third, most leading biotechnology clusters are located not only near sources of highquality basic research but also around areas with signicant capacity in clinical innovation. for example, the pressures on the massachusetts biotechnology cluster arise as much from the presence of demanding clinicians in the leading hospitals as from that of specialized genetics researchers. similarly, the medical device cluster in minneapolis is pushed by demanding consumers at the mayo clinic and related institutions, and industrial biotechnology innovation in scandanavia depends in part on demanding customers in the chemical industry (hermans et al., 2006).finally, the biotechnology cluster depends on the presence of related and supporting industries, most notably an active venture capital industry to supply managerial expertise, risk capital, and relationship experience with downstream partners as well as key pieces of infrastructure (e.g., biological resource centers, specialized seed banks and agricultural research stations, specialized equipment and tools). each of these factors encourages the investment of sunken assets and the development of specialized capabilities that reinforce the strength and ultimately the international competitiveness of that cluster environment.when these factors are present, geographic clustering promotes important externalities in innovation that are relevant to biotechnology. thus, while location within a cluster enhances a rm™s ability to identify opportunities for innovation, it also promotes the rm™s ˚exibility and capacity to bring new ideas to market. within a cluster, a company can more rapidly assemble the components, machinery, and services necessary for commercialization. suppliers of essential inputs and ﬁleadﬂ buyers become crucial partners in the innovation process, and the relationships necessary for effective and efcient innovation are more easily forged among proximate rms. reinforcing these advantages for innovation within clusters are competitive, peer, and customer pressures associated with the proximity of other, often directly competing, biotechnology rms. clustering enables easy comparisons of performance.as would be expected, the innovation environment of a cluster is fundamental to its competitiveness. for example, the biotechnology sector serving the needs of the scandinavian pulpandpaper cluster benets from the advantages of pressures from demanding domestic consumers, intense rivalry among local competitors, and the presence of swedish processequipment manufacturers that are global leaders (e.g., kamyr and sunds, for the commercialization of innovative bleaching equipment). the finnish pulpandpaper industry utilizes specic biotechnological techniques in its production processes, which has also partially motivated industrial enzyme providers to construct production plants in finland. as a consequence, enzyme applications form the largest sales within the small and mediumsized biotechnology industry in finland (hermans et al., 2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.246 innovation in global industriessimilar examples of cluster vitality in innovation may be observed in many elds, from pharmaceuticals in the united states to semiconductor manufacturing in taiwan. cluster vitality is derived from industries and resources as diverse as the elds they support. the pharmaceutical industry, of course, provides a strong source of support for biopharmaceutical innovative activity. in particular, though the natural resource requirements of the pharmaceutical industry are limited, the industry has been geographically concentrated in a small number of regional locations, including new jersey and switzerland, partially as a result of competition for pharmaceutical demand.porter™s cluster framework is useful for identifying some of the key drivers of international competitiveness for an innovationoriented biotechnology cluster at a point in time. however, the durability of clusterdriven competitiveness depends on the dynamics and evolution in the scope of clusters over time. while there is less research that focuses specically on biotechnology clusters in this regard, recent research on clusters and in economic geography emphasizes the key factors that shape the persistence of location and the dynamics of the geography of innovationoriented industries (e.g., krugman, 1991; krugman and venables, 1995).the convergence effectthough leading clusters may stay at the forefront of innovation and activity for long periods of time, the advantages of cluster leadership are balanced against the possibility of relatively lowcost, highgrowth entry by other regions (barro and salaimartin, 1992; dumais et al., 2002; henderson et al., 1995). although the effect of convergence declines as the emerging regions develop in terms of size and sophistication, the convergence effect is an important consideration when examining changing patterns of geographical investment, employment, and innovation in the biotechnology industry.maturity and the dynamics of geographic dispersionas industries mature and products and processes are standardized and decomposed, the benet of localized innovation may be outweighed by cost advantages in lowerwage locations (brezis and krugman, 1997; duranton and puga, 2001). in other words, one of the key signs of industry maturity and commoditization is a signicant increase in the geographic dispersion of industrial activity. for example, in recent years the diffusion of agricultural biotechnology products has had the consequence that the industrial activities of agricultural biotechnology are more geographically dispersed than the industry was at an earlier stage. while the development of new products continues to be centered in a small number of locations, investments in improvements in how to use the new seed traits and how to adapt farming practices to incorporate the new products are much more geographically dispersed.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 247national versus regional clustersfor medium and large economies, the presence of a cluster will likely be most apparent at the subnational and even local levels (e.g., martin and rogers, 1995; monfort and nicolini, 2000). this is particularly true in the biotechnology industry, where total global employment is quite modest, and the industry is located in proximity to leading university research areas. while data limitations will often force us to examine dispersion at the national level, it is important to keep in mind that much of the clustering in the biotechnology industry takes place at the regional or even municipal level.the emergence of international hubsfinally, as mentioned earlier, the basic research upon which the biotechnology industry is built is widely dispersed across thousands of universities on a global basis. as a result, one of the more subtle dynamics of clustersšhubbingšmay be particularly important in this context. specically, it is possible that a location with a strong cluster environment will not only benet from the dynamics arising from local relationships but will become a ﬁmagnetﬂ for those who are located in lessfavorable cluster environments (krugman and venables, 1995; venables, 1996). for example, a researcher at johns hopkins university might maintain a relationship with a company in boston or silicon valley to take advantage of the potential for commercialization in a strong cluster environment. going forward, there will be tension between the continuing importance of forces that have given rise to agglomeration and clustering and the increasing salience of activities aimed at bridging across clusters and even across national boundaries.the geography of the biotechnology industrywe build on these insights into the geography of the biotechnology industry by undertaking a short description of the global distribution of innovationoriented activities within the biotechnology industry. as described earlier, the industry grew out of a series of fundamental scientic breakthroughs in the 1970s and was initially concentrated among a small number of entrepreneurial rms, mostly in the bay area in california and around cambridge, massachusetts. despite interest in the future of biotechnology, relatively little attention has been paid to the current state of the biotechnology industry in terms of regional patterns of employment, investment, and rm creation.employmentin table 1 and figure 5, we describe the international distribution of employment as of 2005. drawn from van beuzekom and arundel (2006), figure 5 reports the total employment of individuals in private biotechnology rms (i.e., innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.248 innovation in global industriestable 1 biotechnology r&d employees by countrybiotechnology r&d employees (headcounts, 2003)atotalper firmunited statesb 73,52033.5united kingdomb9,644germany (2004)8,02413.2korea (2004)6,55410.2canadac6,44113.1denmarkd4,78117.9franceb4,1935.6switzerland (2004)b4,14326.4spain (2004)2,88410.4swedenb2,35910.9belgium1,98427.2israel (2002)1,59610.8china (shanghai)d1,4479.2finlandb1,1469.3irelandb1,05325.7iceland45819.9norwayb2838.8poland (2004)1098.4 ar&d employment: includes scientists and support staff such as technicians. bdata from critical i report to the uk dti (2005), based on all r&d employees in core biotechnology rms. cexcludes rms with less than ve employees or less than ppp $80,000 in r&d. dfulltime equivalents (ftes).source: oecd (2006).outside of universities and the public sector). while the denition of which rms are included in the ﬁbiotechnologyﬂ industry varies across countries (e.g., the united kingdom reports only companies from ﬁcoreﬂ biotechnology rms, whereas germany reports employment for any worker with biotechrelated responsibilities), the most striking fact about these statistics is the small absolute size of the biotechnology industry. using statistics collected in 2006, the global biotechnology industry directly employs less than 500,000 workers in the private sector.5 while the industry may also support employment in related industries (e.g., pharmaceuticals, agriculture, or industrial engineering), there are no systematic survey data about the global distribution of these employment spillovers, and so we restrict our attention to the biotechnology industry per se. to put these numbers in context, the global automobile industry employs more than 8.4 million workers (international organization of automobile manufacturers, 2007).5 the oecd statistics do not list aggregate employment from japan, but, based on other (though not strictly comparable) gures, japanese employment is likely less than that of the eu, which registered at 73,189 as of 2005.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 249biotech5.eps172,39173,18924,13122,40512,13811,8638,9228,8194,2613,8923,7162,9402,3941,7891,5321,0209709699469181531001,00010,000100,0001,000,000united states (1)eu (4)germany (2,3)united kingdom (1)korea (2004) (3)canada (2,3)france (1)switzerland (2004) (1)belgium (2,3)israel (2002) (3)sweden (1)irelandfinland (1)austria (1)italy (1)south africa (2002) (2,3)norway (1)iceland (3)poland (2004) (2,3)new zealand (2005) (3)portugal (1)biotech workforcefigure 5 international labor distributions: (1) data from critical i report to the uk dti, 2005, based on total employment in core biotechnology rms. (2) limited to employees with biotechrelated responsibilities. (3) includes employment in both core and noncore rms active in biotechnology. (4) eu11 countries presented in this gure. source: oecd biotechnology statistics (van beuzekom and arundel, 2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.250 innovation in global industriesfigure 5 offers several striking patterns about the global distribution of biotechnology activity. first, the united states supports by far the single largest biotechnology industry. even though the european union (eu) has a larger total population than the united states, overall biotechnology employment is less than 50 percent that of the united states. moreover, within the eu, the distribution of employment is highly uneven, with germany and the united kingdom accounting for twothirds of total eu employment. finally, it is useful to note that a number of small countries support signicant biotechnology employment, with an employment intensity exceeding even that of the united states. for example, although iceland has a population of only 300,000, the biotechnology industry accounts for nearly 1,000 jobs.table 1 provides a complementary perspective and reports biotechnology research and development (r&d) employment by country (and the number of r&d employees per rm, which we return to later). two points are of specic interest. first, the ratio of r&d employment to total employment is extremely high; for most countries, the ratio is approximately 0.30.5; in other words, more than one of out every three biotechnology employees is a biotechnology researcher. this contrasts with an overall r&d employment intensity of less than 3 percent across all industries in the united states (national science board, 2006). with that said, it is once again important to emphasize the small absolute size of the biotechnology research workforce. excluding the united states, no country maintains a biotechnology r&d workforce in excess of 10,000 researchers. in other words, while the absolute size of the biotechnology workforce is comparatively small, table 1 and figure 5 suggest that the international distribution of overall employment captures signicant international differences in the distribution of laborintensive innovation activities.enterprisesfigure 6 extends the analysis to the global distribution of companies. while the united states remains the largest single national home for biotechnology activity, it is useful to note that the eu actually accounts for a greater number of companies than the united states. along with the earlier employment statistics, this suggests that individual eu biotechnology companies have fewer employees (on average) than their u.s. counterparts. simply put, the scale of operations for a typical eu biotechnology rm is smaller than that of a biotechnology rm in the united states. this point is illustrated in the second column of table 1, which records the number of r&d employees per rm by country. while the united states employs more than 33 scientists per rm on average, most eu countries employ from 5 to 15 researchers. the smaller scale of rms extends to countries in other parts of the world as well: israel, south korea, and china employ from 9 to 11 scientists per rm.while some of these differences arise from the fact that the united states innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 251biotech6.eps3,1542,19680475564060749045530427826721617215815714812311911610673413932231713101001,00010,000european unionunited statesjapan (3,4)francekorea(2004)germanycanadaunited kingdomaustraliaspain (2004)denmarkswedenitaly (2004)chinaswitzerlandisrael (2002)finland (4)netherlands (5)new zealandsouth africabelgium (4)ireland (5)austria (5)norway (5)icelandportugal (5)poland (2004)biotech workforcefigure 6 number of biotechnology companies in distinct geographic areas (van beuzekom and arundel, 2006; oecd biotechnology statistics).maintains a few very large biotechnology companies (e.g., amgen, genentech), these differences in average rm size seem to re˚ect differences in the origin and maturity of these companies. for example, according to europe™s biotechnology industry association, europabio, europe has a higher number of younger companies but fewer mature companies than the united states (critical, 2006). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.252 innovation in global industriesfurthermore, the european biotechnology companies seem to grow more slowly than their u.s. counterparts. by and large, young european rms are often overtaken by international competitors and even some of the oldest european biotechnology companies have been acquired by u.s. companies that have better access to nancial and commercialization resources (critical, 2006). as in the employment statistics, this concentration of small companies seems to re˚ect the international distribution of employment activities. most companies reporting that consider themselves to be part of the biotechnology industry focus on innovationoriented activities, and figure 6 highlights the role of entrepreneurial rms in this industry.r&d expendituresfinally, we examine the global distribution of r&d expenditures in figures 7 and 8. perhaps even more so than with the employment and enterprise activity statistics, these statistics are only partially informative data since they only measure biotechnologyrelated expenditures for a subset of rms that are focused in biotechnology (i.e., dened as a ﬁcoreﬂ biotechnology rm for many of the countries), and the data seem to primarily cover rms specialized in healthoriented biotechnology. while these data are ˚awed and should not be taken to offer a precise measure of the level of expenditures, they are still useful for highlighting broad contrasts across different countries and regions. in particular, as with the employment statistics, investment expenditures are concentrated in the united states (see figure 7); in 2003, the u.s. investment pace is an order of magnitude higher than for any other individual country. interestingly, there are some important differences in the investment levels of countries, relative to their employment levels. for example, while france registers a much lower level of biotechnology employment than germany, the level of investment expenditures is similar between the two countries; moreover, this re˚ects real differences in investments because both countries share a common currency. as well, modest but still signicant employment statistics for several countries outside the united states and europe are also re˚ected in r&d investment: new zealand and australia support a relatively high level of investment activity, as do asian countries such as south korea and china (although china obviously has a very small industry on a per capita basis).this skewed pattern of global biotechnology investment is reinforced in figure 8, which reports the distribution within the oecd of venture capital investments. if anything, the investment bias toward the united states is even more apparent (venture capital investments are more than 12 times as large in the united states than in the secondlargest target country, germany). to the extent that venture capital funding also offers a particularly effective model for funding innovation (kortum and lerner, 2001), this skewed distribution of nancial innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 253biotech7.eps14,2321,3471,3421,194727699469251236205201199958884672951101001,00010,000100,000united statesgermany (2004)francecanadadenmark (1)korea (2004)switzerland (2004)israel (2002)italy (2004)china (shanghai)australiaspain (2004)new zealand (2004)finlandsouth africa (2002)icelandnorwaypoland (2004)$ million ppp, 2003figure 7 total expenditures for biotechnology r&d by biotechnologyactive rms, oecd biotechnology statistics (van beuzekom and arundel, 2006).investment suggests that the united states may be extending its historical dominance in the creation and evolution of biotechnology enterprises.overall these empirics highlight three very important ndings about the geographic distribution of innovative activity in the biotechnology industry. first, this is an industry of relatively modest size by any measure. the absolute level innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.254 innovation in global industriesbiotech8.eps9,526769721502323303159127124987429231463211101001,00010,000usagermany (2004)canadaukswedenfrancedenmarknetherlandsbelgiumswitzerrlandnorwayfinlanditalyspainaustriairelandicelandportugalventure capital ($million) 20012003biotech workforcefigure 8 total venture capital investments in biotechnology, 2001 to 2003 combined, oecd biotechnology statistics (van beuzekom and arundel, 2006).of employment is relatively low, and the total expenditures (and even the number of entrepreneurial rms) are relatively low in terms of absolute value. second, relative to other industries, measures of employment and entrepreneurship activity are closely linked to innovative activity. more than onethird of all employees in the global industry are considered r&d employees (much higher than in most other industries) and most companies are focused on innovationoriented strategies and investments. finally, although there is an increasingly dispersed global set of locations for biotechnology (e.g., united kingdom and germany, south korea, australia), the overall level of the united states in terms of total activity is much higher.the geographic distribution of innovative output in biotechnologyin this section, we move beyond the general patterns of the geography of biotechnology to examine global patterns of innovative performance. attempts to measure and benchmark innovative outputs have become common across advanced economies.6 one approach to this activity (furman et al., 2002; porter and stern, 1999) is based on a clear distinction between measures of the outputs 6 a review of this process is beyond this chapter™s scope. however, a good starting point is the benchmarking programs of the eu (http://trendchart.cordis.lu/). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 255of technological innovation (for example, international patenting) and its drivers: infrastructure, clusters, and linkages.7 while one must be very careful in interpreting patterns based on patent data, patenting trends across countries and over time are highly likely to re˚ect actual changes in innovative outputs rather than spurious in˚uences, especially in measuring innovation at the global level. also, international patenting captures the degree to which a national economy develops and commercializes internationally important new technologiesša prerequisite for building international competitiveness on a platform of quality and innovation. in short, international patenting is ﬁthe only observable manifestation of inventive activity with a wellgrounded claim for universalityﬂ (trajtenberg, 1990).8 with that said, our analysis of international patenting in biotechnology comes with several important caveats. in particular, the standard for patentability for many biotechnologyrelated innovations differs across countries (and across time within countries). to cite one example, as of 2006, the united states hadgranted more than 40 human embryonic stem cell patents, whereas the european patent ofce (epo) had granted none due to an eu directive to reject human embryonic stem cells patents on ﬁmoralﬂ grounds (porter et al., 2006). while u.s. patent ofce practice has tended to allow patents that are relatively close to the arena of pure scientic ﬁdiscoveries,ﬂ epo practice has tended to only allow patents when a specic industrial application has been identied. more generally, the use of patent data to identify the geography of innovation is of course limited by the fact that many innovations (even important innovations) are not patented or patentable; although this critique is particularly important in the context of a broad crossindustry study, biotechnology is an arena with a close connection between innovation and patenting (cohen et al., 2000). with these caveats in mind, we now turn to a detailed discussion of international patterns of biotechnology patenting.global biotechnology patentingwe use several different measures re˚ecting the number of international biotechnology patents. in particular, we focus on the number of patents granted 7 in addition to patent counts, there are some alternative measures to illustrate the distribution of biotechnology innovations. for instance, other forms of intellectual capital could also be useful to measure. on the one hand, some forms of human capital are often held as critical success factors in the sciencedriven business, such as outcomes of scientic research and a level of education and business experience of employees. on the other hand, the measures related to relational capital, such as collaboration networks, would be useful in assessing the signicance of location of the biotechnology industry (edvinsson and malone, 1997).8 trajtenberg (1990) provides a thorough discussion of the role of patents in understanding innovative activity, referring to their early use by schmookler (1966) and noting their increasing use by scholars (e.g., griliches, 1984, 1990, 1994). our use of international patents also has often been used as a precedent in prior work comparing inventive activity across countries (see dosi et al., 1990; eaton and kortum, 1996). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.256 innovation in global industriesto inventors from a given country by the u.s. patent and trademark ofce (uspto), the epo, and the japanese patent ofce (jpo). we then combine these measures in our analysis by examining the number of triadic patent families (i.e., patents granted in each of the three major patent jurisdictions).figure 9 graphs the number of biotechnology patents issued by the uspto and epo, by the region of origin of the inventor.9 several striking patterns stand out. first, the united states is the dominant country of origin for biotechnology innovations, even those that are patented in europe (i.e., where the ﬁhome biasﬂ would favor the european inventors). second, there was a sharp increase in u.s. biotechnology patenting by u.s. inventors during the late 1990s, a trend that is partially re˚ected in the epo data and partially ameliorates from 2000 onward. uspto patents with european inventors are associated with a much more gradual rise and achieved a 20 percent share of uspto biotechnology patents by 2003.clearly, the regional patenting patterns re˚ected in the uspto and epo gures re˚ect a ﬁhome biasﬂ; inventors tend to prefer domestic patent ofces to foreign ones (as documented and discussed in detail by criscuolo [2006]). this suggests at least in part that domestic biotechnology companies tend to apply for patents rst in their domestic patent ofce and only seek foreign patents for their most signicant and valuable products and processes. we attempt to address the homebias problem by moving toward triadic patent family counts to perform more strict comparisons among biotechnology patents led in the uspto, the epo, and the jpo.10 triadic patent families provide a more valid proxy for the economic value of patents. patent application processes differ by country; most companies or individuals will undertake the costly process of ling a patent abroad only if the invention or process in question has signicant earnings prospects.when we turn to triadic patent families in figure 10, a similar set of patterns emerges. the united states continues to have a dominant share, on both an absolute and a per capita basis. furthermore, when we calculate patent per capita estimates, japan™s innovative productivity appears to be at the same level or higher than that of the eu. it is useful to note that, on a per capita basis, the 9 unfortunately, we are unable to obtain disaggregated data on assignee location using the derwent database. the location of the inventors is often distinct from the location of the assignee of the patent. this distinction may confound an analysis of global sourcing of r&d activity. the decrease in the share of u.s. inventors described earlier does not necessarily imply a decrease in u.s. patent ownership. therefore, we cannot rule out a geographical shift in r&d activity by u.s.based rms. however, given the strong entrepreneurial element of the biotech industry and the ndings of the oecd 2007 compendium of patent statistics, biotechnology r&d work does not seem to be heavily outsourced from the united states at this point. however, constructing a database of triadic biotechnology patents by assignee country is a strong priority for future research in this area. 10 eurostat denes triadic patent families as follows: ﬁa patent family is a set of patents taken in various countries for protecting a single invention. . . . patent is a member of a triadic patent family if and only if it is led at the european patent ofce (epo), the japanese patent ofce (jpo) and is granted by the us patent & trademark ofce (uspto).ﬂ innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 257biotech9.epsnumber of patentsuspto biotechnology patents 01 0002 0003 0004 0005 0006 0007 0001994199519961997199819992000200120022003yearusaeujapanepo biotechnology patents 05001 0001 5002 0002 5003 0003 500199419951996199719981999200020012002yearnumber of patentsusaeu25japanfigure 9 biotechnology patent counts in uspto and epo by inventor™s country of origin. source: oecd.united states has only about two times the innovative capacity of japan and the eu. perhaps more important, these patterns provide some interesting insights into the evolution of the global biotechnology industry over the past decade or so. in particular, despite the fact that countries outside the united states started from a very low level of activity (and may benet from the ﬁconvergence effectﬂ), the gap between the united states and the rest of the world has persisted. while there has been a very slight convergence in the last years of our data (i.e., applications from 2000 onward), these broad patterns are consistent with the hypothesis that regional agglomeration remains an important driver of the geography of the biotechnology industry.there are several potential explanations for this continued persistence. first, innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.258 innovation in global industriesbiotech10.epstriadic biotechnology patent families (est.)020040060080010001200140016001800199419951996199719981999200020012002yearnumber of patentstriadic biotechnology patent families per capita (est.)0.001.002.003.004.005.006.007.00199419951996199719981999200020012002yearnumber of patents per 1 mill inhabitantsusaeu25japanusaeu25japanfigure 10 triadic biotechnology patent counts and per capita measures by inventor™s country of origin. source: oecd and authors™ calculations.and perhaps most important, the extremely rapid advances in the scientic and technological frontier in biotechnology likely reinforce the strengths of preexisting clusters, such as san diego and massachusetts. in contrast to environments where a single ﬁmacro innovationﬂ diffuses rst locally and then globally (resulting in convergence in incremental innovation over time), biotechnology innovation remains ﬁperpetually immature.ﬂ second, the scale of private and public research funding in the united states continues to be very large relative to any other individual country or region. the national institutes of health has experienced rapid increases in its funding, and this seems to have been a innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 259complement, rather than a substitute, for venture capital and private investment. finally, even though there are an increasing number of biotechnology innovation clusters around the world that are operating at least at ﬁminimum scale,ﬂ the united states has beneted from an environment that by and large encourages the commercialization of new biotechnology products. this is perhaps most apparent in the agricultural sector, where the strength of clusters is probably less salient than in healthoriented biotechnology, but resistance to development and commercialization efforts in europe have allowed the united states to establish and maintain a dominant position.11 together, while future u.s. leadership will depend on the continued vitality of cluster environment, these patterns suggest that the united states has by and large provided a favorable environment for biotechnology innovation.global biotechnology patenting by application segmentswe now provide a more detailed analysis of innovative output as measured by patent counts based on inventor location, which are divided into 12 patent subcategories by the same regions considered earlier. our analysis utilizes derwent biotechnology abstracts, the most widely utilized classication system for biotechnology patent analyses (dalpé, 2003). table 2 presents biotechnology patent counts and regional shares from 2000 to 2003. note that we are no longer looking only at patent triads.while the overall results re˚ect our more aggregate ndings (i.e., the united states as a dominant player), table 2 also reveals some striking differences across industrial applications. u.s. leadership in biotechnology is centered on the patent classes most closely related to red biotechnology. more than 75 percent of all u.s. patents are in the categories genetic engineering and fermentation, pharmaceuticals, and cell culture. while these classes are also active in the portfolio of the eu and japan, an important share of patenting activity by the eu and japan is in classes associated with green and white biotechnology. these patterns of comparative advantage can be seen most clearly when we calculate the share of patenting recorded by each region within each industrial application. we dene comparative advantage as those patent classes with a higher share of domestic patenting than the country™s share of the total number of biotechnology patents.12 for example, the united states has a comparative advantage (as indicated by the boldface entries) in the classes for which it holds over 55.4 percent of all 11 this pattern may be reversed in the case of stem cells, where restrictions on u.s. federal funding of earlystage embryonic stem cell research have spurred numerous international initiatives to attract key scientists and create a favorable cluster environment for stem cell commercialization efforts.12 the formal condition for ˚agging a quotient is ppppijjitotal, where p is the number of patents, i denotes the country, j indicates the application area, and total stands for the entire number of biotechnology patents within the period 20002003 in derwent biotechnology resource.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.260 innovation in global industriestable 2 patent counts and share of patents in biotechnology patent classes, 20002003codepatent classu.s.eu15jptotalagenetic engineering and fermentation7,1252,6711,65512,13858.7%22.0%13.6%bengineering, biochemical engineering19616610347940.9%34.7%21.5%csensors and analysis124775524550.6%31.4%22.4%dpharmaceuticals5,5641,9781,1109,25060.2%21.4%12.0%60.2%eagriculture1,2493912362,01062.1%19.5%11.7%ffood and food additives26028618671212.1%7.6%9.0%gfuels, mining, and metal recovery44664517125.7%38.6%26.3%hother chemicals 16020417650431.7%40.5%34.9%jcell culture 1,0584232491,77959.5%23.8%14.0%kbiocatalysis 593 548 492 1,60437.0%34.2%30.7%lpurication, downstream processing 54 52 16 12742.5%40.9%12.6%mwaste disposal and the environment 122 185 232 56321.7%32.9%41.2%total16,3756,8154,43329,582granted patents. consider, then, the areas of relative strength for the eu, such as fuels, mining, and metal recovery; other chemicals; purication, downstream processing; and waste disposal and the environment. these patterns seem to re˚ect historical strength by the eu in the chemical industry and related industrial applications of biotechnology. similarly, the relative strength of japanese inventors is apparent in areas such as waste disposal and the environment and other chemicals. indeed, it is useful to note that the eu and japan both register a higher number of patents on an absolute basis in several application categories: fuels, mining, and metal recovery; other chemicals; and waste disposal and the environment. finally, while the bulk of u.s. patents are in classes related to red biotechnology, the united states also exhibits advantage on a relative basis in green biotechnology (the agriculture sector), re˚ecting in part the leading global position of monsanto and dupont in this application segment. overall, these patenting patterns suggest that u.s. leadership in biotechnology is by no means monolithic. while the united states does tend to have a dominant position in red and green biotechnology, the eu and japan exhibit innovation leadership in areas innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 261related to white biotechnology. this is consistent with qualitative assessments that specic areas of biotechnology tend to be organized around clusters, with a small number of global innovation hubs.from innovation activity to salesof course, our analysis so far provides a limited perspective on the intensity of biotechnology activity across different regions: while evaluations of r&d employment and investment capture the intensity of r&d inputs, and patenting provides an imperfect measure of earlystage research outcomes, the impact of biotechnology ultimately depends on the ability to commercialize new technologies in the marketplace.as such, table 3 provides a brief examination of the relative intensity of inputs and outputs of the biotechnology industry. biotechnology r&d expenditure, patent counts, and sales are divided by the total population within each distinctive geographic area to calculate per capita measures for each category, which are then indexed to the u.s. level (u.s. = 1.0). both r&d investment and patenting in the eu are approximately 40 percent of the u.s. level on a per capita basis, yet sales per capita are nearly onethird lower, at 28 percent of the u.s. level. as mentioned earlier, this may re˚ect the earlier stage of development of many european biotechnology rms or the fact that european rms are more specialized in areas such as industrial applications, which may be associated with a lower level of sales for a given level of innovative investment (and patenting output). in contrast, although japan is also concentrated in white biotechnology, japanese companies exhibit a slightly higher level of patent per capita than europe (0.46) and a much higher level of sales per capita (0.45).countryspecic innovation performancefinally, table 4 presents the distribution of biotechnology patent counts across a range of countries from 2000 to 2003, divided by individual application areas. these data are not strictly comparable to the ofcial oecd triadic patent table 3 from r&d activity to patenting and sales of the biotechnology industryr&d per capita indexpatents per capita indexsales per capita indexusa1.001.001.00eu0.370.410.28japann/a0.460.45source: oecd biotechnology patents and authors™ calculations (oecd, 2006, author™s calculations).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.262 innovation in global industriestable 4 biotechnology patenting from 2000 to 2003 by countrya. genetic engineering and fermentationb. biochemical engineeringc. sensors and analysisd. pharmaceuticalse. agriculturef. food and food additivesg. fuels, mining and metal recoveryh. other chemicals j. cell culturek. biocatalysisl. purication downstream processingm. waste disposal and the environment wpo/ib7,9792131396,4881352611971,19076571113usa7,1251961245,5641,249260441601,05859354122canada1116903632211029mexico43211cuba11argentina53brazil1epo797442458711010214871121601132uk653211652093226159967923ireland3131122germany71273274961049224701281791981france258166192463910114743728netherlands21211371251515belgium4311121switzerland10722411austria1731144223595denmark862464671255sweden44246419612finland191955163norway10512italy3142872147732spain21195227portugal4111greece1111hungary4311czech republic2111slovakia111111poland 11serbia and montenegro 1republic of macedonia11russia331281623411turkey1israel5122399943japan1,655103551,1102361864517624949216232republic of korea672152107199175china 46521416371211233212taiwan11india64411singapore6241malaysia11australia14682111426522225new zealand231412211south africa8744total 12,1384792459,2502,0107121715041,7791,604127563source: derwent biotechnology resource (2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 263table 4 biotechnology patenting from 2000 to 2003 by countrya. genetic engineering and fermentationb. biochemical engineeringc. sensors and analysisd. pharmaceuticalse. agriculturef. food and food additivesg. fuels, mining and metal recoveryh. other chemicals j. cell culturek. biocatalysisl. purication downstream processingm. waste disposal and the environment wpo/ib7,9792131396,4881352611971,19076571113usa7,1251961245,5641,249260441601,05859354122canada1116903632211029mexico43211cuba11argentina53brazil1epo797442458711010214871121601132uk653211652093226159967923ireland3131122germany71273274961049224701281791981france258166192463910114743728netherlands21211371251515belgium4311121switzerland10722411austria1731144223595denmark862464671255sweden44246419612finland191955163norway10512italy3142872147732spain21195227portugal4111greece1111hungary4311czech republic2111slovakia111111poland 11serbia and montenegro 1republic of macedonia11russia331281623411turkey1israel5122399943japan1,655103551,1102361864517624949216232republic of korea672152107199175china 46521416371211233212taiwan11india64411singapore6241malaysia11australia14682111426522225new zealand231412211south africa8744total 12,1384792459,2502,0107121715041,7791,604127563source: derwent biotechnology resource (2006).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.264 innovation in global industriescounts presented earlier. instead, derwent biotechnology resources relies on an idiosyncratic algorithm for assigning patents (e.g., fractional patent shares) to different countries, by the country of origin of the inventors (derwent biotechnology resource, 2006). with that caveat, the results are intriguing, as they deepen the broad patterns observed in our earlier u.s.eujapan comparisons.in particular, while we do not engage in a detailed applicationspecic examination of individual countries, there seem to be several distinct ﬁtiersﬂ of global activity within the biotechnology industry. first, there are several countries that exhibit a high level of overall activity, realized across several different application areas with a high number of patents in each area. these multifunctional biotechnology centers include the united states, japan, germany, the united kingdom, and australia. the presence of australia in this category is signicant; it has a strong history of basic research in the life sciences and has made signicant investments in nurturing biotechnology companies and applications. second, there is a grouping of countries that either have a broad base with only a few patents in each category (e.g., the netherlands) or have intensive activity in a few categories (e.g., israel). finally, a large number of countries have only a small number of patents in biotechnology, often exhibiting only one or two patents in total. these include several european countries (e.g., portugal, greece), most of the latin american and former eastern european countries, and several of the less developed asian economies (india, malaysia, etc.).overall, these countryspecic patterns reinforce several of the themes already mentioned. first, the united states exhibits persistent innovation leadership in biotechnology by a wide margin. second, an increasing number of countries around the world seem to be displaying signicant activity within biotechnology, and there is signicant heterogeneity among countries in their biotechnology innovation intensity. for example, although belgium has an advanced economy, it is a clear laggard in biotechnology innovation. finally, as the biotechnology industry begins to spread from its origins in the life sciences sector, it will be increasingly important to distinguish the geography of innovation by individual applications; while the united states exhibits leadership in life sciences and agriculture, denmark and japan seem to have established leadership positions within industrial biotechnology applications.key findings and policy conclusionskey findingsoverall our analysis suggests that both the biotechnology industry and biotechnology innovation in biotechnology remain clustered economic activities, with a strong reliance on and interaction with sciencebased university research. however, the number of active clusters in biotechnology is increasing over time, both in terms of the number of distinct locations in the united states that serve as innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 265the host for activity in the industry and in terms of a globalizing activity. while many countries around the world now host a biotechnology industry of varying importance, the activity within most countries seems to be highly localized. in other words, the data, though clearly inadequate to provide a complete picture, suggest that the number of biotechnology clusters that achieved ﬁminimum scaleﬂ has increased, which is re˚ected in an increased dispersion in terms of employment, measures of biotechnology entrepreneurship, and measures of the geographic origins of biotechnology innovation.this central insightšan increase in the number of regional innovation clusters, rather than a simple dispersion of biotechnology activityšholds several important implications for (1) evaluating the global biotechnology industry going forward and (2) developing effective policy to ensure continued u.s. leadership in this area.first, our analysis suggests that the impact of globalization on biotechnology innovation seems to be different than that of traditional manufacturing sectors, such as the automobile industry or the it sector. specically, the globalization of other industries re˚ects the increasing availability of lowcost locations to conduct activities that previously had been done in the united states. in contrast, the globalization of biotechnology re˚ects a ﬁcatching upﬂ process by a small number of regions around the world that seek to compete headtohead with leading regions in the united states.second, it is important to account for the range of activities now included within the biotechnology industry, including diverse applications in the life sciences, agriculture, and industry. although most discussion focuses on life sciencesšwhich remains the largest single segment of biotechnology in terms of employment, enterprises, investment, and patentingšthe globalization of biotechnology is occurring most rapidly in industrial applications. moreover, although the united states continues its historical advantage in agricultural applications, this may be due to political resistance in europe and other regions rather than the presence of strong agglomeration economies within the united states. for example, the presence of extremely strong clusters with a high level of entrepreneurship that characterizes life sciences biotechnology seems to be a bit less salient for agricultural applications. the presence of multiple industrial segmentsšeach of which is associated with distinct locational dynamicsšraises the possibility that, even as individual clusters become more important within each application area, the total number of global clusters may increase with the range of applications.third, at least in terms of the available data, the united states maintains a very strong, even dominant, position within biotechnology. while some conceptual frameworks (e.g., the convergence effect) would suggest that early leadership by the united states would have been followed by a more even global distribution of biotechnology innovation, the ﬁgapﬂ between the united states and the rest of the world has remained relatively constant over the past decade or so. indeed, it innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.266 innovation in global industriesis likely that the united states has a historic opportunity to establish a longterm position as a global hub for biotechnology innovation, particularly in the life sciences and agricultural areas. in contrast to traditional debates about outsourcing, it is possible that increased global activity in biotechnology can complement rather than substitute for u.s. investment, employment, and innovation.finally, our analysis highlights the small size (in terms of absolute levels of employment) of the biotechnology industry. while industries such as it may plausibly be associated with a large impact on the total workforces of individual states and regions, total employment in biotechnology is very small, although associated with very high average wages. the simple fact is that, if the biotechnology industry remains at roughly the same scale that it has achieved over the past decade or so, it is unlikely to be a major driver of employment patterns and overall job growth, either in the united states or abroad.policy conclusionsthe analysis holds a number of important policy implications. first, and perhaps most important, effective innovation policy concerning biotechnology must account for the broad differences between biotechnology and other sectors of the economy. the globalization of innovation in biotechnology is occurring in a much different way and for different reasons than the globalization of innovative activity in other manufacturing sectors, such as automobiles or it. consequently, policies that may be benecial for these more traditional sectors (e.g., domestic r&d tax credits) may have little impact in biotechnology, where the vast majority of rms do not report positive accounting prots subject to signicant taxation.second, there are policies that are likely to be particularly important in biotechnology, even though they may do little to stem the broader pattern of the globalization of innovation. specically, the biotechnology industry is extremely reliant on effective intellectual property institutions, most notably patents. u.s. leadership in biotechnology has beneted historically from a strong intellectual property environment, in many cases protecting innovations that received limited protection in other jurisdictions (e.g., transgenic mammals). similarly, innovation in biotechnology benets from the promotion of earlystage venture capital, including seed investments, and an effective system for technology transfer from university to industry (mowery, 2004). while such considerations may be of modest importance for many of the sectors currently undergoing globalization, policies ensuring effective operation of the patent system, providing favorable treatment of earlystage venture capital investment, and enhancing the effectiveness of technology transfer are likely to enhance the strength of the u.s. biotechnology sector.recent patent reform proposals illustrate the challenge of ensuring continued u.s. leadership in biotechnology in a changing policy environment. spurred in innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 267part by key studies emphasizing signicant inefciencies in the patent system (cohen and merrill [2003]; jaffe and lerner [2004]), numerous patent reform proposals have been advanced in the last few years, including legislation and administrative reviews. while some of these proposals seek to limit the strength of patents in areas such as business methods, biotechnology will be impacted by these reforms. continued dynamism in the u.s. biotechnology sector requires strong and enforceable intellectual property protection, and would benet from signicant improvements in the operation of the patent system, such as reduced administrative delay and a higher level of consistency in patent grant decisio making. the danger is that reforms targeting sectors very distant from biotechnology will undermine the ability for biotechnology innovators to effectively commercialize their discoveries.third, the distinctive nature of biotechnology innovation suggests that the globalization of biotechnology innovation need not detract from u.s. strength in this area. both the underlying science and the industry are still at a relatively early stage, and longterm american prosperity will benet from establishing the united states as a global hub for biotechnology innovation. this can be accomplished in several ways, most notably through investments in education and immigration policy. international leadership by american universities in the life sciences is a fundamental precondition for continued american leadership in biotechnology innovation. the biotechnology sector will benet from policies that encourage the ﬁbest and brightestﬂ on a global scale to study and potentially work in the united states. signicant restrictions on the ability of researchers living abroad to travel and collaborate with researchers in the united states in both public and private sectors or signicant restrictions on the free ˚ow of capital investments undermines the likelihood of translating current u.s. cluster leadership into a position of durable centrality as a global biotechnology innovation hub.finally, an increasing number of state policy initiatives are focused on biotechnology in terms of encouraging job creation and employment. while providing a favorable local environment for biotechnology innovation and entrepreneurship is important, policy makers should be careful to avoid focusing too heavily on attracting external investments in biotechnology. as emphasized by feldman and francis (2004), effective local economic development in biotechnology focuses on encouraging entrepreneurship and an effective interface with preexisting scientic institutions, rather than focusing on attracting a single large company. while there are of course cases where the ﬁmatchﬂ between an individual company and region are particularly favorable, most qualitative and quantitative evidence about the growth of biotechnology clusters emphasizes the centrality of indigenous entrepreneurship and the key role played by local university research. in addition, local policy makers must avoid excessive optimism about the promise of biotechnology for shortterm economic development. relative to the size and scope of other industries undergoing globalization, the absolute size of the biotechnology industry is quite modest and is likely to have innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.268 innovation in global industriesonly a small effect on regional employment and economic growth for the foreseeable future.acknowledgmentwe would like to thank jeff furman, fiona murray, jeffrey t. macher, david c. mowery, and stephen a. merrill for extremely thoughtful suggestions and comments.referencesadams, j. d. (1990). fundamental stocks of knowledge and productivity growth. journal of political economy 98(4):673702.argyres, n., and j. liebeskind. (1998). privatizing the intellectual commons: universities and the commercialization of biotechnology. journal of economic behavior & organization 35(4): 427454.arora, a., a. fosfuri, and a. gambardella. (2001). markets for technology: economics of innovation and corporate strategy. cambridge: mit press.audretsch, d. b., and m. p. feldman. (1996). r&d spillovers and the geography of innovation and production. american economic review 86(3):630640.audretsch, d. b., and p. e. stephan. (1996). companyscientist locational links: the case of biotechnology. american economic review 86(3):641652.barro, r.j., and xavier salaimartin. 1992. converage. journal of political economy, 100(2): 223251.battelle technology partnership practice, ssti. (2006). growing the nation™s bioscience sector: state bioscience initiatives.biotechnology industry organization. (2006). milestones 20062007.breschi, s., and f. malerba. (2005). clusters, networks, and innovation. new york: oxford university press.brezis, e., and p. krugman. (1997). technology and the life cycle of cities. journal of economic growth 2(4):369383.burrill & company. (2004). biotech 2004. available at http://www.burrillandco.com/bio/biotechbook. accessed august 3, 2007.cockburn, i., r. henderson, l. orsenigo, and g. p. pisano. (1999). pharmaceuticals and biotechnology. pp. 363398 in u.s. industry in 2000: studies in competitive performance, d. mowery, ed. washington, d.c.: national academy press.cohen, w., and s. merrill. (2003). patents in the knowledgebased economy. national research council (u.s.). committee on intellectual property rights in the knowledgebased economy. washington, d.c.: the national academies press.cohen, w., r. r. nelson, and j. p. walsh. (2000). protecting their intellectual assets: appropriability conditions and why u.s. manufacturing firms patent (or not). national bureau of economic research working paper 7552.cooke, p. (2002). biotechnology clusters as regional, sectoral innovation systems. international regional science review 25(1):837.cortright, j., and h. mayer. (2002). signs of life: the growth of biotechnology centers in the u.s. washington, d.c.: brookings institution press.criscuolo, p. (2006). the ﬁhome advantageﬂ effect and patent families. a comparison of oecd triadic patents, the uspto and the epo. scientometrics 66:2341.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 269critical, i. (2006). biotechnology in europe: 2006 comparative study. europabio, the european association for bioindustries.culliton, b. (1990). what is good for monsanto is good for washington university. science 247: 1027.dalpé, r. (2002). bibliometric analysis of biotechnology. scientometrics 55:189213.david, p. (2004). can ﬁopen scienceﬂ be protected from the evolving regime of ipr protections? journal of institutional and theoretical economics 160(1):934.derwent biotechnology resource. (2006). thomson, inc available at http://www.thomson.com/ content/scientic/brandoverviews/biotechresource.dimasi, j. a., r. w. hansen, and h. g. grabowski. (2003). the price of innovation: new estimates of drug development costs. journal of health economics 22:151185.dosi, g., k. pavitt, and l. soete. (1990). the economics of technical change and international trade. new york: columbia university press.dumais, g., g. ellison, and e. l. glaeser. (2002). geographic concentration as a dynamic process. review of economics and statistics 84(2):193204.duranton, g., and d. puga. (2001). nursery cities: urban diversity, process innovation, and the life cycle of products. american economic review 91(5):14541478.eaton, j., and s. kortum. (1996). trade in ideas: patenting & productivity in the oecd. journal of international economics 40(34):251278.edvinsson, l., and m. malone. (1997). intellectual capital. new york: harper business.feldman, m. (2003). the locational dynamics of the us biotech industry: knowledge externalities and the anchor hypothesis. industry and innovation 10(3):311328.feldman, m., and j. francis. (2003). fortune favours the prepared region: the case of entrepreneurship and the capitol region biotechnology cluster. european planning studies 11(7):765788.feldman, m., and j. francis. (2004). homegrown solutions: fostering cluster formation. economic development quarterly 18(2):127137.furman, j. l., m. e. porter, and s. stern. (2002). the determinants of national innovative capacity. research policy 31:899933.gans, j., and s. stern. (2000). incumbency and r&d incentives: licensing the gale of creative destruction. journal of economics and management strategy 9(4):489511.gans, j., and s. stern. (2003). the product market and the market for ﬁideasﬂ: commercialization strategies for technology entrepreneurs. research policy 32(2):333350.graff, g., s. cullen, k. bradford, and d. zilberman. (2003) the publicprivate structure of intellectual property ownership in agricultural biotechnology. nature biotechnology 21(9):989995.griliches, z., ed. (1984). r&d, patents and productivity. chicago, il: chicago university press.griliches, z. (1990). patent statistics as economic indicators: a survey. journal of economic literature 92:630653.griliches, z. (1994). productivity, r&d, and the data constraint. american economic review 84: 123.heller, m., and r. eisenberg. (1998). can patents deter innovation? the anticommons in biomedical research. science 280:698701.henderson, j. v., a. kuncoro, and m. turner. (1995). industrial development in cities. journal of political economy 103:10671090.hermans, r., and a.j. tahvanainen. (2006). regional differences in patterns of collaboration, specialisation and performance. in sustainable biotechnology development, r. hermans and m. kulvik, eds. etla, the research institute of the finnish economy, series b 217.hermans, r., m. kulvik, and a.j. tahvanainen. (2006). the biotechnology industry in finland. in sustainable biotechnology developmentšnew insights into finland, r. hermans and m. kulvik, eds. etla, the research institute of the finnish economy, series b 217.hewlettpackard. (2006). annual report, 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.270 innovation in global industrieshoffman, william (2008). mbbnet, http://www.mbbnet.umn.edu/scmap/biotechmap.html, university of minnesota, mn.international organization of automobile manufacturers. (2007). available at http://www.oica.net/htdocs/main.htm. accessed august 1, 2007.jaffe, a., and j. lerner. (2004). innovation and its discontents: how our broken patent system is endangering innovation and progress, and what to do about it. princeton, nj: princeton university press.jensen, r., and m. thursby. (2001). proofs and prototypes for sale: the licensing of university inventions. american economic review 91(1):240259.kenney, m. (1986). biotechnology: the universityindustrial complex. new haven, ct: yale university press.klein, s., and n. rosenberg. (1986). an overview of innovation. in the positive sum strategy: harnessing technology for economic growth, r. landau and n. rosenberg, eds. washington, d.c.: national academy press.koput, k. w., w. w. powell, and l. smithdoerr. (1996). interorganizational collaboration and the locus of innovation: networks of learning in biotechnology. administrative science quarterly 41.kortum, s., and j. lerner. (2001). assessing the contribution of venture capital to innovation. rand journal of economics 31(4):674692.krugman, p. (1991). increasing returns and economic geography. journal of political economy 99(3):483499.krugman, p., and a. j. venables. (1995). globalization and the inequality of nations. quarterly journal of economics 110(4):857881.lerner, j., and r. p. merges. (1998). the control of technology alliances: an empirical analysis of the biotechnology industry. journal of industrial economics 46(2):125156.lundvall, b. (1992). national systems of innovation: towards a theory of innovation and interactive learning. london, uk: st. martin™s press.magee, m. (2005). health politics. spencer books.martin, p., and c. rogers. (1995). industrial location and public infrastructure. journal of international economics 39:335351.massachusetts biotechnology council. (2007). massachusetts biotechnology company directory. available at http://massbio.org/directory/statistics/statscompyrfound.html. accessed december 19, 2007.mcelroy, d. (2004). valuing product development cycle in agricultural biotechnology. what is in a name? nature biotechnology 23:817822.mckelvey, m. d. (1996). discontinuities in genetic engineering for pharmaceuticals? firms jumps and lockin in systems of innovation. technology analysis & strategic management 8(2):107116.merges, r. p., and r. r. nelson (1990). the complex economics of patent scope. columbia law review 90(4): 839916.merges, r. p., and r. r. nelson. (1994). on limiting or encouraging rivalry in technical progress: the effect of patent scope decisions. journal of economic behavior and organization 25(1):124.monfort, p., and r. nicolini. (2000). regional convergence and international integration. journal of urban economics 48:286306.mowery, d. (2004). ivory tower and industrial innovation: universityindustry technology transfer before and after the bayhdole act in the united states. stanford, ca: stanford business books.mowery, d., and r. nelson. (1999). sources of industrial leadership: studies of seven industries (1999). cambridge, uk, and new york: cambridge university press.mowery, d., r. nelson, b. sampat, and a. ziedonis. (2001). the growth of patenting and licensing by u.s. universities: an assessment of the effects of the bayhdole act of 1980. research policy 30:99119.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.biotechnology 271murray, f., and s. stern. (2007). do formal intellectual property rights hinder the free ˚ow of scientic knowledge? an empirical test of the anticommons hypothesis. journal of economic behavior and organization 63(4):648687.narin, f., and d. olivastro. (1992). status report: linkage between technology and science. research policy 21(3):237249.national science board. 2006. science and engineering indicators 2006. two volumes. arlington, va: national science foundation (volume 1, nsb 0601; volume 2, nsb 0601a).nelkin, d., r. nelson, and c. kiernan. (1987). universityindustry alliances. science, technology, & human values 12(1):6574.nelson, r. (1993). national innovation systems: a comparative analysis. new york: oxford university press.oecd. (2006). statistical denition of biotechnology. available at http://www.oecd.org/document/42/0,2340,en264937437193399411137437,00.html. accessed march 1, 2008.orsenigo, l. (1989). emergence of biotechnology: institutions and markets in industrial innovation. pinter publishers, 230 pp.pierrebenoit, j. (1999). innovating through networks: a case study in plant biotechnology. international journal of biotechnology 1(1):6781.porter, g., c. denning, a. plomer, j. sinden, and p. torremans. (2006). the patentability of human embryonic stem cells in europe. nature biotechnology 24:653655.porter, m. (1990). the competitive advantage of nations. new york: free press.porter, m. (1998). clusters and the new economics of competition. harvard business review 76(6): 7790.porter, m., and s. stern. (1999). the new challenge to america™s prosperity: findings from the innovation index. washington, d.c.: council on competitiveness.powell, w. w., d. r. white, k. w. koput, and j. owensmith. (2005). network dynamics and eld evolution: the growth of interorganizational collaboration in the life sciences. american journal of sociology 110:11321205.romer, p. m. (1990). endogenous technological change. journal of political economy 98(5): 71102.rosenberg, n. (1974). science, invention and economic growth. economic journal 84(333):90108.saxenian, a. (1994). regional advantage: culture and competition in silicon valley and route 128. cambridge, ma: harvard university press.schmookler, j. (1966). invention and economic growth. cambridge, mass.: harvard university press.stern, s. (1995). incentives and focus in university and industrial research: the case of synthetic insulin. in the universityindustry interface and medical innovation, a. geligns and n. rosenberg, eds. washington, d.c.: institute of medicine, national academy press.stokes, d. (1997). paster™s quadrant: basic science and technological innovation. washington, d.c.: brookings institute press.swann, g. m., m. prevezer, and d. k. stout. (1998). the dynamics of industrial clustering: international comparisons in computing and biotechnology. oxford university press.trajtenberg, m. (1990). patents as indicators of innovation, economic analysis of product innovation. cambridge, ma: harvard university press.van beuzekom, b., and a. arundel. (2006). oecd biotechnology statisticsš2006. oecd, paris, france.venables, a. (1996). equilibrium locations of vertically linked industries. international economic review 37:341359.zucker, l., m. r. darby, and j. armstrong. (1998a). geographically localized knowledge: spillovers or markets? economic inquiry 36(1):6586.zucker, l., m. r. darby, and m. b. brewer. (1998b). intellectual human capital and the birth of u.s. biotechnology enterprises. american economic review 88(1):290306.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.273 8 logisticsanuradha nagarajanuniversity of michiganchelsea c. white iiigeorgia institute of technologyintroductionﬁalexander™s army was able to achieve its brilliant successes because it managed its supply chain so wellﬂ says michael hugos (2006), drawing on published literature on the history of the successful campaigns of alexander the great. one of the critical differences between alexander™s army and the ones he defeated was the fact that his army was the fastest, lightest, and most mobile army of its time. while other armies were constrained by carts and pack animals carrying the supplies, alexander™s soldiers were trained to carry their own equipment and provisions and to live off the land as needed. competitive advantage provided by logistics and the supply chain persists 2000 years later. in the battleeld of modern industry, globalization, demanding consumers, and efcient capital, markets have combined to create an environment that punishes mediocrity and incompetence. firms are looking to the logistics industry to provide competitive advantage as goods and services move seamlessly worldwide. in a recent speech on global economic integration, federal reserve chairman ben bernanke said, ﬁtechnological advances continue to play an important role in facilitating global integration. for example, dramatic improvements in supplychain management, made possible by advances in communication and computer technologies, have signicantly reduced the costs of coordinating production among globally distributed suppliersﬂ (bernanke, 2006). economic integration brought about by vanishing global trade barriers has enabled rms to creatively manage their value chain, identifying sources of competitive advantage in the world stage to provide the best value for customers worldwide.a consequence of the global dispersion of economic activity has been the innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.274 innovation in global industriesincreased complexity of the supply chain. when national boundaries were impermeable due to geographical, technological, logistical, and political constraints, rms could control the movement of goods through the value chain with more certainty. consider the movement of goods in and out of the united states. in 2004, nearly $1.5 trillion worth of goods were imported to the united states, and $0.8 trillion of u.s. goods were exported to other countries. nearly 16 million 20foot equivalent units (equivalent to shipping containers that are 20 feet long, 8 feet wide, and 8 feet tall) arrive each year at u.s. ports. roughly onequarter of u.s. imports and onesixth of its exportsšor about $423 billion and $139 billion worth of goods, respectively, in 2004šarrive or depart on container ships. containerized imports include both nished goods and intermediate inputs, some of which are critical to maintaining u.s. manufacturers™ ﬁjustintimeﬂ supply chains. supplychain disruptions can leave manufacturers vulnerable if a necessary part does not reach an assembly plant in time. the lack of key parts could reduce output, employment, and income for individual companies and entire economic regions by amounts larger than the value of the delayed partšand in areas and businesses far removed from the port where a disruption occurred. although concerns about disruptions in the ˚ow of freight focus on terrorist attacks, similar economic losses could result from extreme weather, the high cost of fuel or fuel unavailability, or labor disputes that affect freight operations or from disruptions elsewhere in the supply chain.1 the increasing complexity of the global supply chain has compelled rms to look carefully at managing three primary challenges in logistics: (1) managing visibility of information and product movement as it relates to the ability to track orders, inventory, and shipments in real time; (2) managing costs; and (3) securing reliable service. innovation in the logistics industry has played a major role in helping businesses manage these challenges. according to the u.s. state of logistics report, although absolute logistics costs rose substantially in the united states in 2004, because of the growing economy, the costs of logistics remained at 8.6 percent of the gross domestic product (gdp). in fact, logistics costs have generally been declining annually since 1995.as shown in figure 1, logistics costs were 10.4 percent of gdp in 1995 but they have declined year after year annually, except for a slight increase in 2000, reaching its lowest level of 8.6 percent in 2003 (wilson, 2005). innovation in logistics has been critical to offering better products and services at lower costs.we begin this chapter with a brief denition of the logistics industry and its role in the economy. we classify the rms involved in the industry into four categories and examine innovation practices in each of these categories in order to understand where innovation occurs and how the locus of innovation has changed over time among the various participants in the logistics network. we present the results of our semistructured interviews with 20 respondents consisting of execu1 see http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/71xx/doc7106/0329containershipments.pdf, p. 7.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 275logistics1.eps0.02.04.06.08.010.012.014.016.019841986198819901992199419961998200020022004yearpercent of gdplogistics % of gdpfigure 1 logistics as a percentage of gdp. source: wilson (2005).tives from the logistics industry and industry experts. we then focus specically on the locus of innovation, as indicated by the home country of the rst inventor listed on logisticsrelated patents in the database of world intellectual property organization (wipo) patents we have collected, and we examine the changes in the location of innovation worldwide in the logistics industry. our conclusions on the current state of innovation are derived from our observations from the two sources mentioned earlier: patent data and semistructured interviews with top industry executives and experts. we conclude with policy implications and our expectations for the future of innovation in the logistics industry.industry definition and descriptionlogistics management is that part of supplychain management that plans, implements, and controls the efcient, effective, forward and reverse ˚ow and storage of goods, services, and related information between the point of origin and the point of consumption in order to meet customers™ requirements. logistics management activities typically include inbound and outbound transportation management, ˚eet management, warehousing, materials handling, order fulllment, logistics network design, inventory management, supply/demand planning, and management of thirdparty logistics services providers. to varying degrees, the logistics function also includes sourcing and procurement, production planning and scheduling, packaging and assembly, and customer service. it innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.276 innovation in global industriesis involved in all levels of planning and executionšstrategic, operational, and tactical. logistics management is an integrating function that coordinates and optimizes all logistics activities, as well as integrating logistics activities with other functions, including marketing, sales manufacturing, nance, and information technology (council of supply chain management professionals, n.d.). the logistics industry consists of rms offering a variety of services, including transportation and warehousing. as globalization has extended and expanded the supply chain, logistics rms have added order fulllment, logistics network design, inventory management, and supply/demand planning to their portfolio of products.in terms of tons transported, domestic freight transportation in the united states grew by about 20 percent annually from 1993 to 2002. in the same period inventory carrying costs as a percentage of gdp have decreased from 8.3 percent in 1981 to 2.8 percent in 2002 as shown in figure 2. ﬁthis reduction can be atlogistics2.eps012345678919811983198519871989199119931995199719992001yearpercent of gdpyear% of gdpfigure 2 inventory carrying costs as a percent of gdp. source: fhwa freight management and operations; see http://www.ops.fhwa.dot.gov/freight/freightanalysis/econmethods/lcdprep/index.htm.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 277tributed to timely, reliable delivery, efciency, and visibility in the supply chain system. these reductions are especially evident in industries such as automotive and computer hardware manufacturers2.ﬂ firms use logistics not only to manage cost, as dell did in their assembly and distribution of desktops, but also to be nely tuned to customer needs, as zara has done in fashion retailing. dell™s personal computer supply chain creates positive cash ˚ow for the rm because it receives payment from its customers before it has to pay its suppliers by managing its supply chain efciently.3 zara™s supply chain allows the rm to closely observe the market™s changing tastes and to respond quickly, keeping the rm in the forefront of fashion while minimizing inventory markdowns.4 in each case, these supply chains are wellcoordinated, complex global networks, and in each case the rms have focused on innovation in their supply chain in order to achieve competitive advantage (economist, 2006).three trends have spurred innovation in logistics (smith, 2006). the rst trend is the increase in demand for hightech goods.5 according to the global insight world industry service database, which provides production data for 70 countries that account for more than 97 percent of global economic activity, the global market for hightechnology goods is growing at a faster rate than that for other manufactured goods, and hightechnology industries are driving economic growth around the world. during the 22year period examined (19802001), hightechnology production grew at an in˚ationadjusted average annual rate of nearly 6.5 percent compared with 2.4 percent for other manufactured goods. between 1996 and 2001, hightechnology industry output grew at 8.9 percent per year, more than double the rate of growth for all other manufacturing industries. output by the ve hightechnology industries represented 7.7 percent of global production of all manufactured goods in 1980; by 2001, this output had doubled 2 ginter, j. l. and la londe, b. j. 2001. an historical analysis of inventory levels: an exploratory study. ohio state working paper and fein, a. j. 2004. the myth of decline: assessing time trends in us inventory to sales ratios. ces 0418. see http://www.ces.census.gov/index.php/ces/1.00/cespapers?downkey=101710#search=%22ginter%20and%20la%20londe%22 3 dell pioneered buildtoorder supplychain management in the 1990s to support its desktop business. instead of building computers to forecasts and letting retailers sell them, dell sells directly from its own website and call centers and then builds to order. dell cuts retailers and distributors out of its supply chain but also gets paid up front, often before they have to pay for components. however, dell has found it difcult to duplicate its supplychain success in its laptop and consumer electronics businesses.4 zara, a part of spain™s inditex group, is in the fashion apparel business. fashion retailing is highly perishable, in˚uenced quickly by changes in consumer and celebrity tastes. in contrast to a typical clothing company, where outsourcing manufacturing to asia could take about 6 months to get a new design to shops, zara completes the process in 5 weeks. zara accomplishes this speed to market primarily by buying some garments and materials partly nished and by avoiding mass production.5 the ve industries considered high technology by organisation for economic cooperation and deveopment (oecd) based on their r&d intensity are aerospace, pharmaceuticals, computers and ofce machinery, communication equipment, and scientic (medical, precision, and optical) instruments.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.278 innovation in global industriesto 15.8 percent.6 hightech products typically have short product life cycles and complex value chains with design, manufacture, sales, and distribution located in different parts of the world. the role of innovation and execution of the supply chain has become paramount in this context.the second trend in˚uencing the logistics industry is globalizationšthe integration of many microeconomies into one worldwide, interdependent economy. companies have the ability to source and sell globally and have begun to streamline their supply chains and open new markets. according to world trade organization statistics, world merchandise trade has grown by 70 percent since 2001.7 according to global insight, trade exports are going to increase signicantly in all regions of the world, with the largest increases coming from exports from china to europe and intraasia trade (economist, 2006, p. 5). table 1 shows the top 25 rms in the logistics industry as identied by the hoovers database.8 these companies, headquartered all over the world, are not only moving logistics services worldwide but are also creating innovation centers close to the new centers of trade. for example, saint gobain, a glass manufacturer headquartered in france, has a ﬁtechnology centerﬂ for conducting multidisciplinary research and development (r&d) in blue bell, pennsylvania, to support its u.s. glass manufacturing and logistics operations. it has also opened a new materials research and logistics support center in shanghai, china, to cater to all its business divisions in asia in 2006. in 2005, hitachi invested in an information system company in china to help its thirdparty logistics (3pl) operations there.9 according to industry experts, including the council of supplychain professionals, reliable, timely accurate data is the keystone of the new global supply chain (bowman, n.d.; wilson, 2004). information is needed from each market and manufacturing outpost for planning, to enable ˚exibility, and to ensure security. software and hardware innovations that enable greater visibility of product movement to shippers and carriers have become critical to success in the industry.innovation in the industry has also been spurred by the growth of the internet and ecommerce. businesstobusiness commerce on the internet has been increasing. according to industry week™s 2005 value chain survey, worldwide, in the 2 years between 2003 and 2005, business purchases made online increased 6 u.s. technology marketplace. see http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind04/c6/c6s1.htm#c6s1l1p2. accessed october 23, 2006.7 see http://stat.wto.org/home/wsdbhome.aspx. accessed august 15, 20068 logistics services is described in hoover™s as companies that engage in the process of planning, implementing, and controlling the movement and storage of raw materials, inprocess inventory, nished goods, and related information from the point of origin to the point of consumption. we selected rms in the industry category that had logistics as one of their primary businesses. the rms are ranked by sales, not necessarily by logistics.9 by denition, a 3pl becomes a third party to the traditional twoparty (shipper/carrier) contract for transportation. a 3pl rm is, therefore, an outsourced provider that manages all or a signicant part of an organization™s logistics requirements and performs transportation, locating, and sometimes product consolidation activities.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 279table 1 top logistics companies worldwideno.company namelocationyear startedsales ($ million)employeescomments (source of information)1hitachi, ltd.tokyo, japan19202,524.80323, 072 (hitachi ltd.); 7505 (hitachi transport system ltd.)company website, annual report 2005, one source global business browser, hoovers online2deutsche post agbonn, germany1949mail: 16,486.42; express: 23,393.09; logistics: 10,176.31mail: 125,282; express: 131,927; logistic: 148,095one source global business browser, hoovers online, annual report 2005, equinet analyst reportšfebruary 20053united parcel service, inc.atlanta, us190742,581.00 (total); 5,994 (supply chain and freight operations)407,000one source global business browser, annual report 2005, factiva4compaigne de saintgobaincourbevoie, france166545,058 (total revenues); 19,808.18 (building distribution)199,630one source global business browser, annual report 2005, factiva5deutsche bahn aktiengesellschaftberlin, germany199435,314233,657hoovers online, company website6dhl worldwide networkdiegem, belgium196933,524.4171,980one source global business browser, hoovers online, annual report 20057fedex corporationmemphis, us197132,294.0184,953one source global business browser, factiva, hoovers online8a.p. mollerœmaersk a/scopenhagen, denmark190434,80976,000one source global business browser, hoovers onlinecontinuedinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.280 table 1 continuedno.company namelocationyear startedsales ($ million)employeescomments (source of information)9mclane company, inc.temple, us189423,373.0014,300one source global business browser, hoovers online, factiva10supervalu inc.eden prairie, us192619,863.6 (total); 9,228.6 (food distribution)52,400company website, factiva, one source global business browser11tnt n.v.hoofddorp, holland1946 (tnt originally founded)12,621.12 (total); 991.30 (logistics)128,671one source global business browser, factiva, hoovers online, company website12schenker agessen, germany187210,91239,000hoovers online, one source global business browser, factiva, company website13mitsui o.s.k. lines, ltd.tokyo, japan196410,920.2 (total); 553.4 (logistics)7,385annual report 2006, one source global business browser, hoovers online, company website14kbr, inc.houston, usthe parent company, halliburton, was founded in 191910,13862,500factiva, hoovers online15yrc worldwide inc.overland park, us19248,741.6 (total); 447.6 (meridian iq)68,000factiva, hoovers online, annual report 2005, company website16csx corporationjacksonville, us19808,61835,000hoovers online, one source global business browser17norfolk southern corporationnorfolk, us18948,52730,294annual report 2005, hoovers online, one source global business browser, company web site18r.r. donnelley & sons companychicago, us18648,430.250,000company website, factiva, one source global business browser19kuehne + nagel international agschindellegi, switzerland189011,276.6 (total); 1,681.2 (railroad logistics); 1,071.1 (contract logistics)23,000company website, factiva, one source global business browser, annual report 200520bollore investissementputeaux, france19557,648.732,808company website, factiva, one source global business browser21hanjin shipping co., ltd.seoul, south korea19885,921.11,641company website, factiva, one source global business browser, supplychainbrain.com22ryder system, inc.miami, us19345,740.8 (total); 1,637.8 (supply chain solutions)27,800company website, factiva, one source global business browser, annual report 2005, the south florida business journalšsouth˚orida.bizjournals.com23c.h. robinson worldwide, inc.eden prairie, us19055,688.95,776world trade magazine (worldtrademag.com), company website, one source global business browser, hoovers online24canada post corporationottawa, canada18675,520.372,874factiva, company website, one source global business browser25panalpina world transport (holding) ltd.basel, switzerland18905,290.613,583company website, factiva, one source global business browserinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 281no.company namelocationyear startedsales ($ million)employeescomments (source of information)9mclane company, inc.temple, us189423,373.0014,300one source global business browser, hoovers online, factiva10supervalu inc.eden prairie, us192619,863.6 (total); 9,228.6 (food distribution)52,400company website, factiva, one source global business browser11tnt n.v.hoofddorp, holland1946 (tnt originally founded)12,621.12 (total); 991.30 (logistics)128,671one source global business browser, factiva, hoovers online, company website12schenker agessen, germany187210,91239,000hoovers online, one source global business browser, factiva, company website13mitsui o.s.k. lines, ltd.tokyo, japan196410,920.2 (total); 553.4 (logistics)7,385annual report 2006, one source global business browser, hoovers online, company website14kbr, inc.houston, usthe parent company, halliburton, was founded in 191910,13862,500factiva, hoovers online15yrc worldwide inc.overland park, us19248,741.6 (total); 447.6 (meridian iq)68,000factiva, hoovers online, annual report 2005, company website16csx corporationjacksonville, us19808,61835,000hoovers online, one source global business browser17norfolk southern corporationnorfolk, us18948,52730,294annual report 2005, hoovers online, one source global business browser, company web site18r.r. donnelley & sons companychicago, us18648,430.250,000company website, factiva, one source global business browser19kuehne + nagel international agschindellegi, switzerland189011,276.6 (total); 1,681.2 (railroad logistics); 1,071.1 (contract logistics)23,000company website, factiva, one source global business browser, annual report 200520bollore investissementputeaux, france19557,648.732,808company website, factiva, one source global business browser21hanjin shipping co., ltd.seoul, south korea19885,921.11,641company website, factiva, one source global business browser, supplychainbrain.com22ryder system, inc.miami, us19345,740.8 (total); 1,637.8 (supply chain solutions)27,800company website, factiva, one source global business browser, annual report 2005, the south florida business journalšsouth˚orida.bizjournals.com23c.h. robinson worldwide, inc.eden prairie, us19055,688.95,776world trade magazine (worldtrademag.com), company website, one source global business browser, hoovers online24canada post corporationottawa, canada18675,520.372,874factiva, company website, one source global business browser25panalpina world transport (holding) ltd.basel, switzerland18905,290.613,583company website, factiva, one source global business browserinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.282 innovation in global industriesfrom 15 to 20 percent (vinas, 2005). in addition, according to forrester research, of the 80 million u.s. online households, threefourths have purchased products online (mulpuru, 2006). acquiring and retaining customers online necessitates providing complete satisfaction from the rst click on the company™s website to delivery to the door. the product has to be delivered when, where, and how the customer wants it delivered (bhise et al., 2000). in contrast to the bricksandmortar economy, delivery of the product on a timely basis has become a critical part of the overall customer™s purchasing experience. the internet and computing technologies have increased the amount of information available to the buyer and manufacturer about the product and the fulllment process. consequently expectations relating to timely and accurate fulllment are rising. data from the american customer satisfaction index annual ecommerce report in 2005 showed a slump in scores after 2 years of progressive increases (smith, 2005). auction leader ebay had a 4.8 percent reduction, and amazon.com dropped 4.5 percent in their customer satisfaction scores. firms such as amazon and ebay depend on the logistics function to improve and complete their customer™s purchasing experience. innovation along the supply chain, especially warehouse management software and tracking products, support rms™ efforts to cope with the demands of the internet environment.in summary, the modern logistics industry is a complex network of rms involved in the ˚ow and transformation of goods from the raw materials stage to the end user. innovation in the industry has been spurred by increases in the demand for high technology products, globalization in all aspects of the value chain, and the advent of ecommerce.patterns of innovation in the logistics industryone of the most challenging aspects of understanding innovation in logistics management lies in the accepted wisdom that every product has its own unique value chain. thus, innovation is primarily a pull phenomenon10 for rms in the logistics industry, with new products and services being developed in response to specic customer needs. the competing pressures of managing global supply chains costeffectively while increasing visibility, which allow a rm to monitor events and exceptions in real time, have created an environment ripe with opportunity for innovation. we adopt a broad denition of innovation that is not limited 10 john seely brown and john hagel iii dene pull and push systems in the context of innovation as follows: ﬁpush systems contrast starkly with pull ones, particularly in their view of demand: the former treat it as foreseeable, the latter as highly uncertain. this difference in a basic premise leads to fundamentally different design principles. for instance, instead of dealing with uncertainty by tightening controls, as push systems would, pull models address immediate needs by expanding opportunities for local participantsšemployees and customers alikešto use their creativity. to exploit the opportunities that uncertainty presents, pull models help people come together and innovate by drawing on a growing array of specialized and distributed resourcesﬂ (brown and hagel, 2005).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 283to technological breakthroughs or new products. as rogers notes, ﬁinnovation is an idea, practice, or object that is perceived as new by an individual or other unit of adoptionﬂ (rogers, 1995). consequently logistics innovation could improve internal efciency within a logistics rm or could help serve shippers better. for the purposes of this study, logistics innovations could be new to the world or new to the particular context of the rm and its stakeholders.to understand the locus of innovation in the logistics industry, we begin with a classication of rms in the industry. our analysis of innovation patterns in the industry is presented in the context of this taxonomy. we present the results of our semistructured interviews with top management personnel and experts in the industry on innovation practices of prominent rms in the industry. these semistructured interviews, though few in number, allow us a negrained look at innovation practices in the industry. then we present an analysis of patent data from the wipo to provide further insight into the innovation practices in the logistics industry and how they have changed over time.classication of firmsto identify meaningful patterns in innovation behavior, we needed to classify rms according to the role they play in the industry before we discuss the interview data and patent data. figure 3 depicts our classication of rms into logistics3.epssuppliersinbound logisticsmanufacturersoutbound logisticscustomerswarehousing and distributionretailersoutbound logisticsreverse logisticslogistics service users (lsu)product solutions providerslogistics service providers (lsp)logistics service integratorsfigure 3 classication of rms in the logistics industry.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.284 innovation in global industriesfour categories based on a simple logistics value chain.11 they are logistics services users, logistics service providers, logistics service integrators, and product solution providers. in this section, we focus on describing the classication since our subsequent sections discuss innovative activity along the categories detailed in the following paragraphs.logistics service users (lsus) are shippers, such as dell and general motors (gm), who manufacture products and use logistic services. there are many variations among the rms in this category. some lsu rms manage important parts of the logistics function while outsourcing parts of the supply chain such as transportation planning, execution, and warehousing to logistics service providers and logistics integrators. in other rms, the purchasing and transportation departments have combined to form supply chain departments. beginning in the mid to late 1990s these departments were given the responsibility for logistics management as dened earlier. as lsu rms began to focus more on core operations in the late 1990s, they began outsourcing many aspects of the supply chain, giving rise to 3pl providers and fourthparty logistics (4pl) providers. 3pl and 4pl providers enable logistics outsourcing and provide logistics valueadded services.12 a recent survey of 381 lsus revealed that 69 percent of them outsourced their logistics operations to 3pls (stoffel, 2006). however, as innovation in the supply chain becomes critical for business success and the competitive advantage it confers becomes more evident, there has been a move to bring parts of the activity within the organization again. for example, vector scm was a joint venture created in december 2000 by conway and gm to manage gm™s global supply chain. however, in june 2006, gm declared its intent to enter into negotiations to purchase vector from conway. gm noted that, by integrating vector into the rm, it had made a strategic decision to resume more direct control over its logistics functions.13 most lsus are not interested in acquiring the physical assets involved in the physical transportation of their goods. rather, they look to increase their capability in supplychain management to effectively partner with 3pls and 4pls to leverage their combined capabilities. according to razat gaurav, vice president of global transportation and distribution for i2, companies ﬁwant to let 3pls execute against their plans and then rely on their specialized local knowledge. if you are highly reliant on international sources of supply, you also need some internal competenceﬂ (bartels, 2006).specialized industry and rmspecic supplychain challenges are best understood by lsus. these rms use their specialized knowledge to innovate products and processes as solutions to solve their particular business challenges. a survey of lsus by mckinsey and the institute for supply chain management 11 we thank tushar dave of satyam for helping us develop these categories.12 please see section on logistics service providers for 3pl and 4pl denitions; see also footnote 9.13 http://www.menloworldwide.com/mww/en/newsroom/prarchives/29jun2006.shtml. accessed july 20, 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 285at the university of munster found that the best supplychain performers create innovations to increase efciency in logistics by borrowing from efciency programs in other parts of their business process, such as lean manufacturing (grosspietsch and kupper, 2004). consequently, lsus generate efciencybased supplychain innovations that draw on business practices outside the supplychain function. the united states, with more than onefourth of the world™s gdp, depends heavily on logistics for movement of goods within the country and across its borders. it provides a fertile environment for innovation among lsu rms with u.s. operations regardless of where it is headquartered.logistics service providers (lsps) are rms, such as fedex, ups, conway, and ryder, that offer partial or complete logistics solutions. these rms could be 3pl or 4pl providers. the difference between 3pl and 4pl, to be explained in more detail later, lies primarily in the value provided to customers and the basis of rms™ competence, although the boundary dening the scope of activity is hazy.3pls are rms that enable logistics outsourcing. drawing on their core business, whether it be forwarding, trucking, or warehousing, they have moved into providing other services for customers. 3pls, in general, are commodity transportation service providers who have moved into highermargin, bundled services such as warehousing and inventory management. exel plc and penske logistics are among leading 3pl rms headquartered in the united states with expanding international operations.in the past decade, competitive pressures have created more complex supply chains as lsus deal with multiple customers, suppliers, transportation providers, and government organizations worldwide. 4pls, such as ups supply chain solutions, emerged in the late 1990s in order to manage the ˚ow of information and to coordinate the movement of goods. the 4pl rm wants to position itself as an extension and part of its customer™s business environment. for example, ups operates a computer repair service center in louisville, kentucky. the digital products division of toshiba america information systems, irvine, california, has used the ups repair service since 2004 for repair of it laptop computers. ups has decreased the turnaround time by two and a half days since they took over repairs for toshiba (violini, 2006). a key differentiator between 3pls and 4pls is that while many 3pls focus on providing valueadded services to their customer with a view to maximizing the utilization of the assets of the parent lsp, 4pls develop solutions tailored to meet the unique and special needs of each customer, without regard to a parent company™s service offerings and operations. the 4pl™s parent™s assets are given due consideration; however, the overarching goal of the 4pl is to serve the customer™s specic needs and provide visibility and efciency to the logistics process (craig, 2003).3pls and 4pls are the backbone of the logistics system. in the past the primary task of an lsp was to transport goods from one location to another. today, as we have noted earlier, all the rms along the supply chain have to work innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.286 innovation in global industriesin concert in order to achieve costeffective and ˚exible solutions. lsps turn to innovation to improve supplychain efciency as demanded by lsus, their customers. innovation among the lsps has focused on creating new supplychain solutions such as ﬁdocktostockﬂ delivery systems,14 increased information visibility through implementation of innovative information software and hardware systems, and better asset utilization through loadandback haul management.lsps, working closely with their customers, have expanded their operations as their customers have globalized. as the locus of operations expand, so too has the locus of innovation for these rms. innovation among lsp rms draws on local environments, and solutions created depend on local challenges.logistics service integrators (lsis) such as accenture, ibm, and satyam are rms that are platformneutral15 and nonassetbased in that they do not own means of cargo transportation such as trucks, ships, or planes. the key difference, as per our denition, between 4pls and lsis is asset ownership. the value proposition that lsis bring to their customers is knowledge of specic business processes going beyond a rm™s logistics needs. lsis work with a variety of product solution providers, including vendors of products based on radiofrequency identication technologies (rfids), enterprise resource planning (erp) software vendors, software developers, and transportation providers to provide customized solutions for their customers, the lsus. in the past decade, rms that have traditionally focused on strategy consulting have set up supplychain divisions to exploit the need for unbiased and processcapable integrators. on the other end of the spectrum, rms specializing in the provision of information technology services have recognized the vital role that information plays in supplychain management and have created divisions specializing in supplychain services. lsis recognize that innovation in the supply chain lies in the management of shipment visibility and requires analysis of critical supplychain information (pande et al., 2006).innovation among lsi rms is often collaborative in nature. these rms work closely with lsus and lsps to enhance supplychain operations. lsi innovation often arises in the united states, where many management consulting rms have begun to offer supplychain integration services. their innovative efforts are likely to draw upon their knowledge of products, processes, and practices in contexts outside the supply chain. supplychain innovation among lsis may be expected to increase their innovation efforts, especially in business processes and in information integration.product solution providers (psps) such as sap, oracle, manugistics, i2, 14 robert handeld and ernest nichols (2002) dene ﬁdocktostockﬂ delivery as those supplier deliveries of component parts that are made directly to the plant ˚oor and end up in nished goods by the end of the same day. 15 lsis are platformneutral in this context in the sense that they do not work necessarily with one brand of hardware or software. they examine the business process to determine the best solution.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 287and savi technologies are rms that create products that are used in logistics management. they often work with rms in each of the other three categories to enable efciency, visibility, and integration.16 some examples of products developed by these rms include asset tracking technologies such as rfid hardware and software, erp systems, and warehouse management software. figure 4 shows how different asset tracking technologies are deployed from the truck level to the product level. organizationally, these rms begin as vendors of a specic product that fullls a specic niche in the supply chain. in time, they grow to offer deeper and broader product and service solutions but are generally not complete lsps with transportation assets.psps are the most prolic innovators in the logistics industry, consistent with the ﬁpullﬂ characteristic of the logistics industry. they are specialists and create new products and solutions that address specic challenges in parts of the logistics network. for example, rfid manufacturers offer innovative passive rfid products that help lsus track inventory at the product level. the same manufacturer may offer innovative active rfid products that assist 3pl rms with ˚eet monitoring. as the demands on the supplychain network increase, psps can be expected to continue to offer innovations to enable lsus and lsps to manage the supply chain more effectively.innovation among psps, unlike rms in the categories discussed earlier, draws upon basic and applied research and development. according to national science foundation (nsf) reports, the united states ranked sixth among countries with reported r&dtogdp ratios with a ratio of 2.9 percent in 2003. the business sector performed nearly 70 percent of the u.s. r&d in 2004. besides performing the majority of u.s. r&d, the business sector was also the largest source of r&d funding in the united states, providing 64 percent ($199 billion) of total r&d funding in 2004.17 u.s.based psp rms draw on this rich tradition of r&d to provide most of the innovation in the logistics industry.the preceding taxonomy has been developed so that data gathered through interviews and patent analysis may shed light on where, when, and why innovation is occurring in the logistics industry. depending on their primary business, rms are classied as lsu, lsp, lsi, or psp. in the sections that follow, we ex16 efciency in supplychain management often relates to minimizing the time that elapses between procurement of raw material and the delivery of an order to a customer while minimizing the total cost of procurement, transportation, inventory management, and warehousing and reducing variability in execution. visibility in the supply chain relates to the ability to track orders, inventory, and shipments in real time. visibility allows a rm to monitor events and exceptions in real time so that it may proactively manage supplychain activities. supplychain integration involves sharing and combining information ˚ows relating to critical business processes including customer service management, procurement, product development and commercialization, manufacturing ˚ow management and support, physical distribution, outsourcing and partnerships, and performance measurement. 17 us r&d continues to rebound in 2004; see http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/infbrief/nsf06306/. accessed december 22, 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.288 innovation in global industriespartł bar code and 2dł inscribed partł passive rf tagsmultipacł bar code and 2dł optical cards, tagsł passive rf tagspalletł bar code and 2dł optical cards, tagsł active or passive rf tagscontainerł bar code and 2dł active or passive rf tagsł untethered mobile communications and gpsconveyanceł bar code and 2dł active or passive rfł mobile communications and gpsfigure 4 asset tracking technologies. source: available at http://www.ops.fhwa.dot.gov/freight/intermodal/freighttechstory/freighttechstory.htm#toc1. accessed july 27, 2006.plore patterns of change in innovative activity by examining interview and patent data for the industry as a whole and for each category separately. we begin by presenting the results of our interviews with executives in the industry.semistructured interviews with executives in the industry and industry expertsto delve into the innovation process of the logistics industry, we conducted semistructured interviews with top executives in the industry and with industry experts. a copy of the questionnaire used for discussions with industry executives is available from the authors on request. we interviewed a total of 16 rms and 4 industry experts who were faculty at leading universities and representatives of industry associations. the rms include 4 lsus (2 nonu.s.), 2 lsis (1 nonu.s.), 4 lsps (2 nonu.s.), and 6 psps (all u.s.). since the respondent pool is small, there was concern raised by many respondents about the nature of information revealed. in order to obtain the most comprehensive information, we agreed that all information would be kept anonymous and that the names of responding rms would not be revealed.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 289the four rms classied as logistics users are large multinational rms with global operations in different manufacturing industries. two of them are headquartered in the united states, one is in europe, and one is in asia. the two lsis are among the world™s largest consulting organizations. one of these rms is headquartered in the united states and one is in asia; however, both have operations worldwide. one of the four lsps is a 3pl organization located in asia while three of them provide the complete range of logistics services as 4pls. two of the three 4pl rms are headquartered in the united states and one of them is headquartered in europe. all three of the 4pl rms have worldwide operations and are among the largest providers of logistics services in the world. the six psps represent a range of products and provide hardware, software, or both for specic use in logistics. these rms are among the global leaders in their product categories, are headquartered in the united states, and have worldwide operations. two of these psps have their primary supplychain business functions in europe, and we conducted our interview with their supplychain personnel in europe. finally, we talked to two industry experts in the united states and two in asia.during the course of our conversations with the two lsi rms, we realized that, although they ll an important role in the industry, these two rms did not actually create new products or services. rather, they reduce the friction in the supplychain system, using products and services developed by the other three categories. since our interest is focused on the changing locus of innovation in the industry, we have classied the responses of the lsi rms along with the responses provided by the industry experts for this section since lsi rms are prominent players in the industry and have valuable insight into the innovation activity in the industry as a whole.the respondents were asked about the evolution of the supplychain organization within their own rm. the mid1990s appear to have been watershed years for supplychain services for logistics users and providers. the user organizations we talked to began their logistics and supplychain division, usually combining their purchasing and transportation departments of the past, around 1995. in subsequent periods, our lsu respondents noted that there has been partial outsourcing of parts of the logistics process such as transportation of raw materials and nished goods, inventory management, and warehousing. some of them reversed their decision to outsource some logistics services but lsu rms differed in terms of logistics activities conducted within the rm and activities outsourced. around the same time, the 3pl and 4pl rms we interviewed began offering more valueadded services by adding warehousing and inventory management to providing transportation. separate divisions offering supplychain services such as transportation, warehousing, crossdocking, inventory management, packaging, and freight forwarding began in the 3pl and 4pl companies between 1995 and 1997. these divisions worked closely with customers to provide complete transportation solutions and used the parent company™s ˚eet only if it was the innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.290 innovation in global industriesbest solution for the customer. the supplychain services organizations among the users and the transportation providers of our respondents are usually headed up by a vice president who reports directly to the ceo or coo. this organizational arrangement shows the importance placed on the supplychain activity by the lsu and lsp rms. the psp companies in our sample were usually started when the innovator applied technology solutions to the logistics domain. all the psp rms we talked to were created during or after 1990. once again, most of their activity picked up around 1997. it is clear that the internet, computing, and communications technologies created the right environment for rms to develop new products and services for the logistics industry just as the lsus and lsps were recognizing the need to effectively manage supply chains as the cornerstone to success in a global context of competition.all respondents to the survey identied globalizationšdened in the survey instrument as the increased mobility of goods, services, labor, technology, and capital throughout the worldšas the primary driver of innovation in the industry. they noted the consequences of globalization for their business. first, globalization has increased competition in the lsu home countries. consequently, rms can no longer trade cost for quality of product or service. rather, they need to offer costcompetitive products of high quality to increasingly demanding consumers. lsus are responding by looking to supplychain solutions within their own rms and to partnering with lsps and lsis to create maximum visibility of information relating to the ˚ow of product and money through the value chain. according to our respondents, globalization has also led lsus to locate various value chain activities, such as product development and manufacturing, in different parts of the world. lsus look for logistics partners who can provide global logistics solutions as they expand their supplier base and their markets. as lsus and lsps extend their product development, manufacturing, marketing, sales, and service activities around the world, they are confronted with unique countryspecic challenges. for example, while labor costs in the emerging economies are attractive, the infrastructure for transportation and the regulations of local, regional, and national authorities create barriers to effective transportation solutions. lsus and lsps, sometimes with the help of local lsis, have developed unique solutions in response to these challenges using their local subsidiaries and partners.all the respondents concurred that most often users drove innovation in the logistics industry. an innovation typically began by identication of a business problem by the lsu. sometimes, lsus with their own supplychain organizations developed unique solutions based on their particular needs. the lsus we interviewed estimated that about onefourth of the innovations they implemented in the past decade came from within their rms. firms in the industry also worked collaboratively with subsidiaries and suppliers to innovate. for example, a global glass manufacturer we interviewed developed and deployed a simple supplychain solution from within its own local operations in india, created a solution in innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 291partnership with another division within the same company in south korea, and worked with an lsp to deploy a supplychain innovation. the glass manufacturer looked rst to internal r&d capabilities before seeking help from outside the rm. in general, industryspecic solutions were more likely to be created with internal r&d resources. in other situations, the lsus communicate the supplychain challenge to lsps, and these rms then create innovative solutions, often working closely with lsus.according to our respondents, innovation at a psp begins by working with a customer on a solution to a specic business problem. a leading rfid innovator and manufacturer mentioned that the rm also looks for feedback on its products from industry analysts, academia, and other external stakeholders. internally, the customer service division, along with the sales, research and development, and professional services divisions, looks for new ways to enhance the customer experience. our psp respondents noted that they share the cost of development with the lsu when the solution is customized and later scale the product for wider market adoption. one of the psps we interviewed, a leading software rm, acquires smaller rms with the requisite innovation. sometimes it just acquires the rights to the technology, leaving the smaller rm alone to continue its innovative trajectory. at other times, the entire rm is acquired. after acquisition, the rm may be completely integrated into the larger psp business or may be left alone for productdevelopment purposes while the customer interface functionsšmarketing, sales, and servicešare handled by the larger rm. the same software rm noted that incremental innovations arise by continuously tracking customer complaints and wish lists. the next new release of the product addresses the issues most often raised by customers. psps and lsps that have operations in many countries release products on a global basis but permit the local entities to have great freedom to adapt the product to local conditions. according to our u.s.based respondents, products are released rst in the united states and are subsequently scaled for global release.we asked our respondents about their r&d process. the lsu and lsp respondents commented that, over the past decade, innovation has become more dispersed, both organizationally and geographically, and solutions involve multiple rms in locations all over the world. in the past, many supplychain solutions were developed inhouse. today™s best in class order management, warehouse/inventory management, and transportation management systems from psps provide the majority of functionality necessary to support new product development. economies of specialization encourage psps to innovate, as can be expected from the ﬁpullﬂ system of innovation prevalent in the logistics industry where rms address immediate needs by expanding opportunities for local participants to use their creativity and innovate by drawing on a growing array of specialized and distributed resources. according to our lsu and lsp respondents, the active participation of psps in supplychain innovation began about a decade ago as globalization combined with advances in communication and information innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.292 innovation in global industriestechnologies. the psp respondents supported this view, stating that they focused on specialized niches and worked with lsps and lsus to customize products if necessary. the respondents felt that the consequence of the modular r&d process increased innovative output and allowed for greater specialization in all parts of the logistics network. interestingly, lsis have arisen as a response to the challenge of integrating modular inputs from the psps. lsus in particular noted that lsi rms ll an important role in encouraging innovation among psps, since they facilitate the widespread adoption of innovative products with their integration expertise.we then asked the respondents about the organizational structure of the supplychainrelated r&d activity. among the lsus and lsps, there are signicant structural differences in the way innovation is managed within the organization, with the trend shifting from large unwieldy product development groups to more focused, small development teams. for example, one rm we interviewed uses a dedicated core team, leveraging six sigma methodology18 to drive product development; another rm, using techniques based on the systems development life cycle (sdlc) process,19 uses a champion along with three leads (business, it, and customer organization) to design, develop, and deploy the new products. the psps have a more traditional approach to r&d and have separate r&d departments to focus on both basic and applied research. for example, one of the psps we interviewed had a separate division focusing on rfid and related technologies. they worked closely with universities to improve electronic circuitry in tags or communication between tags and readers. a separate division worked with the customer service department to monitor and understand customer requests and complaints and then worked on creating customer or industryspecic solutions. in general, psp respondents noted that they detected the need in recent years to work more closely with their customers while developing new products.18 six sigma (6) is a businessdriven, multifaceted approach to process improvement, reduced costs, and increased prots. with a fundamental principle to improve customer satisfaction by reducing defects, its ultimate performance target is virtually defectfree processes and products (3.4 or fewer defective parts per million [ppm]). the six sigma methodology, consisting of the steps ﬁdene, measure, analyze, improve, control,ﬂ is the roadmap to achieving this goal. within this improvement framework, it is the responsibility of the improvement team to identify the process, the denition of the defect, and the corresponding measurements. the primary goal of six sigma is to improve customer satisfaction, and thereby protability, by reducing and eliminating defects. defects may be related to any aspect of customer satisfaction including high product quality, schedule adherence, and cost minimization. 19 sdlc is a systematic approach to problem solving and is composed of several phases, each comprised of multiple steps including the software concept stage, which identies and denes a need for the new system; the requirements analysis phase dening the information needs of the end users; the architectural design step, which creates a blueprint for the design with the necessary specications for the hardware, software, people, and data resources; the coding and debugging phase to create and to program the nal system; and nally the system testing phase, which evaluates the system™s actual functionality in relation to expected or intended functionality.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 293another interesting phenomenon we observed from our respondents is a shift in the geographic locus of innovation. our respondents felt, based on the number of new products and services introduced, that the united states has historically been the hub of innovation for logistics for lsps, psps, and lsus headquartered there. according to our respondents, most of the innovation activity for these rmsšidea generation, product development, and deploymentšwas conducted in the united states between 1995 and 2005. more than half of our u.s. respondents noted that the united states continues to be the primary source of innovation; however, about onethird of our respondents noted that innovation activities have shifted either to multiple locations around the world or to specic research centers in europe and or asia. these companies cited the need to increase operational efciency, and for better information and shipment visibility in import and regulatory operations as reasons for geographic dispersion of innovation. however, one of our lsps noted that it is in the process of creating regional centers of innovation to identify and develop products and services relevant to its geographic areas. the regions assigned to the centers were broadly continental in scope, dened as asiapacic (including australia and new zealand), europe, the middle east, africa, and the americas. larger rms are able to leverage global resources to develop efcient solutions on a costeffective and industrywide basis. however, local conditions may not permit these solutions due to regulations and lack of appropriate infrastructure. understanding and adapting to local conditions is critical to successful innovation for rms in the industry. according to one of our respondents, the creation of regional innovation centers is expected to confer a competitive advantage. the rm believed that innovative output for the rm as a whole would be enhanced by the decentralization of innovation resources.in dollar terms, the shift is still quite insignicant; less than 10 percent of total logisticsrelated development dollars are spent outside the united states, according to our u.s. respondents. for rms headquartered in europe and asia, a similar pattern has been observed by our respondents: more rms are going beyond country borders to develop innovations in response to customer needs. according to one of our respondents, ﬁthe move is not for cost reasons but for logistics reasons,ﬂ meaning that increases in trade among the nations of the asiapacic region and europe and the americas increase the need to be sensitive to local conditions and to develop countryspecic solutions where necessary. these strategies are consistent with two of the ve motives put forth by gerybadze and reger (1999) through their survey of 21 rms on the r&d internationalization process. in the logistics industry, based on the information provided by our respondents as to their reasons for creating r&d facilities in markets outside their home country, we nd that rms tend to locate r&d centers in markets close to their lead customers. in addition, they exploit unique logisticsrelated capabilities available in developed and emerging economies to which their lead customers have expanded.zander (1999) offers a taxonomy of international innovation networks based innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.294 innovation in global industrieson the extent of international duplication of technological capabilities and international diversication of technological capabilities. early evidence on the capabilities of the innovation networks being developed in the logistics industry indicates that these networks belong to the dispersed category, in that capabilities at each of the centers combines core logistics r&d capabilities and diversied capabilities developed with local knowhow and expertise in response to local lead customers.20 r&d centers located outside the home country have been created by the lsus and lsps with a mandate to use and develop local expertise to create new products in developed and emergingeconomy markets.respondents noted that increased collaboration among lsus and lsps is a signicant shift in innovative patterns, especially in the past 5 years. lsu respondents indicated that they work closely with lsps to develop custom solutions for their business needs. according to one lsu respondent, collaboration is necessitated, especially in a global context; this respondent provided an illustration based on the rm™s experience in china. he noted that unique solutions are required in each market due to differences in infrastructure and resource availability. variations in the physical network in each market can be expected because physical infrastructure in many emerging economies is inadequate and communication infrastructure is insufcient. however, the lsu respondent could ill afford to decrease information visibility for any reason and expected continuous monitoring and timely shipment delivery. the rm worked closely with a u.s.based lsp™s division in hong kong to ensure that the communications infrastructure was sufciently robust and seamlessly integrated with the lsp™s ˚eet and package tracking system, with the lsu™s erp systems in the united states, and with the supplier™s erp system in china. similar incidents were shared with us by other respondents. the respondents acknowledged that close collaboration among the rms in the logistics network is necessary in order to create innovation that is effective systemwide.comparing responses between rms headquartered inside and those headquartered outside the united states, we found that u.s. rms had a global view of innovation. innovative activity for these rms was more decentralized, both organizationally and geographically. in contrast, innovation occurred primarily in the home country for respondents from europe and asia. although all the respondents stressed the importance of collaborative innovation, lsus and lsps in the united states have been more active in collaborative innovation. the global market was the focus of innovation of u.s.based respondents, whereas respondents in asia were focused on innovations for the local markets.20 zander (1999) differentiates between international duplication and international diversication of technological capabilities. according to zander, rms belonging to the internationally duplicated category include those where foreign units are typically involved in the same kind of technologies that are represented at home. firms in the dispersed category have signicant duplication or overlap of technologies across locations but also harness a number of technologies for which units in foreign locations have developed world product mandates.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 295looking to the future, respondents believed that there would be greater emphasis on the intercontinental supply chain due to increased product ˚ows between asian countries and the united states and europe. in addition there was expectation among the lsp respondents that there would be more mergers and acquisitions by lsps leading to consolidation in that category. this activity will be driven by increased competition for larger shippers and the need for an increased global footprint. these trends will spur greater development of logistics r&d centers in the lead markets, especially in asia. the psps in our survey primarily had marketing outposts in markets outside the united states. we expect that they will join the lsus and lsps to extend their r&d presence in their international markets.in summary, our interviews with executives in the logistics industry revealed interesting insights into the innovation process. the dynamic management of the supplychain processšgoing beyond transportationšas a distinct valueenhancing activity began in most organizations in the mid1990s. innovation is driven primarily by user needs and rms collaborate closely to develop solutions. logistics innovation follows the global dispersion of markets and production capacity in most industries, although the extent of offshore migration of innovationrelated activities in logistics remains modest. our respondents noted that they are just beginning to create r&d centers in countries other than their home country, often to remain close to lead markets and to respond quickly to changing user needs. increasing global trade has accentuated the need for lsus and lsps to create local solutions that take into account differences in physical infrastructure, availability of reliable transportation providers, and government and export rules and regulations. however, the psps™ innovationrelated activities appear to remain more ﬁhomeboundﬂ in the united states. innovation has necessitated increased and closer ties among the lsus, lsps, and sometimes psps in the last 5 years in order to create products and services that are creative, efcient, and costeffective throughout the supply chain.analysis of patent datathere are many organizations that collect and organize patent data, including country patent ofces and proprietary databases such as those created by thomson™s delpion. each database has valuable information. we used the patent database created by the wipo, a specialized agency of the united nations. the wipo website (http://www.wipo.int) has a patent search option for all patents led worldwide. this option was used to do a search on patent ling data. the patent search uses a boolean search option and hence enabled us to restrict patents to only those related to innovation in the logistics industry. the search was restricted to following four phrases in the description of the patent: supply chain, logistics, inventory, and freight. for the period between january 1990 and december 2004, we identied 2,268 unique successful patents led worldwide that were innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.296 innovation in global industriesrelevant to the logistics industry after checking for incomplete data and multiple patents issued for the same innovation in different jurisdictions. we acknowledge that the cutoff year of 2004 may create some data truncation problems and so we interpret the data for the year with caution. additionally, patenting may not be the best measure of innovation in an industry that is primarily focused on service to its customers. the logistics industry is quite unlike industries such as pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, where patenting is ubiquitous. however, the data on patenting reveal important patterns and trends that allow us to cautiously interpret the changing locus of innovation in the industry. a database was developed with the following elds from the wipo database augmented by rmlevel information from company websites: the patent name; date of ling; date of publication; international classication; application number; country and continent in which the patent was rst led; the inventor™s name, home country, and home continent; and the name, home country, and home continent of the assignee. each assignee was further designated as an lsu, lsp, lsi, or psp using the description of the company™s business from the company website and other published sources.figure 5 shows patent ling by continent of the rst inventor between 1990 and 2004. the gure indicates that worldwide patent ling for supplychain products climbed very slowly between 1990 and 1996, increasing from 17 in 1990 to 27 in 1996. the number of patents led almost doubled in 1997 and then climbed dramatically until 2001. the economic downturn caused by the crash of internet stocks and the 9/11 terrorist attacks may be reason for the slight decrease in patents led between 2001 and 2004. while the patent ling levels have not yet reached the peak of 480 patents led worldwide in 2001, the trend appears to be increasing. the number of patents led in north america are nearly double the number led in any other continent in any year and contributed about 60 percent of the patents led each year between 1990 and 2004. the number of patents led in asia and europe is steadily increasing: europe™s share of total patents hovered between 20 and 30 percent of total patents led between 2000 and 2004 and asia contributed around 7 percent in the same time frame. patents led in australia21 have shown an impressive increase, moving from 1 patent led in 1996 to between 14 and 17 each year between 2001 and 2004. logistics innovation is beginning to occur in africa, where 11 patents were led between 2001 and 2004. there were only 3 patents led from inventors in south america during the entire period from 1990 to 2004. australia, africa, and south america together have contributed less than 1 percent of the total patents led in any year.figure 6 shows the patents led between 1990 and 2004 as indicated by the country of the rst inventor for the top ve countries with patents. consistent with the perspective of the survey respondents discussed earlier, most of the innovation has taken place in the united states in this period. u.s.based rst inventors led 1,340 patents. the number of patents led by the u.s.based inventors 21 we included new zealand in the numbers for the continent of australia.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 297logistics5.eps0100200300400500600199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004south americanorth americaeuropeaustraliaasiaafricafigure 5 patents led by continent of rst inventor between 1990 and 2004.almost doubled from 49 patents in 1998 to 81 in 1999, doubled to 167 in 2000, and almost doubled again in 2001 to 308. the number declined to 214 in 2002 and even further to 169 in 2003 but shows signs of increasing again in 2004. in a distant second place is germany, with 250 patents led between 1990 and 2004. the number of patents led by germanybased inventors increased dramatically from 3 in 1997 to 19 in 1998 and then nearly tripled to 55 in 1999 and remained between 25 and 37 between 2000 and 2004. following germany, in third place, is the united kingdom with 150 patents led between 1990 and 2004. japan and australia led 63 and 62 patents, respectively, in the same period, rounding out the top ve countries when considering patents led by country of rst innovator.considering the locus of innovation over time, inventors from nearly 40 countries have been involved in innovation in the logistics industry since 1990, although figure 6 shows only the top ve countries. the increase in the number of inventor countries from 6 in 1990 to 26, 26, 25, and 27 in 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004, respectively, is an indication of the increasing dispersion of innovative activity. another indication of dispersion of innovative activity is the fact that ve countries that led in 2002 did not have an inventor le a patent in 2003 and four countries that led in 2003 did not have a patent originate in their country in 2002. eleven countries led over 20 patents between 1990 and 2004 including innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.298 innovation in global industrieslogistics6.eps05010015020025030035019901992199419961998200020022004yearpatentsunited states ofamericagermanyunited kingdomjapanaustraliafigure 6 patents by country of rst inventor between 1990 and 2004 for the top ve countries.australia, canada, denmark, finland, france, japan, the netherlands, singapore, and sweden since 2000. it appears that china, india, israel, and korea are just beginning to become involved in logistics innovation.a total of 149 patents had at least one inventor from a country different from the rst inventor.22 we examine those patents to understand patterns of crosscountry collaboration. there is one instance of inventors from multiple countries in 1990 and then one in 1996 with no patent activity between 1991 and 1995 with inventors from multiple countries. after climbing to 29 instances of collabora22 there were four patents that had inventors from three countries. they were not separated since they all involve the united states as the rst inventor and a clear second inventor. therefore, we counted each patent only once whether they had inventors from two countries or three focusing on the second inventor. we do provide details about the instances where inventors from the united states collaborated with inventors from two other countries in the discussion below and in figure 8.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 299tion among inventors from different countries in 2001 and 2002, there is a sharp drop in collaborative activity to 20 instances in 2003, which may be an artifact of the beginning of the war in iraq. these data indicate that cooperation in innovation in the logistics industry began only in the late 1990s and conrms the data provided by our survey respondents. although u.s. inventors have more patents that involve inventors from other countries, the share of u.s. patents with a u.s. inventor as the rst inventor and one or more foreign inventors (60 out of 1340, or 4.5 percent) is in fact somewhat smaller than the share of patents with german rst inventors and foreign coinventors (23 out of 250, or 9.2 percent), or logistics patents with british rst inventors (16 out of 250, or 10.7 percent).in 1999, inventors from the united states collaborated with inventors from china and great britain. in 2000, inventors from the united states collaborated with inventors from the netherlands and italy in one of the two instances of collaboration with the netherlands. in 2001, inventors from the united states collaborated with inventors from canada and the united kingdom in one of three instances of collaboration with canada and inventors from the united states partnered with inventors from the united kingdom and germany in one of four instances of collaboration with united kingdom. au, australia; be, belgium; bm, bermuda; br, brazil; ca, canada; cn, china; de, germany; fr, france; gb, united kingdom; ie, ireland; il, israel; in, india; jp, japan; mx, mexico; nl, netherlands; sg, singapore; tw, taiwan.table 2 shows the countries with whom rst inventors from the united states have partnered over time. inventors from the united states have partnered with inventors in over 17 countries between 1990 and 2004 for a total of 60 patents. table 2 patents with inventors from multiple countries with united states as first inventorusgrand totalaubebmbrcacndefrgbieilinjpmxnlsgtw1997112199811199911*2420001112*5200123*114*112200211236111520031211117200421411112114grand total341172123131221142160notes: there are four instances when there were inventors from three countries and these are noted with an asterisk. we have counted these instances against the second inventor country.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.300 innovation in global industrieswhile inventors in the united states partnered with inventors from only three countries in 1999, they partnered with inventors from nine countries in 2004, indicating an increasing scope of cooperation. u.s. inventors partnered with inventors from the united kingdom and germany most often during this period. however, 2004 data indicate that inventors from the united states have one patent with an inventor in india, one with an inventor in taiwan, and two with inventors in singapore, showing an increasing trend of cooperation of u.s. rms with the asiapacic region. the share of all u.s. logistics patents accounted for by patents with inventors from multiple countries for which u.s. inventors appear as rst inventors varies from a low of 2 percent in 1998 to a high of 7 percent in 2002. after a drop to 4.1 percent in 2003, in 2004 the number of u.s. coinvented patents rose to 6.2 percent of total u.s. logistics patents.table 3 provides the details about the 37 patents between 1990 and 2004 by rst inventor™s country, where the second inventor is from the united states. once again, the collaboration shows a sharp increase in 2000 and is ˚at after that point. in 2003 and 2004 the inventors from the united states supported inventors in ve other countriesšthe most in the 15 years studied. most of the collaboration, where the second inventor is from the united states, was with germany and the united kingdom, which is similar to the pattern when the inventor from the united states is the rst inventor. these data must be interpreted with caution, however, since instances of collaboration account for a small share of overall logistics patents. for instance, the share of all german logistics patents with u.s. inventors in second position fell from 6 percent in 2003 to 3 percent in 2004; the share of all british logistics patents similarly classied was 8 percent in 2004 and 5 percent in 2005. data in tables 2 and 3 combine to show that u.s. inventors in the logistics industry are increasingly collaborating with inventors worldwide. however, given the growth in patents over the period studied, the proportion table 3 patents with first inventors from different countries and with second inventor from the united states19901997199920002001200220032004grand totalbelgium11canada54110germany24219denmark11spain11france112united kingdom11112219israel11japan1113grand total1117877537innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 301of coinventions in logistics with u.s. inventors listed as the rst inventors or second or lower appears to be limited.figures 7 through 10 examine patterns in assignee patent data. while assignee data are not meaningful when considering geographic location of innovative activity, they do indicate the kinds of rms that own the patents. figure 7 compares patents led by category of assignee over time. only those countries that had more than 50 patents between 1990 and 2004 are shown in figure 10. a brief discussion on assignee data provides some insight into patterns relating to resource allocation. examination of patents led in the past 15 years indicates that psps have been the dominant assignee worldwide with 1,095 patents, followed by 678 for the lsus. of the 302 patents that have been assigned to individuals designated as experts in our study, 13 patents were assigned to universities and 36 patents were assigned to individuals associated with universities. the number of patents led by psps worldwide shows a steady increase from 1997 through 2001 in absolute terms. the share of logistics patents assigned to psp almost doubled from 30.8 percent in 1997 to 60.4 percent in 1998. after climbing to nearly 68 logistics7.eps0100200300400500600199019911992199319941995199619971998199920002001200220032004psplsulsplsiexpertfigure 7 comparison of patents led by category of assignee between 1990 and 2004.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.302 innovation in global industrieslogistics8.eps05010015020025030035040045019901992199419961998200020022004yearpatentsunited states ofamericaunited kingdomswitzerlandnetherlandsjapangermanyaustraliafigure 8 patents by country of assignee between 1990 and 2004 for the top seven countries.percent of total patents in 2000, the psp share of overall logistics patents declined to 41 percent in 2004. the patents assigned to lsps doubled between 1999 and 2000 and doubled again in 2001. additionally, and consistent with our earlier discussion on the recent participation of lsis in the logistics network, a few patents have been assigned to lsis since 1997. our discussions with lsis and industry experts indicate that the role of the lsi in the industry is often focused more on process improvement and less on patentable innovation. a large number of patents have also been assigned to lsus, suggesting that user rms are investing in developing logistics capabilities as a critical business advantage. in 2004, more patents were assigned to lsus than to psps, with the lsu share of total patents rising from 15.7 percent in 2000 to 44.1 percent in 2004.figure 8 shows the distribution of patents by assignee home country or country where the assignee is headquartered. it is worth noting from the gure that, although the rms headquartered in the united states have nearly seven times as many patents as the next countryšgermanyšthe countries of switzerland and the netherlands have 129 and 53 patents assigned to them. further analysis shows innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 303logistics9.eps02004006008001000120014001600africaasiaaustraliaeuropenorthamericasouthamericapsplsulsplsiexpertfigure 9 patents by category of assignee by continent.that the individuals listed as rst inventor for the patents assigned to dutch and swiss rms were mostly from germany, the united states, or belgium.in the geographic distribution of patents shown in figure 9, rms assigned the most patents were from the two developedeconomy regions represented broadly by north america and europe followed by the emerging economies of the asiapacic region. three times as many patents were generally assigned to rms in north america as were assigned to rms in europe, and the order of magnitude was even larger when compared to the asiapacic region. a closer examination of the data reveals that psps in the united states were assigned the most patents between 1990 and 2004, with more patents than all the patents worldwide for experts, lsis, and lsps combined and almost as many patents as patents assigned to lsus worldwide. in contrast to the prolic innovation of psps in the united states, lsus were assigned the most patents in most of the european countries, with the exception of germany and sweden. among the countries in asia no particular pattern could be discerned. experts were assigned the most patents in china, lsus in japan, and psps in india and singapore.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.304 innovation in global industrieslogistics10.eps051015202530351990199619971998199920002001200220032004psplsulspexpertfigure 10 patents led by category of assignee between 1990 and 2004 when inventors are from different countries.figure 10 presents the number of patents with inventors from different countries for each assignee category over time. although more than onehalf of coinvented logistics patents were assigned to psps (80 out of 149), in fact the share of pspassigned patents that were coinvented (7.3 percent) is similar to the share of coinvented lsu patents (7.7 percent) or coinvented lsp patents (6.3 percent). after peaking in 2002 at 10.7 percent, collaborative psp patents decreased to 9.3 percent in 2003 and 7.1 percent in 2004. one explanation for this trend may be that rms are creating local r&d centers to create innovative products and solutions for local consumption.our study of patent data indicates that logistics innovation gained importance in the mid to late 1990s. in addition, we found that most of the innovation activity remains in the united states. however, logistics innovation has become increasingly dispersed. for each of the past 5 years, inventors from more than 20 countries had led logisticsrelated patents with nearly 60 percent of the patents coming from inventors based in the united states. more patents have been assigned to pspsšrms who provide software and hardware to enhance communications, tracking, and visibility along the supply chainšthan to users of logistics services and providers of logistics services until 2004, when users were assigned innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 305nearly 44.1 percent of all patents. since 1996, the number of patents with inventors from different countries has increased but the trend has been ˚at since 2000. inventors from germany have the highest proportion of collaborative patents, averaging more than 13 percent since 2000, and 11 percent of the united kingdom™s logistics patents during the same period re˚ect collaborative invention. inventors in the united states have partnered with inventors in over 17 countries, primarily in europe. however, when considering the share of patents created through collaboration (with the rst inventor located in the united states), only about 5 percent of the patents were coinvented between 2000 and 2004. there is evidence of recent partnerships with inventors in the asiapacic region.discussionan analysis of innovation in the logistics industry is handicapped by the lack of readily available data. most of the innovation activity is condential information, and the level of investment in logistics innovation is hard to track specically. financial and operational data about this aspect of their business is not publicly disclosed. to the extent possible we have relied on public sources of data to augment our understanding of the phenomena learned through private conversations. where public data are lacking, we have relied heavily on the information obtained from our interviews, although our conclusions are not based on any single source of information.our study examined multiple aspects of innovation in the logistics industry through interviews with industry insiders and experts and through a study of patent data. while the logistics industry™s innovation may not be perfectly re˚ected in patent data, we believe that, with cautious interpretation, they provide valuable information about important trends in innovation in logistics.in addition we also examined the innovation activity of the top logistics rms, as listed in the hoovers database, in order to understand innovation in logistics. for each of the top rms we looked at company websites, articles in industry periodicals, and databases such as factiva and one source global business.as noted earlier, we nd that innovation is gaining importance in the logistics industry. the advent of new technologies and globalization has inspired rms to look for new solutions for the challenge of business in today™s competitive landscape. innovation is also becoming more global than it has been in the past, although the united states continues to lead the innovative effort in the industry. inventors in the united states have been the most productive throughout the past 15 years and we do not observe any threat to this dominance. inventors from japan and australia have become more productive in the past 5 years, and many european countries have become more active in logistics innovation as trade increases within the european union. since 2000, there has been increased collaboration in the industry. inventors from different countries collaborated on innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.306 innovation in global industriesabout 6 percent of the patents led, 88 percent of which were led after 2000. nearly half of the intercountry collaboration involved a u.s. rst inventor but these patents were a very small proportion of the total u.s. patents. u.s inventors collaborated with inventors in 17 other countries when they were listed as the rst inventor, and inventors from 9 countries when they were the second inventor. psps were the most frequent collaborators but more recently lsus and lsps have been more actively collaborating for innovation.our data lead us to the conclusion that logistics innovation is most often a pull phenomenon. the users of logistics services identify a business challenge. as the supplychain process has increased in complexity due to the increasing scope of business activity, solutions to these challenges require specialized and often distributed resources. the lsu ﬁpullsﬂ the innovation from the psps and lsps with requisite specialized capabilities. more recently, lsi rms have entered the logistics value space. they are software and hardware platform and productneutral and focus on providing the best solution to the customer. we tracked few innovations from these rms. however, if their role increases in the logistics landscape, we may see an increase in innovative activity among the integrators.product innovations, especially those related to new technologies, are enabled through collaboration. for example, dhl worldwide, an lsp, has recently unveiled its rfid pilot project, which it is developing in partnership with ibm, an lsi. savi technologies, a psp and recently acquired by lockheed martin, leverages its leading position in rfid solutions through alliances with leading rms in data collection, services, software, and solutions for the logistics industry.23we see a growing trend of innovation in different parts of the world as the outcome of globalization. we have noted that a few lsus and lsps are beginning to locate logistics r&d centers in different parts of the world in order to be close to the customer in lead markets. we believe that these centers are used to create capabilities that allow greatest responsiveness to local customer needs while exploiting local expertise and relationships. nearly twothirds of the executives responding to a survey by the mckinsey quarterly in september 2006 stated that they are concerned with increasing risks from disruptions to their supply chain. the environment is ripe for rms in the logistics industry to continue to innovate and address users™ concerns about their supply chain.policy implicationsarchibugi and iammarino (1999) offer a taxonomy of globalization of innovation with a view to understanding the implications for national policy. based on the locus of innovation and the nature of exploitation, the three categories they suggest are the international exploitation of nationally produced innovations, the 23 see http://www.savi.com/partners/program.shtml.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 307global generation of innovation, and global technoscientic collaborations. our study of the logistics industry indicates that innovation in the logistics industry has mostly belonged to the rst categoryšinternational exploitation of nationally produced innovations. logistics innovations have generally been developed for the home market, predominantly the united states, and then scaled for the international market. however, the u.s. logistics industry is slowly moving toward the second and third categoriesšglobal generation of innovation and global technoscientic collaborations. accordingly, one of the most relevant policy issues for the logistics industry is the role of governments in creating and enforcing patent law. patent law enforcement is disparate and unequal in many parts of the world. our study shows that u.s. logistics rms have been prolic in innovation compared to their peers in other parts of the world. with the globalization of logistics users and suppliers, innovations developed in the united states should be adopted in every country without concern for misappropriation of intellectual property (ip). inadequate ip protection is a concern for many industries, and the logistics industry is no exception. as seen from the data, innovation in logistics is in the early stages of its life cycle. while there is no evidence that ip protection is hindering innovation now, the role of formal ip protection is likely to assume greater importance as innovation increases in the industry.reducing trade barriers and standardizing import rules would also help innovation in the u.s. logistics industry. market liberalization in many of the world™s fastestgrowing economies would increase opportunities for u.s. logistics rms. data indicate that the u.s. logistics industry is the most innovative and the most advanced in the world. liberalization would provide the opportunity to extend the market reach of u.s. logistics rms and add to their capabilities by being exposed to different contexts and conditions. for example, brunei, singapore, and thailand have recently signed the multilateral agreement on the full liberalization of allcargo services. this agreement allows airlines to operate unlimited cargo on any route within the three countries (bower, n.d.). this type of agreement enables logistics rms to create innovative solutions to better respond to customer needs since they have fewer constraints imposed on the ˚ow of goods, information, and funds.a skilled workforce is an essential component for successful innovation in any context. however, as discussed earlier in this chapter, the logistics industry has become a hightech complex network with information ˚ow becoming the critical source of competitive advantage. graduate enrollments in science and engineering elds in u.s. universities reached a record high of 566,800 in the fall of 2003, according to data collected by nsf through 2003.24 encouraging higher education, especially in the elds of mathematics, computer science, and 24 s&e indicators 2006 available at http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind06/c2/c2h.htm. accessed january 22, 2007.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.308 innovation in global industriesengineering, is essential so that the requisite skilled workforce is available for the united states to continue its dominance in logistics innovation.since the events of september 11, 2001, supplychain security has been receiving much publicity. according to a recent report by the council of supply chain management professionals, none of the programs instituted by the u.s. government have been successful in eliminating or signicantly reducing supplychain vulnerability (wilson, 2005b). while most of the attention and funding has been directed toward enhancing airport and passenger security, little attention has been paid to the rest of the transportation system. the shipment of containers represents one of the greatest risks in the cargo supply chain. in 2004, over 10 million loaded cargo containers were imported into the united states, representing about $1.43 billion of containerized goods moving through u.s. ports each day.25 despite the security programs enacted by congress, such as the maritime transportation security act and the customstrade partnership against terrorism, experts agree that security along the supply chain remains woefully inadequate (wilson, 2005b). it is critical that the u.s. government devote greater resources to address this security risk by increasing funds and manpower for adequate implementation of security programs. there is no evidence to suggest that rms in the u.s. logistics industry have received federal funding for securityrelated innovation. the innovative power of the u.s. logistics industry could be harnessed for creating new products for increasing supplychain security. the logistics industry has been up to the challenge when faced with many changes in the environment; with the right incentives from the government, the industry could become a partner in creating a safer, more secure, supply chain through innovation.conclusionthe council of supply chain management professionals has been publishing an annual report on the state of the logistics industry for the past 17 years. according to the latest report, after declining for most of the last 7 years, logistics costs as a percentage of the nation™s gdp are pushing upward. after hovering around 10 percent of gdp during the 1990s, logistics costs as a percent of gdp decreased as interest rates declined and business cost pressures mounted. however, the most recent estimate is for 2005, when logistics costs were about 9.5 percent of gdp, as shown in figure 1. estimated logistics costs in 2005 totaled $1.183 trillionšan increase of $156 billion over 2004 and the largest yearonyear change in the 17year history of the report. shippers are feeling pressure from two directions. one factor is the steady climb in interest rates, which has pushed up inventorycarrying costs. but the biggest cost driver has been rising 25 liner shipping facts and figures. world shipping council. available at http://www.worldshipping.org/linershippingfacts&gures.pdf. accessed december 26, 2007.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 309transportation expenses, which reached $744 billion in 2005, up from $636 billion in 2004. soaring fuel prices, a driver shortage in segments of the trucking industry, and diminished competition have all come together to raise rates across all modes, and for trucking in particular. figure 11 shows the breakdown of the costs in 2005.26managing these increasing costs is going to become even more critical in the future. domestic freight transport is expected to increase by another 65 to 70 percent by 2020. international shipments are expected to increase even more 26 see http://www.logisticsmgmt.com/article/ca6352889.html. accessed august 28, 2006.logistics11.epscarryingcoststransportationcostsmotorcarriersothercarriersshipperrelated costslogisticsadministrationtotallogistics costsł interest 58ł taxes, obsolescence, depreciation, insurance 245ł warehousing 90ł truck œ intercity 394ł truck œ local 189ł railroads 49ł water (international 29, domestic 5) 34ł oil pipelines 9ł air (international 15, domestic 25) 40ł forwarders 22($ billions)1,183153846583744393figure 11 costs in the logistics market, 2005. source: http://www.logisticsmgmt.com/article/ca6352889.html. accessed august 28, 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.310 innovation in global industriesover this period (by about 85 percent).27 as the need for logistics management grows, businesses will need to be adaptable and ˚exible to changing environmental conditions. in a world of synchronized trade, collaboration among all parts of the logistics network becomes critical. innovation in logistics is essential for the ˚ow of goods, information, and funds to be seamlessly choreographed. some factors such as interest rates and fuel prices are beyond the control of the rm, but investment in innovation, especially that directed at reducing variability in quality of service and uncertainty in the supply chain, shows the greatest promise for the future of the industry.acknowledgmentwe are grateful to the sloan foundation for generous support of this research.referencesarchibugi, d., and s. iammarino. (1999). the policy implication of the globalization of innovation. research policy 28(2,3):317336.bartels, n. (2006). 21st century logistics. manufacturing business technology. march.bernanke, b. (2006). global economic integration: what™s new and what™s not? available at http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2006/20060825/default.htm. accessed august 28, 2006.bhise, h., d. farrell, h. miller, a. vanier, and a. zainulbhai. (2000). the duel for the doorstep. the mckinsey quarterly 2:3241.bower, e. z. (n.d.). off shoring operations by united states rms in logistics and distribution services: implication for asean. available at http://www.usasean.org/asean/svcsfdicomppaper.doc. accessed august 15, 2006.bowman, r. j. (n.d.) supply chain management: the perils of going global. available at www.supplychainbrain.com, category scm technology. accessed august 15, 2006.brown, j. s., and j. hagel iii. (2005). from push to pull: the next frontier of innovation. mckinsey quarterly 3. see www.mckinseyquarterly.com accessed july 26, 2006.council of supply chain management professionals. (n.d.). supply chain management/logistics management denitions. available at http://www.cscmp.org/website/aboutcscmp/denitions/denitions.asp. accessed july 26, 2006.craig, t. (2003). 4pl versus 3plša business process outsourcing option for international supply chain management. world wide shipping. december/january. see http://www.ltdmgmt.com/mag/4pl.htm.economist. (2006). the physical internet: a survey of logistics. june 17.gerybadze, a., and g. reger. 1999. globalization of r&d: recent changes in the management of innovation in transnational corporations. research policy 28(2,3): 251275.grosspietsch, j., and j. kupper. (2004). supply chain champs. the mckinsey quarterly 1:24.handeld, r., and e. nichols. (2002). supply chain redesign. englewood cliffs, nj: prentice hall: p. 13.27 see http://www.ops.fhwa.dot.gov/freight/freightanalysis/natfreightstats/docs/05factsgures/table21.htm. accessed august 27, 2006.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.logistics 311hugos, m. (2006). essentials of supply chain management. hoboken, nj: wiley and sons. 2nd edition, pages 79.mckinsey quarterly. (2006). understanding supply chain risk: a mckinsey global survey. september.mulpuru, s. (2006). us ecommerce: five year forecast and data overview. october 12. available at www.forrester.com. accessed november 8, 2006.pande, a., r. raman, and v. srivatsan. (2006). recapturing supply chain data. mckinsey on it. spring 2006, pages 1621.rogers, e. m. (1995). diffusion of innovations. 4th ed. new york: free press, p. 11.singh, m. (2004). a review of leading opinions on the future of supply chains. supply chain 2020. working paper. available at http://ctl.mit.edu/public/opinionsfuturesupplychains.pdf. accessed july 26, 2006.smith, b. (2005). customer satisfaction is the wrong measure. gallup management journal. april 14. available at http://gmj.gallup.com/content/15850/customersatisfactionisthewrongmeasure.aspx. accessed december 22, 2006.smith, f. (2006). going with the flow: how to succeed in a macrotrend environment. speech given at george washington university, february 8, 2006. see http://www.fedex.com/us/about/news/speeches/gwu.html?link=4. accessed july 26, 2006.stoffel, b. (2006, july). navigating the world of outsourcing. lq magazine 12(3).vinas, t. (2005). iw valuechain survey: a map of the world. industry week. september 1. available at http://www.industryweek.com/readarticle.aspx?articleid=10629. accessed august 9, 2006.violini, b. (2006). what can logistics do for you. global services. june. available at www.globalservicesmedia.com. accessed july 15, 2006.wilson, r. (2004). 15th annual state of logistics report. presented at the national press club, washington, d.c., june 7.wilson, r. (2005a). u.s. state of logistics. available at http://www.logistics.or.jp/member/pdf(mazazineinformation)/20050809.pdf. accessed august 26, 2006.wilson, r. (2005b). 16th annual state of logistics report. presented at the ronald reagan building and international trade center, washington, d.c., june 27.zander, i. (1999). how do you mean ﬁglobalﬂ? an empirical investigation of innovation networks in the multinational corporation. research policy 28(2,3):195213.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.313 9 venture capitalmartin kenneyuniversity of california, davismartin haemmigunibw munich, germany and leiden university, netherlandsw. richard goekansas state universityintroductionin 1946, the rst venture capital (vc) rms were established in the united states with the objective of providing nancial backing and business assistance to entrepreneurs in exchange for repayment in capital gains. these pioneering vc rms soon discovered that technologybased innovations most consistently yielded the greatest returns. today, the ideal/typical vc rm is the u.s.style limited partnership that is embedded in a local entrepreneurial ecosystem and invests in technologyrelated deals. the pioneering vc rms were also motivated to diffuse venture capitalism nationally and internationally. in retrospect, it would appear that they were successful. in the past two decades venture capitalism has spread globally. there are now domestically owned vc rms operating in at least 40 nations. also, there is an increasing number of vc rms that have established ofces or begun investing in multiple nations, or both (i.e., vc rms operating across national borders). the international diffusion of vc investing suggests that there are entrepreneurial ventures that merit funding in many nations.in 2006, there can be little doubt that vc nancing of entrepreneurial hightechnology ventures plays a signicant role in the u.s. national innovation system. venture capitalists have backed nearly all of the signicant u.s. information technology (it) rms established during the past four decades. these include 3com, amd, apple, applied materials, cadence, cisco, google, intel, oracle, netscape, seagate, silicon graphics, solectron, sun microsystems, yahoo!, and many others. in biotechnology, the vcnanced rms include amgen, biogen, cetus, centocor, chiron, genentech, and many others. in the nontechnology elds, important vcfunded rms include federal express, jetblue, ebay, home innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.314 innovation in global industriesdepot, and ofce depot. a number of these rms have changed the way human beings work and interact or, to borrow a phrase from steven jobs, ﬁthey have changed the world.ﬂ recently, new vcnanced rms, such as facetime, myspace, and youtube, are driving yet further change.if one agrees that the vcnanced rms are critical to the u.s. position in the global technology economy, then the globalization of the vc industry is an important topic. the vc industry is not signicant in terms of either direct employment or the total capital under management. rather its signicance lies in the role of venture capitalists in nding, funding, and assisting entrepreneurs whose rms will be instruments of schumpeter™s (1939) ﬁcreative destructionﬂ or successful in creating ﬁnew economic spaces.ﬂ previous studies have attempted to measure the employment contribution of rms funded by vc and found it to be extensive (see, e.g., global insight, 2004).our examination of the globalization of the vc industry proceeds as follows. the rst section introduces vc as an organizational form. the second section examines the academic research on international vc investing. the following section describes the history of international vc investing, which began in the 1960s and has since grown enormously. the fourth section examines the reasons for the globalization of the vc industry and is followed by a quantitative section describing the international ˚ows of vc. in the sixth section the growth of the vc investment in china is discussed. the concluding section discusses the implications of the ndings for our understanding of the globalization of vc. we nd that there is little evidence at this time to indicate that the globalization of vc is having a negative effect on the u.s. innovation system. the existing evidence does suggest that u.s. vc rms are nding viable investments in other nations and foreign vc rms continue to nd viable investments in the united states.venture capital as an organizational formprofessional vc rms are the subject of this chapter and, as far as is practicable, buyout (bo) and angel investors are omitted from our analysis. private equity (pe) rms are organizations that invest in rms with the aim of later selling this equity at a higher price to capture the capital gains. vc is a subset of pe rms. we do not include bo rms because they acquire existing rms and thus are involved not in supporting emerging rms but rather in acquiring and reorganizing existing rms. angel investing refers to equity investment in young rms by individuals or groups of individuals using their own funds and is a practice that is hundreds of years old. the difference between angels and venture capitalists is that the venture capitalists are professionals operating an organization that has raised institutional money.this chapter treats private vc as the ideal type and does not examine corporate vc. the reasons for omitting corporate vc are threefold: first, as a whole, corporate vc is much less important than private vc. second, many corporate innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 315vc operations have very different organizational structures, degrees of independence, compensation, and reporting relationships to the parent corporation than do the private vc rms. finally, most corporate venture capitalists do not perform the leadinvestor role, preferring instead to invest after, or in conjunction with, the private vc rms.the narrow denitions of vc are slippery in the real world. for example, ﬁventure capitalﬂ investing in japan and korea traditionally has been in the form of loans (clark, 1987; kenney et al., 2004; kuemmerle, 2001). the data collected on ﬁventureﬂ investment often commingles vc and bošand even angel investments if they are sufciently large.1 in europe, the acronym evca stands for the european private equity and venture capital association, and bo continues to be the dominant investment pattern in europe (gompers and lerner, 2001), although the relative shares may be changing. despite the disparate denitions, the term ﬁventure capitalﬂ in this chapter refers to equity investors in young rms.the vc rm is a small nancial services professional organization (usually employing a total of less than 30 persons) that functions primarily to (1) assess business opportunities; (2) provide capital; and (3) actively engage, monitor, advise, and assist the rms in its portfolio (i.e., those rms in which vc has been invested). by investing, the venture capitalist accepts a substantial tranche of illiquid equity that converts its status to something like a ﬁpartnerﬂ to the entrepreneur. the goal of the venture capitalist is not only to increase the value of that equity, but to eventually monetize the investment through a liquidity event such as an initial public stock offering or sale to another investor so it can reap the results of its investment. the nal way of ﬁreaping the rewardﬂ is rm failure and bankruptcy. in all of these scenarios, the venture capitalist ﬁexitsﬂ the investment (i.e., ends its ownership role in the rm). this is necessary to complete the process because the vc rm™s investors must be paid by liquidating the holdings. in environments in which exit is impossible, venture capitalists cannot invest.the economics of vc are characterized by high risk and high returns. investing in young rms is riskyšmany fail and become total losses. the compensation for the failures comes from investments that yield 10, 20, or even 100 times the initial capital invested by the venture capitalists. this asymmetric return prole means that venture capitalists only invest in rms offering the opportunity for extremely large returns. to be clear, venture capitalists are industrysector agnostic, but as a generalization, during the past ve decades, the sectors that most often generate such opportunities are the information and communication technologies. the biomedical elds are the only other ones with a long history of good returns. of course, many other investment elds, such as energy in the 1970s, superconductivity, and now, possibly, nanotechnology, have come and gone with minimal returns.operationally, venture capitalists invest only after rigorous reference check1 all statistics used in this chapter are for vc only unless otherwise noted.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.316 innovation in global industriesing (due diligence) and, in return for capital, the venture capitalist receives equity and a seat on the board of directors from which to actively monitor and assist the rm™s growth. after investment, the idealtypical vc rm provides assistance ranging from practical needs such as providing advice on issues that a ˚edgling rm might encounter, introducing contacts, and assisting in securing necessary executive talent, to more abstract needs such as providing ﬁlegitimacyﬂ (aldrich and fiol, 1994) to help overcome ﬁliabilities of newnessﬂ (stinchecombe, 1965).previous research on venture capital globalizationin many respects, the globalization of vc rms is puzzling. the academic literature suggests that vc investing is strongly localized (sorenson and stuart, 2001), although florida and kenney (1988) found that venture capitalists in nancial centers such as new york and chicago exported capital to technology centers such as silicon valley, where the entrepreneurs and deals were clustered. more recently, kogut et al. (2007) showed that even the early u.s. vc rms coinvested with distant rms. also, by the mid1980s, many east coast vc rms established branch ofces in other regions, particularly in silicon valley (kenney and florida, 2000). perhaps this indicates that the emergence of the global vc rm should have been expected given the increasing globalization affecting nearly every industry, particularly those industries funded by venture capitalists.the international dimensions of vc are receiving increased attention from scholars (gompers and lerner, 2001).2 in the 1980s and 1990s, studies examined the establishment of vc rms in other countries (clark, 1987; green, 1991; kuemmerle, 2001; manigart, 1994). there also have been a number of crosscountry comparative studies, both at the institutional level (kenney et al., 2004; manigart et al., 1996) and in comparisons of practice (pruthi et al., 2003).the literature offers three explanations for the uncanny success of vc as an institution in the united states and its relative slow diffusion to most other nations. the rst explanation is inspired by the work by la porta et al. (1998), which suggests that english common lawbased nations have had the most successful vc industries. this success is ascribed to the proposition that noncommon law legal regimes offer less protection to the owners of capital (bottazzi et al., 2005; hege et al., 2004; lerner and schoar, 2005). the legal/governance explanations may explain part of the crossnational variation, but these studies do not control for technological capability or entrepreneurial environment, which the extant literature suggests is important for understanding the subnational regional success in vc investing.the second explanation is a variant on the governance explanation that focuses on the nexus between ownership and control. here, the existence of a local 2 see zalan (2004) and wright et al. (2005) for comprehensive reviews of the academic literature on vc globalization.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 317stock market as the main source of capital for growing rms is singled out as a critical variable for vibrant vc industry growth. for example, black and gilson (1998) argue that economies with stock marketbased nancial systems have stronger vc industries than economies with bankbased systems, presumably because new rms can raise capital in these markets. in a crossnational comparison, jeng and wells (2000) found that the numbers of inital public stock offerings (ipos) in the domestic market were the strongest driver of vc investing.since ipos are highly visible markers of wealth creation, one would expect that they would have a demonstration effect. however, stuart and sorenson™s (2003) research suggests that in the united states this effect is very local. the stock marketbased explanation has a powerful appeal because it resonates with the obvious need for there to be exits for the reproduction of vc. this conclusion is drawn from the success of vc rms in the united states and the united kingdom (unfortunately, the european data used for empirical studies during this period came from the evca and do not distinguish between bo and vc). more recently, this perspective has been brought into question because ipos on foreign markets have been the exit strategy of choice for israeli and chinese rms (rock, 2001; zero2ipo.com, 2005).these corporate governance/nancial system arguments have been questioned. for example, a study by kaplan et al. (2003) of funding agreements from 23 nations (not including the united states) found that u.s.style contracts could be written in a wide range of legal regimes and were used by more experienced venture capitalists. the implication is that legal systems might not be as signicant an obstacle as some believe. in a study to be discussed further later in the section, guler and guillen (2005, p. 31) found that legal effects vanished after controlling for national strength in science and technology. using nationallevel variables, allen and song (2005) conrmed the dubiousness of the ﬁruleoflawﬂ position. they found that law and order were negatively related to vc investing. these studies suggest that governance and nancial system explanations for the success of vc may be overemphasized. given that venture capitalists have experienced some recent success investing in china, it may be that an english common lawbased legal system may not be required.there is other evidence to conrm that the traditional arguments about legal environments may not be as important as previously thought. through an analysis of contracts written by u.s. venture capitalists in foreign markets, kaplan et al. (2003) conclude that in nearly any environment it should be possible for vc rms to write contracts or develop various mechanisms to ameliorate legal, regulatory, scal, and structural obstacles to investment and exit, although the contracts may initially appear cumbersome.3 we would extend this to suggest that if successful exits (through either acquisition or a public offering) occur 3 lerner and schoar (2005), studying private equity, come to different conclusions. however, this may be due to the difference in operation of pe and vc rms. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.318 innovation in global industriesin these environments, then the contracts and other organizational features can coalesce into understood routines and be taken for granted. after routinization, the contracts would appear to the participants as unproblematic (e.g., offshore investment vehicles in china).the nance literature research on the global diffusion of venture capitalism is remarkable because it ignores the fact that the predominant deal ˚ow for venture capitalists has come from the information and communication technology (it) eld and the biomedical eld. for example, in the united states from 2002 to 2005, investments in it as a share of total vc investments ranged between 58 and 60 percent. between 18 and 23 percent of total investments were in the life sciences, while the remainder were scattered across other industries. in europe between 51 and 57 percent of the total investment was in it, while the life sciences received a further 21 to 28 percent. in israel, it has been far more dominant, receiving 7076 percent of total vc investments. in contrast, the life sciences received 1619 percent (original data from ventureone, ernst & young, and martin haemmig, 2006). these data indicate that, in each major western vc market, more than 80 percent of all vc investments have been in the it and biomedical elds. in the hotbeds of investment activity (e.g., silicon valley, boston, israel, stockholm, cambridge [england], austin), the percentages of vc invested in these technology areas are likely to be even greater. this strongly suggests that vc investments in any nation cannot be explained without considering the nation™s technological base in general, and its it and biomedical innovatory capabilities in particular.few studies of vc globalization have controlled for the vc recipient nation™s technological base. using a sample of organisation for economic cooperation and development (oecd) nations, astrid romain and bruno van pottlesberghe (2004) found that measures of technological strength such as patenting and research and development (r&d) investment were signicant predictors of an increase in vc investment in that nation. in examining the overseas investments by u.s. venture capitalists, guler and guillen (2005, p. 30) found that a onestandarddeviation increase in a nation™s u.s. patents led to a 77.5 percent increase in the number of ventures receiving investment from u.s. vc rms. further, a onestandarddeviation increase in scientic publications led to a 113.4 percent increase in the number of ventures receiving investment from u.s. vc rms. no other measures, including stock market capitalization, political constraints, or number of students studying in the united states, were as important.although guler and guillen (2005) do not address the success of domestic vc rms, their study does provide evidence that suggests support for romain and van pottlesberghe™s (2004) conclusion that technological capabilities are necessary to attract vc investment. as avnimelech et al. (2005) argue, the vc industry in the united states and other nations has coevolved with the technology industries that venture capitalists fund. in short, scientic and technological advance are the fuel for creating rms capable of generating the returns necessary innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 319to support a vc industry. this would suggest that models purporting to explain national experience in attracting vc investment (from either national or external sources) that do not control for technological capability are fundamentally misspecied.4with a few exceptions, previous studies have examined national vc industries and thus measure the diffusion of vc as a social function. the phenomenon of interest in this chapter is the globalization of vc (i.e., vc rms operating across national boundaries). in a recent study of global vc investment patterns, megginson (2004, p. 25) found that there was some evidence of ﬁsignicant [international] convergence in funding levels, investment patterns, and realized return.ﬂ and yet, he concluded that, because national capital markets have remained relatively segregated and legal systems remain different, ﬁit appears that no truly integrated global vc market will likely emerge in the foreseeable future.ﬂ there is evidence to qualify this conclusion.today, an increasing number of venture capitalists are investing successfully across borders. one important method of investing internationally is syndication. recently, there have been a number of academic studies on the international syndication of vc investments. for example, mäkelä and maula (2006) found that the presence of foreign venture capitalists and top managers with foreign experience increases the probability that a portfolio rm will list on foreign markets. pagano et al. (2002) found that r&dintensive rms were more likely to undertake a foreign ipo, and this was supported by hursti and maula (2007). the apparent growing tendency for international syndication is creating a global network of vc rms. this has occurred in conjunction with the increasing number of foreign listings on stock exchanges such as the nasdaq and the london aim. with these changes, the grounds for megginson™s (2004) conclusion may be weakening.the history of vc globalizationduring the past halfcentury, venture capitalism has diffused internationally in the sense that numerous nations have indigenous vc industries and increasing numbers of venture capitalists are investing across national borders. although this chapter is most concerned with crossnational vc investing, the presence of local venture capitalists is often important because they are usually more tightly linked to local entrepreneurs and can function as intermediaries for larger foreign vc rms. additionally, when foreign vc rms decide to enter a new market, 4 perversely, the omission of technology variables in academic research is mirrored in ﬁvcﬂ investing in certain nations. for example, in a survey of british venture capitalists, murray and lott (1995) found that ﬁtechnology projects had to meet more rigorous selection criteria than nontechnology projectsﬂ and ﬁinvestors imposed higher investment return ‚hurdle rates™ at each stage of investment other than seed capital.ﬂ though it is difcult to establish the direction of causality, this resonates with the perception that the u.k. vc industry is, in large measure, a pe industry.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.320 innovation in global industriesthey will often form a partnership or even acquire a local vc rm. this suggests that the growth of local venture capitalists and the entry of foreign venture capitalists into a market are intimately related.a rough way of tracking the diffusion of indigenous vc activity is through counting the number of national vc organizations. in 1973, the national venture capital association was established in the united states as the rst national vc organization. since then, at least, vc associations in 36 other nations have been formed. in addition to the united states, other early vc associations were established in canada. these were followed by the establishment of a number of different national associations in europe (largely contemporaneously) in the early 1980s. vc associations gradually spread to southern europe and then later to eastern europe. because of the small size of the local vc industry in many of these nations, they had very few members. over time, venture capitalists in asia formed associations. the most recent major nation to form an association is china. brazil has the only vc association in latin america while south africa has the only one in africa.more recently, regional vc/pe organizations have been formed. for example, the evca was formed in 1983 and is the best organized of the regional vc associations. in 2001 the asia pacic venture capital alliance was formed by the national organizations of hong kong, korea, malaysia, singapore, and taiwan. this was followed in 2002 by the formation of an organization called the emerging market private equity association. this suggests that supranational structures are emerging, possibly leading to a global umbrella organization in the future.the fact that a nation has an association does not prove, in and of itself, that it contains a vibrant vc industry. the existence of an association does provide a certain visibility, and the association can lobby the government to improve the environment for both vc and entrepreneurship. in the united states, israel, and taiwan, the national associations have had policy impacts. the evca has played an important role in lobbying the european union (eu). at a minimum, the existence of national and regional vc associations demonstrates the broad diffusion of vc investing.crossnational vc investing has evolved gradually. the rst important period was in the 1970s when a number of european nancial institutions established u.s. subsidiaries or invested in u.s. vc rms. corresponding roughly to the 1980s, a second period occurred when u.s. east coast vc rms opened ofces in europe (especially in london) in search of european investments. in the mid1980s, several u.s. west coast vc rms were formed to invest in taiwan and other parts of sinophone asia. contemporaneously, a few japanese vc rms began investing abroad. at the end of the decade, taiwanese vc rms began investing in the united states. in addition, there was also an effort to establish vc rms in various developing nations during the 1980s. a third period innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 321of international vc development occurred in the 1990s and is discussed in the next section on current crossnational linkages.pioneering venture capitalists were convinced of the importance of vc and the benets it could provide to society. early vc rms tended to invest locally (hsu and kenney, 2005). however, kogut et al. (2006) showed that crossregional coinvestment occurred very early in the development of the u.s. vc industry. the initial efforts to globalize the vc model were missionarylike initiatives by the u.s. pioneers. the rst effort was in 1960 when the rockefeller vc operation opened an ofce in brussels. unfortunately, it had few successes and soon was abandoned (wilson, 1985, p. 220). in 1962, american research and development (ard) helped organize the canadian enterprise development corporation and european enterprise development corporation. none of these initial efforts were sustainable and they were eventually discontinued.several u.s. technology startups that were backed by u.s. vc rms began to provide large capital gains in the late 1960s. for example, ard™s $70,000 investment in dec in 1957 appreciated to more than $350 million in 1969. this provided incentives for both foreign and domestic investors to invest in vc funds. because of the informal nature of the vc industry during this early period, little is known about its global interconnections. in the early 1970s, pioneering vc rms were established in the united kingdom and then in the netherlands and france (manigart, 1994, p. 535). these marked the acceptance of the vc concept in europe. despite these new rms in europe, there were only a few new entrants per year and very few investment opportunities.the rst sustained global operations were by european nancial institutions that either invested in u.s. partnerships or established vc investment operations in the united states. for example, in 1970, new court securities, which was an arm of the european rothschild family, opened in new york city. also, both the large french bank indosuez and guardian ventures limited of canada established u.s. vc branches. contemporaneously, genstar corporation of canada became the sole investor in sutter hill ventures in the san francisco bay area. these pioneers invested in the united states, not in their home nation.peter brooke, the founder of ta associates and one of the leading u.s. vcs, played a pivotal role in early international diffusion efforts. in 1971, he was appointed as a founding director of sonnova, which was capitalized by various french banks with the mandate to invest in both france and the united states (advent international corporation, 1986). in 1974, sonnova opened an ofce in san francisco and made a number of successful investments in the nascent eld of biotechnology. in 1975, the dutch investment company orange nassau started a u.s. fund managed by ta associates.in the 1970s, some u.s. vcs believed europe would provide signicant investment opportunities. for example, in 1971, u.s. venture capitalist philip greer (1971) opined that europe was attractive because the lack of competition meant that rm valuations were lower. he recognized that exits would be difinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.322 innovation in global industriescult because the only stock market having the requisite liquidity was the london stock exchange.for this reason the prime exit strategy would be selling portfolio rms to u.s. corporations. greer also identied a shortage of entrepreneurs in europe. he stated, ﬁthe entrepreneur concept is typically american and such activities have been discouraged in europe.ﬂ these obstacles were compounded by a paucity of wellrounded managers, longer investment periods, a shortage of second and thirdstage nancial sources, a european nancial community that did not welcome outsiders, and higher costs of operation. although greer was optimistic about europe, the reasons he identied were exactly those that stymied the development of the european vc industry up until the 1990s (pe investing was more successful).after a severe downturn in the mid1970s, the u.s. industry reawakened and a few more u.s. vc rms entered europe. in 1980, peter brooke established an international vc rm, advent international, with a london ofce. from there, it soon expanded to belgium in 1982 and singapore and malaysia (seavic) in 1983. in addition to these ofces, ta/advent established linkages with four seasons venture capital in sweden in 1982, tvm techno venture management in 1983 in munich, germany, advent technoventure in 1984 in tokyo, alpha associes in 1985 in paris, and horizonte ventures in 1985 in austria. the advent network was the rst vc rm with a global presence.another pioneer was apax, which was the result of a merger of a boutique international investment banking rm established in 1972 by ronald cohen in the united kingdom, maurice tchénio in paris, and alan patricof in the united states. in 1981, cohen raised their rst u.k. £10 million fund with the assistance of patricof, who also invested in the fund. in 1983, tchénio raised a fund in france in which patricof also invested. from this union, apax grew to be one of the leading international vc/pe rms, with ofces in new york, menlo park, london, paris, milan, munich, madrid, tel aviv, stockholm, and zurich.as u.s. rms entered europe, european rms continued to enter the u.s. market. for example, in 1981, the british rm 3i opened an ofce in the united states, although it withdrew in the early 1990s (coopey and clark, 1995, p. 179). atlas venture, a division of the dutch ing bank, opened an ofce in boston in 1986. in 1982, vincent worms and thomas mckinley at partech international launched a global venture fund for banque paribas in san francisco and later in paris. yet another rm, alta berkeley, was formed in 1982 in london in cooperation with the u.s. rm burr, egan, and deleage. thus a cadre of transatlantic vcs came into being.despite the growth in vc operations, there was a continuing lack of highquality deals in europe (murray and lott, 1995). as the chairman of apax partners, ronald cohen, put it: ﬁtoward the middle of the decade (1980s) there was a general shift away from business risk. this was partly the result of burnt innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 323ngers from startup investments in the early 1980s, but also because of a move towards the quicker returns to be made from backing mbos and exiting in a rising marketﬂ (quoted in coopey and clarke, 1995, p. 171). the theme of low returns for vc investing in europe has been a constant refrain (see, e.g., murray and marriott, 1998) and is substantiated in table 1, which compares returns from different investment stages in europe and the united states. these data demonstrate that the longrun returns for earlystage investing in europe have been far lower than in the united states. even for the balanced funds category, u.s. funds outperformed european funds. it has only been since the stock market bubble™s collapse in 2000 that european vc funds have performed roughly as well as u.s. funds. the disappointing european vc returns contrast with the superior performance of european pe funds.a full explanation for the low returns to vc investing in europe is outside the scope of this paper. however, it is possible to list some of the salient elements of such an explanation. important elements include the relative weakness of european universities, corporations, and nations in the information technologies, with the possible exception of a few large corporate laboratories and a few universities. a similar but not quite as powerful advantage would be true in the biomedical sciences. also, the enormous and very discerning u.s. it market was a signicant advantage. this meant europe had fewer entrepreneurs, smaller concentrations of entrepreneurs, and slower growth in its entrepreneurial rms. as a result, a pathdependent logic was set in motion, building upon signicant rstmover advantage in the united states, particularly in silicon valley and boston. these factors may partially explain why the united states developed both vc and bo investing, whereas european investors emphasized bo investing.asiajapanese corporate venturers and large japanese vc rms, nearly all of which were subsidiaries of large japanese nancial institutions, began globalizing slightly later in time than the initial european vc rms. in 1983 the largest japatable 1 net returns in european and u.s. venture capital and buyout investments by stages as of december 31, 2005a1 yr eu1 yr usa3 yr eu3 yr usa5 yr eu5 yr usa10 yr eu10 yr usabalanced32.724.32.811.7œ2.7œ3.57.618.9all vc25.415.60.67.5œ4.0œ6.85.323.7buyouts20.931.37.916.35.05.212.69.2 anet internal rates of returns to investors in eu funds formed during the period 19862005 and u.s. funds formed during the period 19862005. these rates were calculated from thomson financial, the national venture capital association, and european venture capital association data.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.324 innovation in global industriesnese vc rm, jafco (a nomura securities afliate), established its international ofce in hong kong. in july 1984, it established a menlo park, california, ofce and, in 1986, opened a representative ofce in london (kuemmerle, 2001). facilitated by the easy money available during the japanese economic bubble of the 1980s, other japanese vc rms and industrial corporations invested in silicon valley and other locations at extremely high valuations. unfortunately, in too many cases, these investments failed. as a result, many but not all of these japanese venturers retreated from these global ventures. some rms (e.g., jafco) continued to invest globally. during the dotcom boom, softbank (a japanese technology conglomerate) began investing globally. these global investments included the purchase of a large stake in yahoo!. today, softbank is an active investor in china.from the 1980s onward, international development organizations, particularly the international finance corporation (ifc), which is a member of the world bank group, made a concerted effort to implant venture investing in the developing nations of latin america, east and southeast asia, and africa (aylward, 1998; fox, 1996). for example, the ifc, in concert with the u.s. agency for international development, british development agencies, and other european aid organizations, provided the initial capital for the rst vc funds in india, korea, and southeast asia (dossani and kenney, 2002; kenney et al., 2004). the modus operandi differed by nation. in some cases (e.g., india), the funds were invested in domestic vc rms. in other cases, the funds were invested in an international vc rm willing to create a country fund. this is exemplied by southeast asia venture inc. (seavi), which was operated by advent international and headquartered in singapore. at this time, the nancial returns were mixed, even in nations where vc rms would later succeed. despite the failures, these initiatives helped promote other benets such as the training of vc personnel, changes in the legal system, and an increasing awareness of entrepreneurship (dossani and kenney, 2002; kenney et al., 2004). the taiwanese vc industry started in 1982 and grew rapidly. in the late 1980s and early 1990s, the largest taiwanese vc rms established silicon valley operations. in many developing nations, however, vc funds failed due to inadequate investment opportunities (aylward, 1998; fox, 1996).more recently, india has been attracting attention from international vc rms. as was the case with many developing nations, india received a spate of investment from u.s. vc rms during the internet bubble that ended in 2000 (dossani and kenney, 2002). the ensuing downturn dried up most of the vc investment in india. from 2003 onward, the growing practice of international outsourcing of business services encouraged some global vc rms to invest in indian service delivery rms. thus far, there have been only a few exits in the form of mergers (e.g., daksh was purchased by ibm for $170 million in 2004, spectramind was purchased by wipro for a total of approximately $150 million in a process in 2003, and 52 percent of mphasis was purchased by eds in 2006 for $380 million).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 325these were good exits, although they did not provide the high multiples that have recently been obtained from investments in particular chinese rms. in part, this is because the indian market is not as large as the chinese market. furthermore, there are no legal or language barriers to foreign rms, and indian rms do not yet have globalclass technology. at this point, india is mainly conned to labor arbitrage opportunities (dossani and kenney, 2007). given the types of recent r&d investment by multinational corporations in india, the skilled managerial and technical personnel in the indian labor force, and the growing expertise of indian rms in software and software services, it is not unreasonable to expect the emergence of technologybased indian startups that are globally competitive within the next 3 years (dossani and kenney, 2007).in the 1990s, the environment changed for vc investing, even for the elite silicon valley venture capitalists. initially, the changes were subtle. historically, it was necessary for vc rms from other nations to quickly establish an international ofce in silicon valley if they wanted to be considered a global player and take advantage of the investment opportunities found there. in contrast, because of the lucrative deals available locally, u.s. vc rms in silicon valley responded to global opportunities at a much more gradual pace. their awareness of international investment opportunities was heightened by the fact that the business plans of an increasing number of the u.s. rms in which they invested (e.g., fabless semiconductor rms) were predicated upon using offshore assets, particularly for manufacturing. furthermore, the startup teams for these rms frequently had at least one member born overseas (wong, 2005). in addition, a steady ˚ow of successful ipos in the united states by venturebacked israeli rms achieved sufciently large returns to draw the attention of silicon valley vc rms. finally, it became apparent that in certain promising technologies (e.g., wireless and software security), the united states was not the clear technological or market leader. taken together, the development of vc industries in new nations, the emergence of a greater number of international investment opportunities, and strategic issues, such as ensuring that the rms in which they had invested were properly positioned in the correct markets, encouraged all vc rms, including the elite silicon valley rms, to make international investments and develop global strategies.venture capital globalization patternsthere are few empirical studies of the reasons for vc globalization (for exceptions, see cumming, 2002; haemmig, 2003). the reasons for establishing overseas operations differ by rm and home market circumstances. first, until recently, only the largest national markets, such as the united states, offered a sufcient number of highquality investments to support a large vc rm.5 vc rms established in smaller markets and seeking critical mass, such as atlas 5 the eu is probably a sufciently large market.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.326 innovation in global industriesventures of holland or sonnova and partech of france, necessarily must invest internationally. in many cases, this occurs through coinvestment with a local rm (e.g., a dutch vc rm invests in a german deal or a german vc rm invests in a u.k. deal). often, the foreign rm offers only nancial support and is not an active investor providing other services to the portfolio rm. the nonlocal vc rm is normally a passive investor.a deeper commitment is to establish an ofce overseas. for example, 3i opened its u.s. operation because it was believed essential to be present in the most dynamic vc market (coopey and clarke, 1995, p. 357). the branch ofce can provide a variety of services to its headquarters. for example, if it is located in a leading entrepreneurial cluster it can provide market information to the home ofce to prevent it from investing in ﬁmetooﬂ startups. alternatively, in technologies where the skills may be available in multiple locations, the branch ofce may notice initiation of investment by leading venture capitalists in the united states and pass this information to its parent ofce so that it can fund domestic startupsšreceiving such a signal early could prove a signicant advantage. in this case, the foreign branch creates a window into market developments.foreign branch ofces can provide services to parent rms, such as providing introductions to potential suppliers, customers, or strategic partners. foreign ofces may begin as a listening post or contact point for laterstage investing while also serving as a marketing differentiator in the home market if domestic entrepreneurs seek a vc rm capable of providing introductions in the foreign market. for nonu.s. rms, a u.s. ofce might be useful for their portfolio company in securing followon investments from u.s. vc rms that can help ﬁcertifyﬂ the foreign rm. this may increase the value of the nonu.s. rm, particularly if it is to have a public offering on a u.s. stock exchange, or if the rm is being considered as an acquisition target by a u.s. corporation.depending on subjective decisions about an entrepreneur™s trustworthiness and excellence, and facing a need to monitor the managers of rms in which they invest, the international investments of vc rms should pose considerably greater difculties compared to their domestic investments. in one of the few studies of foreign vc investors operating in another country, mäkelä (2004) found that foreign vc rms in finland tended to have lower commitment to the finnish rms in which they were invested compared to domestic investors. on the positive side, the foreign vc rms provided an important legitimating function to the finnish rms in which they were invested. in comparing foreign and domestic vc rms operating in india, pruthi et al. (2003) found that domestic rms were more apt to provide advice and monitoring for their portfolio rms while foreign rms placed greater emphasis on strategic positioning. despite these benets, lara baracel (2004) found that u.s. vc rms have enjoyed signicantly less success (measured by exits) with foreign investments compared to domestic investments.the motivation for vc globalization differs by nation. in a survey of vc rms, haemmig (2003) found signicant differences by home region (see tainnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 327ble 2).6 the most striking aspect regarding motives was how different the u.s. rms were from those in europe and asia. u.s. rms reported two primary motives: rst, a desire to invest in technologies that were superior abroad or in industrial sectors that had promising startups in other nations (e.g., mobile telephony and security software), and second, some believed that foreign deals were less expensive. in addition, some wanted to assist their portfolio rms in globalizing their markets. u.s. vc rms were not motivated to invest overseas by pressures or difculties within the u.s. market. the reasons asian rms gave for globalization were an insufcient domestic deal ˚ow and the potential of higher returns from abroadšnearly the polar opposite of the u.s. rms. for the asian rms, the only other signicant issue was a need to operate in larger markets. european vcs agreed with asian rms on the insufcient domestic deal ˚ow, but they also felt a need to assist their portfolio rms in globalizing. higher potential returns and larger markets were also mentioned. the most remarkable difference between the europeans and the asians was that the asian vcs did not believe that they needed to assist their domestic rms in internationalizing their investments. in summary, u.s. vcs responded to business and technology opportunities abroad, while european and asian vcs were reacting to difculties in their domestic markets in terms of either deal ˚ow or returns.in contrast to most academic work that models globalization as a conscious strategy from its inception (e.g., guler and guillen, 2005), twothirds of haemmig™s (2003) respondents answered that their rst foreign investment was due to an opportunity presenting itself rather than a conscious strategy. at the time of the interview, 89.5 percent of the rms claimed that they had developed a written strategy for their international activities after the fact to rationalize their globalization efforts. this suggests that the initial investments were sufciently successful to encourage a greater commitment to overseas investing.these results are reinforced by the responses to the question of whether their international investments and operations were ﬁaddonﬂ businesses or were of strategic importance. only 32 percent of the u.s. rms saw their international investments as being of strategic importance. in contrast, 68 percent of the european rms and 91 percent of the asian rms saw their international investments as strategic. these responses suggest that many u.s. rms are motivated by an ﬁopportunity pull,ﬂ whereas asian and european rms are motivated by the push of being located in inadequate markets. in turn, u.s. rms may be less than committed to their foreign operations due to the voluntary nature of their decision to globalize. of course, the u.s. rms are not monolithic. some were founded with an international mandate and, thus, are entirely committed to international investing.6 these results are from haemmig (2003), who in 2001 conducted interviews at 95 vc rms in 12 nations (25 in the united states, 38 in europe, and 32 in asia). the denition of a globalized rm in table 5 was whether it invested more than 10 percent of its total capital outside its geographic region.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.328 innovation in global industriestable 2 reasons for international investments by vc firms (in percent)au.s.(n = 28)europe(n = 34)asia(n = 33)insufcient domestic deal ˚ow in sectors02434higher return potential outside home country01631need to bring portfolio rms international12243no other choice but going to the main markets01616less competitive in foreign countries2430new emerging technology that is superior to the u.s.2800industry sector is global (telecommunication/wireless, biotech, it)24139other1256 amay not sum to 100 percent due to rounding error.source: haemmig (2003).in summary, there does not appear to be a single evolutionary logic for globalization at the rm level, despite the unmistakable tendency toward internationalization of investment at the industry level. nevertheless, the relational aspects of vc investing and the concentration of good deals in relatively few locations mean that vc investing is not ﬁglobalﬂ in the sense that vc capital ˚ows with equal ease to all parts of the world. the united states in general, and silicon valley in particular, continues to be the center of the global vc industry. this is predicated on a number of advantages: the most experienced vcs, the most venture capital, the most sophisticated markets, the most experienced pool of managers, the most sophisticated entrepreneurial support network, and, in most elds, the best technologists. these advantages will erode slowly if at all. current globalization does not threaten the u.s. innovation system. one current hotbed of investmentštaiwanšhas very few startups that compete with u.s. rms. the other major hotbedšisraelšdoes generate rms that compete with u.s. rms. however, israel is so small that it poses little signicant threat and, moreover, the amount of vc invested in israel is growing only gradually. the current pattern of globalization seems to be reinforcing the centrality of the u.s. vc industry, even as other nations are experiencing a growth in vc investment.a quantitative overview of the global venture capital industrymultinational ˚ows of vc have become signicant. using data from the national venture capital association, evca, israeli venture capital association, and the asian venture capital journal (2001), we aggregated data on the investment ˚ows between and within four regionsšthe united states, europe, asia, and israel. these data indicate that crossregional vc investing (i.e., a vc rm based in one region investing in a rm in another region) is signicant for all four regions. the data in table 3 indicate that approximately 79 percent of the innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 329total vc invested in 2005 came from u.s. vc rms. in comparison, 15 percent came from european vc rms, 4 percent came from asian vc rms, and 1 percent came from israeli vc rms. these data indicate that the united states was closest to selfsufciency in its vc investment ˚ows compared to the other three regions. approximately 93 percent (21,914 of 23,447) of the total vc invested in u.s. companies in 2005 came from u.s. vc rms. furthermore, of the $24.9 billion invested by u.s. vc rms in 2005, approximately 88 percent (21,914 of 24,925) was invested in u.s. companies.the united states exported roughly $3 billion in vc. this is approximately twice the $1.5 billion it received from the other regions.7 european rms were the largest external investors in the united states, contributing $840 million in vc funds. europe received $2 billion in in˚ows from other nations with the united states providing the preponderance ($1.8 billion). this represented 33 percent of the total vc investment in europe. in israel, u.s. vc rms invested almost as much capital as did the israelis ($158 million vs. $208 million). israeli investments outside the country were insignicant. in asia, the united states was also the largest investor, providing $798 million in vc funds. this was a greater sum that the total intraregional investments by asian vc rms. european investments in asia were only onethird that of u.s. rms.8 the bulk of the asian outward investment was directed toward the united states (80 percent or $502 million). asian investments in israel or europe were relatively negligible. in 2005, the total vc invested interregionally was approximately $5 billion, or 18 percent of the vc invested internationally. of this, the united states provided nearly 60 percent. these aggregate statistics conrm that the united states remains the global center for vc investing, both as an investor and recipient of investment.although megginson (2004) may be correct that a global market for vc has not yet emerged, these data demonstrate that there are now large international ˚ows of vc. these international ˚ows are even larger if one considers that intraeuropean and intraasian ˚ows also involve investment across national boundaries, albeit within each region. although we do not present the data on the ˚ow of investments in vc funds, u.s. vc rms invested a greater percentage abroad than u.s. investors provided to foreignbased vc rms. this suggests that u.s. investors may have a bias toward u.s. rms and, perhaps, trust them to make the investments abroad. in summary, the quantitative data strongly suggest that, with the possible exception of the united states, national vc markets are not autarchic and a global deal market is emerging.7 the $3 billion allocated to europe by u.s. venture capitalists includes capital that was raised by u.s. venture capitalists for europe in europe (e.g., accel europe).8 the capital allocated to asia by u.s. venture capitalists includes capital that was raised by u.s. venture capitalists for asia in asia (e.g., walden international has many asian investors, but it is based in san francisco). innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.330 innovation in global industriestable 3 interregional flows of venture capital investment (in millions of u.s. dollars) by location of firm and location of investment, 2005location of vc firm (origin of investor) 2005 location of investments by vc firmsnorth america ($m)europe ($m)israel ($m)asia ($m)rest of world ($m)total ($m)north america21,9141,83715879821824,925europe8403,48635163594,583israel1393020800377asia502118450231,129row5242759231391total ($m)23,4475,5134121,52251131,405source: compiled by martin haemmig, www.martinhaemmig.com, from data provided by national venture capital association/venture economics, european venture capital association, asian venture capital journal, and israeli venture capital association.the china syndromein the past 5 years china has become a fertile environment for vc investing, despite the fact that it does not have an adequate legal or nancial system. what china does have is a booming economy with large numbers of increasingly wealthy consumers and trained engineers. also, it is experiencing rapidly increasing r&d expenditures in both industry and government (jefferson and gian, 2007). this vortex of opportunity has attracted business persons of all types and venture capitalists are no exception. foreign venture capitalists have ˚ocked to invest in china in both technological and nontechnological elds. because of the topic of this chapter, this section is conned to vc investing in china and does not examine the state of chinese high technology, except in relationship to the rms that have funded by vc. with about $1.9 billion invested in 2006, china ranked second after the u.s. in total vc investment (ernst & young 2007). in 2007, venture capitalists raised $5.8 billion in funds dedicated to investment in china, which was nearly 50 percent more than in 2006 (zero2ipo, 2008).9 this increase was, in large measure, motivated by the successful earlier exits by vcbacked chinese rms on international stock markets. the data in table 4 indicate that the most active vc rms are foreign, particularly those from the united states. firms from other nations, such as softbank from japan, also are present. however, from 2005 to 2006 more domestic chinese vc rms were entering the top twenty. whether this is a trend or anomaly is not certain, but is an interesting phenomenon to watch.there are currently four avenues for venture capitalists to exit their investments in chinese rms. the rst avenue is acquisition by foreign multinationals. 9 some or possibly a large portion of these funds may be used in pe transactions.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 331table 4 top venture capital firms in china by us$ invested, 2005 and 2006rankfirm rank 2006nationalityfirm rank 2005nationality1idg technology venture investmentu.s. idg technology venturesu.s. 2saif partners (softbank) japansaif partners (softbank)japan3sequoia capital chinau.s.venture tdfchina 4legend capital (corporate)chinacdh investmentssingapore/u.s.5granite global ventures u.s.dfj eplanetu.s.6softbank china vcjapansoftbank china vcjapan7walden internationalu.s. granite global venturesu.s.8jafco asia (corporate)japanintel capital chinau.s. (corporate)9intel capital (corporate)u.s.3i u.k.10cdh venturessingapore/u.s.newmargin ventureschina 11id techventures ltd.chinawarburg pincus asia llcu.s.12wi harperu.s.doll capital managementu.s.13doll capital managementu.s.actis china limitedu.k.14qiming venture partnerschinasequoia capital chinau.s.15dt capital partnerschinashandong high technology investmentchina (government)16venture tdf china lpchinapacic venture partnerstaiwan17capital today groupchinashenzhen capital groupchina (government)18orchid asia group hong konglegend capitalchina (corporate)19ceyuan ventureschinawi harper groupu.s. 20gsr ventureschinadragontech ventureshong kongsource: zero2ipo (various years).there have been a number of successes, including yahoo™s $1 billion purchase of 40 percent of the chinese ecommerce rm alibaba, the purchase of longshine in 2005 for $30 million by the u.s. rm amdocs, and tdk™s purchase of atl for $100 million in 2005. the second avenue is acquisition by chinese rms. a number of these have provided high returns to their investors.the third exit window is listing on foreign markets, since chinese rms backed by foreign vc cannot list on chinese markets. foreign vc rms play a innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.332 innovation in global industriesvital role in advising and preparing chinese rms for listing on the u.s. nasdaq. listing in the united states is important, because it has the largest and most liquid markets. conversely, chinese listings are becoming important for u.s. exchanges. in 2004 there were 21 vcbacked ipos of chinese rms, 10 of which were in the united states. these constituted more than 10 percent of the 93 vcbacked ipos in the united states that year. in 2005, 20 vcbacked chinese rms listed internationally. of these, 8 exited in the united states. that year, there were only 57 vcbacked ipos in the united states (zero2ipo, 2005). moreover, many chinese listings performed well in the aftermarket. the nal exit is in the increasingly active chinese stock markets.u.s. vc rms have been intimately involved in the chinese startups listing on u.s. markets. using data from u.s. securities and exchange commission lings for ipos, we extracted the names of the venture capitalists serving on these rms™ boards of directors. the preponderance of the rms had foreign venture capitalists on their board of directors (this includes nonhong kong venture capitalists located in hong kong). the representation of silicon valley venture capitalists is particularly striking. this suggests that these individuals may be transferring silicon valleylike practices and routines for managing hightechnology startups to china.do these chinese startups have unique or globalclass technology that might threaten u.s. dominance? table 5 lists chinese rms with ipo in the united states from 1999 to 2005. the activities of these rms suggest that the chinese startups exiting in the united states are ﬁmetooﬂ emulators of overseas business models, semiconductor design rms operating at the lowertechnology end of the marketplace (e.g., vimicro and actions), semiconductor fabrication rms that are direct competitors with taiwanese rms (e.g., smic), or rms that are not based on technology but instead rely on business models that may not be adaptable outside of china. an example of such business models is focus media, which rents space in elevators on which it installs ˚at panel screens displaying advertisements. in summary, nearly all of these rms serve the rapidly growing and underserved chinese consumer market or are part of a global division of labor that does not directly affect u.s. rms.this relatively negative assessment of the technology base of these vcbacked chinese rms does not imply that china will not rapidly improve its technological capacity. given the current trajectory, it is possible that some rms with unique global or nearglobal class technology may appear within 3 to 5 years. certainly, the success of huawei and zte,10 which were not vc nanced, 10 huawei and zte are the largest chinese telecommunications equipment rms and have become signicant competitors in not only the chinese market but also global markets. examples of their developed nation competitors include cisco, lucent, nortel, and alcatel. in 2006, huawei™s global sales were $8.2 billion, of which 58 percent were outside of china (huawei, 2007). in 2005, zte™s global sales were $2.9 billion (byte and switch, 2006), and it competed particularly ercely in the wireless infrastructure space.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 333table 5 chinese entrepreneurial ventures™ ipos on the u.s. markets, 19992005firm nameyear of ipoactivityanalogous offshore firmsasiainfo holdings 2000software and online services for chinamany rmsnetease.com inc2000online gamesmany rmssohu.com inc2000web portalyahoo!china finance online2004chinese nancial informationhooverskongzhong corp2004wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)many rmsninetowns digital2004software for import/export from chinamany rmselong inc2004travel siteexpediatom online inc2004wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)many rmsbaidu.com inc2005web searchgooglehurray! holding 2005wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)many rmsvimicro international2005ic designmany rmswatchdata technologies2005smart card operating system for chinamany rmschina medical tech.2005ultrasound cancer treatment equipmentmany rmschina techfaith wireless2005handset designmany rmsctrip.com international2003travel siteexpedia51job inc2004job websitemonsterlinktone ltd2004wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)many rmssemiconductor mfg. int.2004semiconductor foundrytsmc (taiwan)shanda interactive2004multiplayer gamesmany rmsthe9 limited2004multiplayer gamesmany rmsfocus media holding2005advertising in elevatorsnot technologychina.com corp1999wireless downloads (e.g., ring tones)many rmsasiacontent.com 2000internet solutions and online advertisingmany rmssina.com2000web portalyahoo!wherever.net2000discounted mobile telephony (defunct)many rmsactions semiconductor2005ic designmany rmssuntech power2005photovoltaicsmany rmssource: compiled by authors.suggests such an outcome. the enormous investments by the chinese government, the return of welltrained chinese workers from overseas, and the growth of the chinese economy make negative predictions about the level of chinese technology and innovation unlikely to hold true in the long term.the evidence suggests that international vcs are more active than domestic vcs in china. for example, approximately 75 percent of the vc funds invested in china recently have come from foreign sources (zero2ipo, 2005). although it is difcult to be certain, there is evidence to suggest that clusters of entrepreneurial rms, vc rms, and other startup service providers may be emerging in beijing and shanghai (kenney et al., 2004). all chinese rms listed on the nasdaq were focused on the chinese internal market with the exception of the semiconductor manufacturing international corporation, which was a semiconductor innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.334 innovation in global industriesfabrication rm competing directly with taiwanese rms. the two chinese semiconductor design rms listed on the nasdaqšactions and vimicrošappear to be focused on the domestic market. at this point, these rms are not competing directly with u.s. design rms, which focus on cuttingedge technologies.the rms that have listed thus far are not direct competition for u.s. hightechnology rms. however, since u.s. vc rms are employing chinese professionals, there will be a transfer of skills from the united states to china in the craft of venture investing. furthermore, the substantial numbers of startups that have grown and managed successful exits imply that a class of experienced entrepreneurs is emerging in china. already, a number of these entrepreneurs are being employed by u.s. vc rms or are establishing their own vc rms with signicant investment from u.s. vc rms. the nal missing ingredient is worldclass technology. despite the fact that china does not appear to have globalclass technological opportunities, the rapidly growing domestic market is creating numerous opportunities for substantial capital gains attracting venture capitalists from around the world.discussionone question motivating this book is the availability of reputable quantitative information on r&d globalization. only 5 years ago, it was nearly impossible to measure vc industry globalization because of the lack of comparable statistics and collection standards. the globalization of the vc industry has increased the demand for standardized information on industry trends throughout the global economy. at the behest of the evca and national venture capital association, the comparability among north american, european, and israeli data has improved. thomson and ernst & young have initiated a global standardization initiative that is now being extended to asia; this will further improve comparability. within 5 years, a robust global reporting system should be in place.while the globalization of vc has diffused this institution to many other nations, silicon valley in the united states unambiguously continues to be the center of the vc industry. one issue of concern is whether investment in foreign companies by u.s. vc rms contributes to eroding the competitiveness of the united states in hightechnology industries. u.s. vc rms have invested in european companies for at least two decades. they soon learned to invest primarily in bo deals because there were too few startup deals. recently, there have been better earlystage deals in europe, which has attracted investment by u.s. vc rms. for example, the recent acquisition of skype by ebay for $4 billion is an exit that will likely attract more u.s. vc investments in european rms. in addition, israel continues to attract u.s. vc investment. an investigation of vc investments in taiwanese companies found that taiwanese startups do not appear to be in direct competition with u.s. startups, with the exception of the area of semiconductor innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 335design (u.s. government accountability ofce, 2006). in sum, at this juncture it would appear that the investments of u.s. vc rms in europe, israel, and taiwan have had a negligible effect on u.s. technological competitiveness.the crossnational investments by u.s. vc rms that have caused the greatest concern are those in china. this is due to the belief that these investments are assisting in the development of foreign competition for the u.s. lead in high technology. this may be a valid concern for the future. chinese rms such as huawei, zte, and lenovo (none of which were vcfunded) are already serious competitors in certain markets. however, as we have discussed, chinese rms funded by vc do not yet appear to pose competition at a global level. the other chapters in this book will answer the question of whether globalclass technology is currently being developed, either in chinese rms and universities, or in the r&d operations of multinational rms in china. this chapter did not examine vc investing in india, which up until the last 18 months has been quite limited, but in 2007 began to grow rapidly.there is little reason to believe that investment by foreign vc rms in the united states has had a negative effect on u.s. technological competitiveness; european vc rms have a long history of investing in the united states. it is more likely that the in˚ow of european vc has provided a net benet to the u.s. economyšeuropean governments believe this to be the case. one benet for the united states is that, at a minimum, european vc rms, as well as israeli vc rms, nearly always pressure their portfolio rms to open an ofce in the united states. their objective has been to access u.s. knowledge and markets. in return, this validates and reinforces the united states as the center of global technology. it is difcult to interpret this as negative.there are recent developments in international stock markets that may have implications for u.s. technological competitiveness. a debate in the industry and exemplied by a 2005 article in the venture capital journal suggests that the willingness of rms to list on u.s. markets may be decreasing due to the high cost of complying with sarbanesoxley (sox) legislation (sheahan, 2005). the argument is that u.s. markets may be losing their centrality in vc investing, particularly for smaller ipos. for example, of a total of 78 ipos in 2005 by 30 topquartile u.s. vc rms, only 45 were listed in the united states. the remaining 33 were listed in nonu.s. markets including london (lse and aim), taiwan, hong kong (main board and gem), japan (jasdaq), korea (kosdaq), singapore, and malaysia. whether this recent trend will endure is uncertain as it is also possible that these offshore ipos involve lowerquality rms. sox may be shifting inferior listings to markets with looser disclosure and listing standards. alternatively, shifting listings away from u.s. markets could impact the health of u.s. equity markets by encouraging listing abroad. despite this shift in listing, the larger exits for vcnanced hightechnology rms continue to be on the innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.336 innovation in global industriesnasdaq. so, the suspicion that sox legislation is convincing rms to list in other markets has not been denitively proven.11conclusionthe vc industry has experimented with globalization for the past 40 years. in the last 10 years, and particularly since the 2000 u.s. stock market meltdown, globalization has advanced rapidly as the largest vc rms have established crossnational partnerships and overseas ofces and have coinvested abroad. we expect this trend to continue to grow as other nations develop signicant clusters of expertise and rms worthy of vc investment, global corporations accelerate their practice of acquiring foreign startups, and exit markets are increasingly global.the reasons for globalization vary not only by vc rm, but also by nation. until recently, u.s. vc rms, particularly in silicon valley, experienced little pressure to globalize. for european and asian rms, better returns and more investment opportunities were prime motivators for investing and operating in the united states. for the european rms, the ability to assist their portfolio rms abroad (in the u.s. market) was also an important globalization motivator. in contrast, asian vc rms did not attach as much importance to these reasons, suggesting that the asian rms in which they were investing had minimal global operational ambitions (e.g., nearly all of the chinese rms that went public on nasdaq did not target external markets). although u.s. vc rms have been privileged by being located in the world™s largest and most lucrative investment environment, many major u.s. vc rms are globalizing.in 2007 the vc industry was well into the process of globalization. the it industries have always been the core business eld for vc investing and u.s. rms have dominated this eld. at this time, there is no indication that any other business eld, such as biotechnology, nanotechnology, superconductivity, or green energy technologies, will displace the it sector in the near future in terms of the size and speed of capital gains generation. should the u.s. ability to generate it and biomedical innovations capable of being commercialized for large capital gains decline, vc rms will shift their investment to more promising locations and technologies (if any emerge).the continuing globalization of r&d described in the other chapters of this volume suggests that vc rms will also continue to globalize as investment opportunities proliferate. at this point, vc industry globalization does not threaten u.s. leadership in technological innovation. extrapolating from the historical record, what would be most likely to threaten innovation leadership would be u.s. decisions that weaken the ˚ow of innovative opportunities and the supply of technically procient, welltrained entrepreneurs (e.g., changes in immigra11 doidge et al. (2007) dispute the hypothesis that sox has caused listings to be moved to london markets.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 337tion policy, research funding policy, tax policies, or secrecy that sti˚es the free ˚ow of engineers, scientists, and information). there is little evidence to suggest that innovation is a zerosum game (i.e., if country a innovates, then country b cannot). having said this, it is undeniable that technological expertise is not as concentrated in the united states as it was even one decade ago. moreover, technological creativity is based on the talent of human beings, and they are more mobile than ever.venture capitalists are opportunistic and their rms™ investments will ˚ow to opportunities wherever they are located. there can be little doubt that the addition of vc to a region that already has the technical capabilities and a ˚edgling entrepreneurial environment can accelerate and feed the development of a virtuous circle of further entrepreneurship and a concomitant increase in vc investment. a supply of vc without a large number of hightechnology entrepreneurs will not ignite new rm formation. the globalization of vc will not result in a lack of available capital in the united states. policies that reduce the number of globalclass technologists and entrepreneurs in the united states will directly affect decisions by venture capitalists to invest in the united states.acknowledgmentsmartin haemmig thanks jesse reyes (formerly vice president at venture economics) and john gabbert (until recently at ventureone) for providing data. martin kenney thanks the alfred p. sloan foundation for supporting his research on the globalization of the venture capital industry. the authors thank raq dossani and john taylor of the national venture capital association for comments. we owe a debt of gratitude to jeffrey macher, david mowery, and two anonymous reviewers for their invaluable critiques and comments that sharpened our thinking and improved the chapter.referencesadvent international corporation. (1986). advent international corporation. boston, ma.aldrich, h. e., and m. c. fiol. (1994). fools rush in? the institutional context of industry creation. academy of management review 19(4):645670.allen, f., and w. song. (2005). venture capital and corporate governance. wharton financial center working paper 0305.asian venture capital journal. (2001). the 2000 guide to venture capital in asia, volume 1. hong kong: asian venture capital journal.avnimelech, g., m. kenney, and m. teubal. (2004). building venture capital industries: understanding the u.s. and israeli experience. berkeley roundtable on the international economy, working paper 160.aylward, a. (1998). trends in venture capital finance in developing countries. international finance corporation discussion paper number 36. washington, d.c.: the world bank.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.338 innovation in global industriesbaracel, a. l. (2004). performance of crossborder venture capital investment. paper presented at the financial management association annual meeting, new orleans, la., october 710, 2004.black, b., and r. gilson. (1998). venture capital and the structure of capital markets: banks versus stock markets. journal of financial economics 47(3):243277.bottazzi, l., m. d. rin, and t. hellman. (2005). what role of legal systems in financial intermediation? theory and evidence. university of bocconi working paper 233.byte and switch. 2006. zte key financials, 20022005. available at http://www.byteandswitch.com/document.asp?docid=99265&pagenumber=2&tablenumber=2. accessed february 1, 2007.clark, r. (1987). venture capital in britain, america and japan. london and sydney: croom helm.coopey, r., and d. clark. (1995). 3i: fifty years investing in industry. oxford: oxford university press.cumming, d. j. (2002). contracts and exits in venture capital finance. working paper, university of alberta school of business.doidge, c. a., g. a. karolyi, and r. m. stulz. (2007). has new york become less competitive in global markets? evaluating foreign listing choices over time. fisher college of business working paper no. 200703012. available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=982193. accessed july 2007.dossani, r., and m. kenney. (2002). creating an environment for venture capital in india. world development 30(2):227253.dossani, r., and m. kenney. (2007). the next wave of globalization: relocating service provision to india. world development.ernst & young. 2007. acceleration: global venture capital insights report 2007. available at http://www.ey.com/global/assets.nsf/international/sgmglobalvcinsights2007/$le/globalvcinsightreport2007.pdf.florida, r. l., and m. kenney. (1988). venture capital, high technology and regional development. regional studies 22:3348.fox, j. w. (1996). the venture capital mirage: an assessment of usaid experience with equity investment. center for development information and evaluation working paper, u.s. agency for international development, washington, d.c.global insight, inc. 2004. venture impact 2004: venture capital benets to the u.s. economy. available at http://www.nvca.org/pdf/ventureimpact2004.pdf#search=%22venture %20capital%20total%20employment%22.gompers, p., and j. lerner. (2001). the venture capital revolution. journal of economic perspectives 15(2):145168.green, m., ed. (1991). venture capital: international comparisons. london and new york: routledge.greer, p. (1971). venturing in europe. sbic/venture capital (december):13.guler, i., and m. f. guillen. (2005, november). institutions, networks, and organizational growth: the internationalization of the u.s. venture capital firms.haemmig, m. (2003). the globalization of venture capital: a management study of international venture capital firms. zurich: swiss private equity and corporate finance association.hege, u., a. schwienbacher, and f. palomino. (2004, february). determinants of venture capital performance: europe and the united states. ricafe working paper 001. available at http://ssrn.com/abstract=482322.hsu, d., and m. kenney. (2005). organizing venture capital: the rise and demise of american research & development corporation, 19461973. industrial and corporate change 14: 579616.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.venture capital 339huawei. (2007). financial highlights. available at http://www.huawei.com/about/info.do?cid=1002 &id=64. accessed february 1, 2007.hursti, j., and m. v. j. maula. (2007). acquiring nancial resources from foreign equity capital markets: an examination of factors in˚uencing foreign initial public offerings. journal of business venturing 22(6):833851.jefferson, g. h., and g. gian. (2007). science and technology takeoff in china? sources of rising r&d intensity. asia paci˚c business review 13(3):357371.jeng, l., and p. wells. (2000). the determinants of venture capital funding: evidence across countries. journal of corporate finance 6:241289.kaplan, s. n., f. martel, and p. strömberg. (2003). how do legal differences and learning affect financial contracts? nber working paper 10097.kenney, m., and r. florida. (2000). venture capital in silicon valley: fueling new rm formation. in understanding silicon valley: the anatomy of an entrepreneurial region, m. kenney, ed. stanford, ca: stanford university press.kenney, m., k. han, and s. tanaka. (2004). venture capital industries in east asia. pp. 391427 in global change and east asian policy initiatives, s. yusuf, m. altaf, and k. nabeshima, eds. oxford: oxford university press.kogut, b., p. urso, and g. walker. (2007). the emergent properties of a new nancial market: american venture capital syndication from 1960 to 2004. management science 53(7):11811198.kuemmerle, w. (2001). comparing catalysts of change: evolution and institutional differences in the venture capital industries in the u.s., japan and germany. pp. 227261 in comparative studies of technological evolution, research on technological innovation, management and policy, r. a. burgelman and h. chesbrough, eds. amsterdam and oxford: elsevier science.la porta, r., f. lopezdesilanes, a. shleifer, and r. w. vishny. (1998). law and nance. journal of political economy 106:113155.lerner, j., and a. schoar. (2005). does legal reinforcement affect nancial transactions? the contractual channel in private equity. quarterly journal of economics 120(1):223246.mäkelä, m. (2004). essays on crossborder venture capital: a grounded theory approach. helsinki university of technology, institute of strategy and international business doctoral dissertation series 2004/1.mäkelä, m., and m. v. j. maula. (2006). crossborder venture capital and new venture internationalization: an isomorphism perspective. venture capital: an international journal of entrepreneurial finance 7(3):227257.manigart, s. (1994). the founding rates of venture capital rms in three european countries. journal of business venturing 9(6):525541.manigart s., h. j. sapienza, and w. vermeir. (1996). venture capitalist governance and valueadded in four countries. journal of business venturing 11(6):439469.megginson, w. l. (2004). toward a global model of venture capital. journal of applied corporate finance 16(1):826.murray, g. c., and j. lott. (1995). do uk venture capitalists have a bias against investment in new technologybased rms? research policy 24(2):283299.murray, g. c., and r. marriott. (1998). why has the investment performance of technologyspecialist, european venture capital funds been so poor? research policy 27:947976.pagano, m., a. a. roell, and j. zechner. (2002). the geography of equity listing: why do companies list abroad? journal of finance 57(6):26512694.pruthi, s., m. wright, and a. lockett. (2003). do foreign and domestic venture capital rms differ in their monitoring of investees? asia paci˚c journal of management 20:175204.rock, e. b. (2001). greenhorns, yankees and cosmopolitans: venture capital, ipo™s, foreign rms and the u.s. market. theoretical inquiries in law 2(2):135.romain, a., and b. van pottlesberghe. (2004, april). the determinants of venture capital: panel data analysis of 16 oecd countries. unpublished working paper.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.340 innovation in global industriesschumpeter, j. a. (1939). business cycles: a theoretical, historical and statistical analysis of the capitalist process (abridged with an introduction by rendigs fels). new york: mcgrawhill.sheahan, m. (2005). is sox to blame for ipo decline? what™s next? venture capital journal (november). available at http://www.ventureeconomics.com/vcj/protected/1122124957218.html.sorenson, o., and t. e. stuart. (2001). syndication networks and the spatial distribution of venture capital investments. american journal of sociology 106:15461588.stinchcombe, a. e. (1965). social structure and organizations. pp. 142193 in handbook of organizations, j. g. march, ed. chicago, il: randmcnally.stuart, t. e., and o. sorenson. (2003). liquidity events and the geographic distribution of entrepreneurial activity. administrative science quarterly 48:175201.u.s. government accountability ofce. (2006, september). offshoring u.s. semiconductor and software industries increasingly produce in china and india. publication gao 06423.wilson, j. w. (1985). the new venturers: inside the highstakes world of venture capital. menlo park, ca: addisonwesley.wong, p. k. (2005). venture capital funding of asian entrepreneurs in silicon valley: a longitudinal analysis. paper presented at the conference on greater china capital market for innovation & entrepreneurship, taipei, taiwan, may 1617.wright, m., s. pruthi, and a. lockett. (2005). international venture capital research: from crosscountry comparisons to crossing borders. international journal of management reviews 7(september): 135161.zalan, t. (2004). the secret multinationals of the new millennium: internationalization of private equity rms. journal of international business studies literature review.zero2ipo research center. (2008). us$3.25b vc investment touches new high (january 23). http://www.zero2ipo.com.hk/chinathisweek/detail.asp?id=5753zero2ipo venture capital research center. (2005). china venture firms newly raised us $4 billion in 2005; internet sector most popular to vc firms. (december 15).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.341 10 financial servicesravi aronuniversity of southern californiaintroductionthe nancial services industry is situated at the intersection of twin forces of disruption: technology and globalization. financial services, perhaps more than any other industry, is buffeted by the forces of change that technology has unleashed and the intensity of competition that globalization has brought in its wake. the nature of work in nancial services is such that the input, work in process, and output are all information. there are no heavy and unwieldy manufactured items that need to be carefully managed in transit, there is no need for the maturing of thirdparty logistics that will delay the entry of global players, there are no issues of establishing warehouse and distribution centers to handle inventory that will deter offshore competitors, and the traditional advantages of scale and incumbency that established players enjoy can be nullied by an intelligent business model that takes no more than a few weeksšif thatšto become a business. while business experiencešunderstanding of a market™s needs and its willingness to pay for servicesšis an important prerequisite, the role of physical infrastructure as a barrier to competition is greatly lessened.consider the example of ing direct to illustrate how easily incumbency, scale, and local presence can be neutralized by technology. the highvalueadded business models of the fullservice banks that dominated the retail nancial service industry in the united states should have remained inviolatešafter all, they had local presence, scale of operations, and a formidable network of branches that straddled the retail markets from coast to coast. these banks were challenged in their backyards by a european bank, ing inc., that decided to bypass the battle of the branches and reach out to retail market segments directly through nontradiinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.342 innovation in global industriestional distribution channels. ing direct is a straighttoconsumer banking service that has a very focused product line and one that operates at a signicantly lower cost structure than competitors (traditional retail banks). ing direct does not rely on the traditional channels of distributionšphysical branches; instead it distributes its products using the internet and call centers. as a recent harvard business school case showed,1 ﬁing direct is able to offer depositors higher interest rates on its savings accounts, dispense with fees and service charges, and still make money by reinvesting depositors™ funds in longer term assetsﬂ (gary, 2004). a research report showed that ing direct was able to walk away with $17 billion in direct deposits without an extended banking network (forrester, 2004). in this parable if the large incumbent retail banks were the goliaths then technology was the sling that ing™s david used to take on the entrenched larger players.just as technology releases disruptive change in hitherto stable industries, globalization accelerates that speed of change and amplies the gains and losses that result. global free trade agreements and the integration of several regions into trading blocksšsuch as the european union (eu), asean, and naftašhave opened the nancial services markets for several countries to foreign players even as the large established banks and insurance companies must face competition from asian rivals such as hsbc. if necessity is the mother of invention then competition is the mother of innovation. and competition has unleashed innovations in the nancial services industry in mature markets such as the united states and the eu.a recent research report by the management consulting rm of mckinsey & company attributed the resurgence of european nancial services rms to innovation in a variety of sectors when faced with intense competition from local and foreign players and deregulation (gary, 2004). the report identies two different kinds of innovation: the development of new products and services, and the design of innovative ways in which rms produce and deliver these processes. europe, according to mckinsey & company, has led innovation in creating derivative products and has also innovated in other product classes such as cash securities. leading product innovators include bnp paribas and société générale in equity derivatives, and independent advisory houses such as rothschild. a second kind of innovationšproducing and delivering nancial services in new waysšincluding the use of technology in retail nancial services and the adoption of global operating models has also resulted in european banks becoming centers of innovation. in other recent research reports, mckinsey & company identies that the drivers of success for offshore rms in the indian and chinese nancial services markets would be the ability to deliver nancial services through new and more efcient channels (in india) and to create valuebearing partnerships in china (mckinsey, 2005a,b).1 as the case makes clear, ing™s business model is a clear success in that it enjoys supranormal prots.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 343recent reports in the business press have dwelt at length on the idea of ﬁhighendﬂ and ﬁlowendﬂ work. some of these reports seem to suggest that some work, such as call center work, is routine and can be seen as ﬁlowend,ﬂ whereas other work, such as nancial analytics and investment banking research, is ﬁhighend.ﬂ the lay reader may well take away the impression that in the global sourcing and delivery of nancial services there is a clear understanding of what constitutes low and highend work and that corporations in the united states and europe innovate while their service providers in asia and other lowwage regimes provide routine lowend services at low cost. there is a widespread assumption in media coverage of these trends that the socalled highend work is complex whereas the lowend workšas typied by a tech support call centeršis essentially lowcomplexity work. as we show later in this chapter, this assumption both is wrong and re˚ects a poor understanding of the subjective nature of complexity. to understand how global sourcing of services drives innovation and how the nature and extent of the innovation is itself determined by the subjective perception of complexity, it is necessary to rst understand the globalization of the nancial services industry.the scope and growth of offshore activities in financial servicesthe phenomenon of globalization of nancial services has both supply and market (demand) side implications. large multinational nancial services corporations such as american express, citigroup, and hsbc inc. have established a signicant sourcing and market presence in asia and europe. these companies have a retail, corporate, and investment banking presence in indian and chinese markets. in addition to these traditional nancial services, investment and riskbased nancial services are also offered by multinational vcs and private equity rms. to compete against local companies, the aforementioned rms have to constantly innovate and deliver services to niche segments such as urban retail customers in india.citibank launched its webbased corporate banking products in 2001 to capture a signicant chunk of the market for cash management and trade services. the bank then rolled out this product widely in the asiapacic region (malaysia, australia, singapore, and hong kong) and later into india and parts of europe.2 the bank found a new way of distributing corporate banking services via the web based on a ˚exible electronic product that linked the bank™s front ofce to the clients™ back ofces. the webbased banking services that the bank launched in asia and the united states were based on creating a ˚exible suite of corporate banking products that would connect their clients to the bank™s service delivery portals, provide a set of tools to the clients to automate and manage their accounts 2 citibank™s ebusiness strategy for global corporate banking, hbs case study, hku197, 2002, center for asian business cases, university of hong kong.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.344 innovation in global industriesreceivable and payables, and offer advanced treasury services to clients ranging from smes and mncs.3 the idea of creating an electronic channel that would offer a ˚exible suite of nancial services that wouldšto quote the bankšconnect, extend, and transform the operations of the clients was an idea that was tried in the highly competitive asian markets of the far east (singapore, malaysia) and then rolled out with variants in other parts of the world. as the technological capabilities offered by the internet matured, the diffusion of the innovation in other markets such as europe, india, and china was also accompanied by accommodations of local banking customs, market contexts, and numerous custom features that tailored the innovation to local market conditions.4 thus, the expansion of multinational nancial services rms into global markets has resulted in the globalization of innovation. our denition of the globalization of innovation is one where the innovation that takes place is global in naturešnot that the output (e.g., the applications) of an innovation process (perhaps done in a single home country) is used globally.on the sourcing side too there have been numerous innovations in the use of technology as well in new managerial initiatives. ofcetiger,5 an american business process outsourcing (bpo) rm with ofces in india, sri lanka, and the philippines, has been able to serve offshore clients in projects that often require nearrealtime collaboration on highly judgmentintensive processes (i.e., processes require experts such as accountants and nancial analysts to intervene and exercise judgment) executed by nancial service professionals (aron and singh, 2005). a third of ofcetiger™s deadlines are an hour or shorter. the rm has been able to deploy a combination of technology and a collaborative interorganizational managerial structure called the program ofce in order to deliver highly strategic and valueadded services to its clients.6thus, global sourcing of nancial services too has left an ﬁinnovation footprintﬂ in various parts of the world. there is considerable divergence in the denition of what constitutes offshore production of services and how these are categorized (by work type [i.e., call center] as opposed to vertical industry [i.e., nancial services]). there is also considerable variance in the sources of data and the sampling methods used by various rms. rather than go by any single 3 citibank™s ebusiness strategy for global corporate banking, hbs case study, hku197, 2002, center for asian business cases, university of hong kong.4 the details of customization and localization of the innovation require a detailed exposition beyond the scope of this chapter. we refer the interested reader to a business case developed by the center for asian business cases, university of hong kong, entitled ﬁcitibank™s ebusiness strategy for global corporate bankingﬂ hku197, 2002.5 for an insightful discussion of the business challenges faced by the rm ofcetiger, we refer the reader to an article in the new yorker, july 5, 2004, titled ﬁthe best job in townﬂ by katherine foo.6 we refer the reader to the harvard business review article ﬁgetting offshoring rightﬂ in december 2005; see issue of the journal for further details. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 345estimate of this phenomenon, we nd that the metaresearch done by the rm pipal research summarizes the different estimates best. figures 1 and 2 provide summaries of the estimates. there is wide variance in the estimates of outsourcing because the term is dened differently by different researchers. some con˚ate outsourcing with offshoring (i.e., production of services and goods in a different country than the one in which the nal output is consumed) while others group all offshoring under outsourcing.7 bpo is the practice of sourcing services (processes) from a thirdparty provider of these services. bpo could be an offshore or onshore phenomenon; indeed there is nothing in the nature of bpo that restricts it to a particular location. in popular usage, the term bpo is frequently used to mean offshoring.many of these reports include both offshoring and outsourcing activities, whereas some of these reports exclude offshoring of business processes to a subsidiary of the parent corporation (offshoring but on outsourcing). for instance, the gartner estimate of usd 173 billion includes all the processes in tables 1 and 2 only to the extent that they are outsourced to a thirdparty provider, whereas the estimates by idc (2005) in figure 1 include processes that are offshored even if they are not outsourced.political sensitivity and tensions with labor advocacy groups and organized labor surround the phenomenon of offshore outsourcing. as a result it is not possible to collect data exhaustively from offshore rms on what processes have been offshored and how many agents are employed in executing these processes. we havešas part of our larger research agendašidentied the different kinds of services (and subprocesses) that are offshored in the domain of nancial services. table 1 provides a list of major nancial services offshored while table 2 provides a breakdown of these major nancial services to the level of subprocesses.8 there exist no rigorous estimates that can quantify the extent of offshore outsourcing (or even just outsourcing for that matter) by process type (work type) in nancial services in terms of either dollar volumes or of the fte9 involved in producing the services.10 what tables 1 and 2 provide, however, is a negrained analysis of what kinds of nancial servicerelated tasks are offshored.as we discussed earlier, the advent of bpo also led to the globalization of innovation in nancial services. other examples of such innovation include the 7 when a corporation, say, in the united kingdom locates its back ofce in india and sources back ofce processes through a fully owned subsidiary, it is offshoring but not outsourcing.8 from a joint research project between the wharton school and gartner in 20032006.9 fulltime equivalent, a measure of the number of employees involved in executing a process.10 there are two reasons why this is not possible: as mentioned earlier, there is intense political sensitivity that surrounds offshore outsourcing and, therefore, senior executives are reluctant to provide any estimates that will result in media attention being focused on their rms. second, measuring the economic signicance of activities at the subprocess level requires the deployment of resources that represents a prohibitively high level of cost and effort, especially given the rapid growth of offshoring, which in turn creates a rapidly changing market that is not easily surveyed.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.346 financial1.epsbitmap imagefigure 1 the size of the offshore outsourcing market.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 347financial2.eps65.2%22.7%12.1%$375.0100% =$ billionasia/pacificemeaamericas200265.2%22.3%12.5%$405.1200365.0%22.0%13.0%$447.7200464.6%21.8%13.6%$497.8200563.9%21.6%14.5%$554.8200663.3%21.4%15.3%$614.9200762.5%21.3%16.2%$682.52008sales &marketing24.4%customer care29.8%facilityoperations &management0.5%finance &accounting10%engineeringr&d6.2%humanresources4.6%training15%procurement0.2%logistics22.8%sales &marketing32.9%customer care10.0%facilityoperations &management6.6%finance &accounting3.4%engineeringr&d2.8%humanresources2.4%training0.8%procurement0.4%logistics40.7%total bpo market, $447.7 bn, 2004offshoreable bpo potential, $120.4 bn, 2004figure 2 growth of total bpo market and offshoreable bpo size.table 1 finance and accounting processesaccount management (transaction reconciliation, other asset and liability account administration)accounts payableaccounts receivableactuarial analysisasset pricing research: equity research and xed income asset researchbillingcash ˚ow analysis (including forecasting and related services)cost accounting and analysiselectronic payments (in retail and institutional nancial services)financial statement analysisgeneral ledgermanagement accountingpreparing asset schedulesrisk analyticstax accounting and analysis (individual and corporate)tax managementtreasury and cash managementunderwritingyield analysisinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.348 innovation in global industriestable 2 financial services subprocessesactuarial (insurance)all data processing (banking and insurance)automated clearing house and/or electronic funds transferbusiness and corporate credit card issuing and processingcash managementcheck processing and imagingclaims processingcore bankingcredit card issuing: retail nancial servicescredit card merchant processing: retail nancial servicesdata warehousing (retail and corporate banking, insurance)liability and asset account management (deposits, savings accounts, certicates of deposits, loans, etc.)electronic checks electronic invoice presentment and paymentexception processing and automationinternet bankinginternet lending and asset creationinvestment and portfolio management (insurance)investments and tradingmortgage banking (both loan origination and subsequent account services)pension administration (insurance)policy servicing and administration (insurance)policy underwriting (insurance)primary business applications (insurance)trade services (as necessary: cargo and business insurance)trust (as necessary: retirement and custodial plan trust and administrationvehicle nancing (vehicle leasing and lending)use of lean techniques by wipro technologies in india for the production of processes such as nancial accounting, management of accounts receivable, and payables. wipro technologies was able to cut the time required to execute these processes by between 12 and 47 percent while increasing the quality of output by between 7 and 29 percent.11 we studied other rms such as pipal research inc. and iflex inc. that provide innovative services similar to those provided by ofcetiger.12 many of the drivers of offshore production of processes are also the drivers of innovation at those locations where these processes were sourced. to understand the globalization of innovation, it is necessary to understand the offshoring of business processes. the advent of ge™s bpo initiative in india in 11 from a paper titled ﬁthe use of lean techniques in offshore outsourcing,ﬂ forthcoming (2007).12 pipal research™s manoj jain: ﬁwe have created a spot market for research,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/india/article.cfm?articleid=4155; ﬁhow some bpo providers seek to build and protect their turf,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=1101.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 3491996 started a spurt of offshore outsourcing activity in the region that has since grown rapidly.13 there are two reasons for the growth of offshore production of nancial services: competitive pressures of a maturing industry and technological enabling factors. indeed, these are also the factors that drive the globalization of innovation in nancial services. let us begin by analyzing the competitive pressures.competition and product maturitythe evolution of any product or service is characterized by three phases. in the rst phase, when the product or service is initiated, the challenge is to simply make it work and deliver the core benets associated with the product. we term this the product creation phase. there are numerous examples of products in nancial services that went through the product creation phase when they were introduced. in retail nancial services, the now ubiquitous atm provides a good example. the atm was introduced for the rst time in 1939 in new york city by the city bank of new york and was withdrawn soon after for lack of adoption by consumers.14 it was reintroduced in 1967 in london and has since become a standard feature of all retail nancial service products. when the atm was rst introduced it lacked ease of use and was not connected to the savings accounts of the consumers. for one thing there were no mainframe computers then and it was not possible to store account information and support transactions. and for another, without computer networks that could support multiple machines in different locations, the atm could be used only at the physical location where the bank was situated. the advent of mainframes as the enablers of retail nancial services meant that the atm could be deployed remotely and connected to the accounts. this in turn allowed banks to deliver several nancial services through the atm and consumer adoption followed.the second phase in the evolution of products and services is the integration phase, where the objective is to integrate the product to work seamlessly with the rm™s existing products. as the atm evolved into the integration phase it was extended to offer a suite of services that went beyond dispensing cash to include deposits, balance enquiry, money transfer, and so on. as the industry matures and all other rms offer similar products and differentiation becomes increasingly more costly, the rm in the nal phase outsources several components associated with the product. we term this the orchestration phase, where rms outsource (often to offshore entities) several aspects of production, delivery, and postpurchase service. most banks now are connected to atm networks run by 13 ﬁthe little startup that could: a conversation with raman roy, father of indian bpo,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=794.14 mit series on inventor of the week: luther george simjian, see http://web.mit.edu/invent/iow/simjian.html.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.350 innovation in global industriesthird parties. in the orchestration phase, ownership of atm networks is no longer a source of competitive advantage because atm services are bought by banks from thirdparty rms that provide connectivity to atm networks. indeed, major atm networks are now managed by thirdparty rms that are not in the banking business, thus turning the atm network into a ﬁbanking utilityﬂ comparable to electric power and other commoditized services. many wealth management and personal nancial services (pfs) rms often offer portfolios of services that include offerings of other rms.financial services are natural candidates for outsourcing, in the production and delivery of nancial services, input, output, work in processšare all information. most products and services in the nancial services industry are mature and as a consequence there is considerable competition among rms that offer all of these services. almost all retail banks offer the spectrum of services ranging from savings and checking accounts through money market accounts and pfs including wealth management services. as a result there is considerable pressure on rms both to differentiate themselves by providing a higher quality of servicešmore accurate resolution of transactions, quicker balancing of asset accounts, better customer service, faster turnaround on loan and credit card applicationsšand to lower the costs of production of services. as a result rms have been forced to relocate the production of several services to wage regimes where skilled (white collar) labor can be sourced more costeffectively. financial service rms have offshored processes both to thirdparty providers15 and to their own subsidiaries offshorešknown as captive centers (or simply ﬁcaptivesﬂ)šthat execute these processes offshore. the phenomenon of offshoring that we witness is an evolution of nancial service products where rms have entered the orchestration phase.as we can see, the business case for offshore production of nancial services was chie˚y due to the maturation of products and the fact that differentiation of products had become costly. this alone was not enough to result in rms moving offshore. the technological platforms and business infrastructure that would enable such a move were not in place before the advent of the internet and its wide and ubiquitous adoption in countries like india and china. in 1996 raman roy set up a captive center for general electric (ge) to process transactions and deliver support services.16 roy rst demonstrated his ability to deliver highquality nancial services out of india as a part of american express™s backofce team and then demonstrated it again with ge. after his success with ge he set up spectramind inc. as a thirdparty offshore nancial service provider for mncs. as the success of roy™s spectramind received attention from the business and trade press, several western companies started sourcing services from india 15 as mentioned earlier, this is often referred to as bpo.16 ﬁthe little startup that could: a conversation with raman roy, father of indian bpo, part 2,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=798.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 351and other thirdparty services providers and it majors started offering these services.17since then the bpo industry in india has grown rapidly. corporations in the united states and united kingdom could transfer raw data across the internet and indian companies would process the data according to prespecied rules and transmit information back to the clients. the service could range from simple transaction processing to nance and accounting and as the industry matured it would grow to include nancial analytics and research. for all of this to happen two factors were necessary: (1) the availability of the internet as the physical medium of connection and (2) the availability of rms that would provide these services, because not all corporations could run their own captive centers and the presence of thirdparty rmsšsuch as spectramindšwas necessary to scale up the offshoring trend.18 in the period from 1999 to 2002 several thirdparty providers of bpo services came into being (principally) in india but also in countries such as china and the philippines. by the end of 2004 there were several thirdparty providers of these services as well as captive centers in several regions of the world including sri lanka, jamaica, and the philippines.19 the combination of competitive pressures in a maturing industry and the presence of technological factors of enablement made it possible for corporations to migrate the production of some nancial services to offshore providers.offshore production of nancial services is often seen as being analogous to the production of goods offshore. the production of physical goods offshore was facilitated by the emergence of large and costeffective labor pools in asia and parts of latin america. specialized supply chains emerged in industries such as apparel, auto components, consumer electronics, and toys, which enabled rms to set up offshore operations to service markets in the advanced industrialized countries, thereby leveraging wage differentials for factory labor. while there are similarities between the two forms of production, it would be wrong to assume that the production of services is chie˚y about white collar unskilled labor, such as seen in call centers, which offers attractive wage arbitrage possibilities.it is useful here to make a distinction between the production of nancial services at a lower cost made possible by an attractive wage arbitrage to be found in migrating to lowlaborcost countries and the sourcing of innovative solutions, processes, and management techniques from providers offshore. the production of nancial services can be characterized by lower costs, productivity gains 17 ﬁthe little startup that could: a conversation with raman roy, father of indian bpo, part 2,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=798; ﬁin a global economy, competition among bpo rivals heats up,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=642.18 ﬁthe little startup that could: a conversation with raman roy, father of indian bpo, part 2,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=798.19 ﬁmove over, india: the shifting geography of offshore outsourcing creates new challengers,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=1100.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.352 innovation in global industries(sometimes), and continuous improvements in efciency over a period of time. these services produce modest gains in cost and quality ranging anywhere from 1 to 10 percent over a period of 3 to 4 years.in contrast to these incremental improvements, the execution of processes can be characterized by orderofmagnitude gains in both costs and quality over the same period of time. usually, such gains result not from incremental improvements but from radical redesign of elements of work. such redesign can include some of the following: process redesign, radical changes in the work˚ows and information ˚ows associated with process production, automation in production leading to less human intervention, new information and knowledge transfer mechanisms that make it possible to offshore processes that were hitherto thought of as being too risky to decouple from where they are consumed (e.g., united states, united kingdom), and the deployment of managerial practices that allow managers to monitor and in˚uence work remotely. some features of such innovations include the following: orderofmagnitude gains (as opposed to steady and incremental gains in costs and quality), gains realized over a compressed time period (as opposed to small incremental gains), use of new techniques (as opposed to improvements to existing methods), and simultaneous improvements to aspects of production that are thought to be substitutes (such as cost of production and quality of output; in the absence of innovation, lowering the cost of production substantially would result in lowering the output quality).certain nancial services such as bond pricing research, equity research, asset pricing research in general, cash ˚ow analysis, nancial statement analysis, tax management, and modeling are now executed offshore. while the production of these nancial services has been characterized by highly innovative practices, some socalled lowend services have proven to be difcult to migrate offshore and have been characterized at best by gains from wage arbitrage and small incremental improvements in efciency. to understand why some complex services have been successfully migrated to offshore entities and have, within a short period of migration, resulted in innovations in the production and delivery of these services while other seemingly simple services could not be migrated offshore due to a high degree of operational errors, it is necessary to understand the subjective nature of process complexity that underlies the production of services.the lay person might well think that the work involved in tasks such as asset pricing, tax analysis, nancial analytics, and modeling is complex whereas the work involved in tasks such as customer service and selling credit card products is relatively simple. in fact, our research into the nature of complexity points to the contrary. there is considerable divergence between managers in different countries in their ratings of what is complex and what is not and as a result there are resulting differences between countries on the locus of innovation in the production and delivery of nancial services. executives in india and singapore tend to rate the complexity of different kinds of work very differently from executives innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 353in the united states and united kingdom.20 to understand how the different regions of the world forge very different kinds of innovation it is necessary to investigate the subjective nature of complexity and how offshoring may well set up a mechanism for complexity arbitrage.the subjective nature of complexitywe surveyed executives of bpo rms and captive centers and their clients and users21 respectively and sought their views on what kinds of tasks they deemed to be ﬁcomplexﬂ and which ones not. executives from bpos and captive centers were mostly located in india, singapore, and mauritius while executives from their clients (and users) were located in the united states and united kingdom. we showed executives an identical set of processes. as a measure of complexity we asked executives from the four countries to rate an identical set of processes on the level of complexity involved in executing the processes.22 only those executives that managed the execution and delivery of a process were asked to rate the complexity of the process.23 each process was rated by four executives (one for each region) and some raters rated more than a single process.24 they rated processes on a likert scale of 1 to 7, where the highest level of complexity corresponded with a rating of 7 and the lowest complexity level was rated at 1. the results of the survey are shown in table 3.it is clear that while the executives of the client rms in the united states and united kingdom are in broad agreement on process complexityšjust as indian and singaporean executives are in agreement with each otheršthey differ to a signicant degree from their indian and singaporean counterparts. for instance, u.s. and u.k. executives rate process25 p8 as a lowcomplexity process while their indian and singaporean counterparts rate the process as being of relatively 20 based on a survey of bpos and captive centers undertaken by the author and his doctoral students.21 for captive centers the term ﬁclientﬂ is less accurate as the users of the service and the providers belong to the same rm. instead of clients we call them users.22 as a measure of complexity we asked executives how difcult it was to ensure that a particular process could be executed at an acceptable level of quality, at a required scale, reliably, and predictably. it is clear that implicit in this denition of complexity is the difculty associated with stafng the process and the costs incurred in retaining and training the workforce to reach the adequate levels of quality.23 in all there were 37 processes for which we were able to obtain comparable data for 28 processes. each process was rated by an executive from each of four countries: the united states, united kingdom, india, and singapore. the 28 processes were rated by 112 raters.24 the same manager often managed two or three different processes and provided a rating for each.25 the companies that provided us with the data have placed strict restrictions on us whereby we are not allowed to mention the names of processes or rms or reveal any information that may lead to the disclosure of the names of the companies or their clients. we therefore use generic names for processes such as ﬁp1ﬂ, ﬁp2ﬂ, etc.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.354 innovation in global industriestable 3 subjective perceptions of process complexityprocessesindian bpo firmssingaporean bpo firmsuk firmsus firmsp11232p23423p32356p43455p53277p64543p77612p86522p93454p105432p113277p123256p132356p145534p155432p163454p171177p186721p193444p206721p216622p221357p235433p247512p252266p266547p272176p283354higher complexity. similarly, executives in india and singapore tend to rate process p5 as a lowcomplexity process while executives in the united states and united kingdom rate it as being of relatively higher complexity. table 4 provides a summary of the levels of convergence and divergence of opinions, between executives from the buyer and provider countries, on process complexity. the coefcient of correlation in the ratings of process complexity between the four regions is furnished in table 4.the preceding ndings can be explained when we analyze the factors that cause the divergence of opinions between the four regions. we found26 that when a process involved computational work, algorithmic execution, quantitative analysis, numerical analysis, or large dataset handling and analysis, the executives from the united states and united kingdom tended to rate such processes as being highly complex, while their indian and singaporean counterparts rated 26 in interviews with executives that responded to the survey.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 355table 4 correlation coefcients of process complexity ratingscorrelationsindiasingaporeunited kingdomunited statesindia1.000singapore0.8317.610998154.4461e081.000 tstat pvalueunited kingdomœ0.760œ5.96082152.7238e06œ0.813œ7.1124911.4903e071.000 tstat pvalueunited statesœ0.644œ4.28709090.0002204œ0.720œ5.28877151.5708e050.8618.614622294.2947e091.000 tstat pvaluesuch work as being of low complexity. similarly, when the work involved in executing these processes required interpretation, judgment, understanding of the market context, understanding the client™s business context, communication, persuasion, or disambiguation,27 the executives in india and singapore rated the processes as being highly complex while their western counterparts rated such work as being of low complexity. why do executives in india and singapore nd the latter kind of work complex? the answer to this question also has to with difference between domain expertise and domain experience and the difference in turn explains the very different kinds of innovation in nancial services that we see in western and asian economies.domain expertise and domain experiencedomain expertise refers to an expert™s understanding of a body of knowledge and ability to use a set of rules to execute some tasks in a given domain. for instance, an employee in a captive center in india may have acquired the expertise needed to do equity research and forecast a stock price window for a basket of stocks. the techniques needed to do this can be learned from a doctoral course in asset pricing and require no experience on the part of the agent actually working in an investment bank. similarly an agent working for a bpo in china could well forecast cash ˚ows and create scenario models for a client rm without ever having worked for a corporate bank. the mastery of a set of techniques and un27 sometimes it is necessary for an agent that is executing the process to use personal understanding of the business context of the process to remove ambiguities that may arise in executing the process.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.356 innovation in global industriesderstanding of rules needed to perform such work is termed domain expertise in this context. on the other hand, in order to design a new nancial product or offer an asset of a specic risk category to an investor it is necessary that the manager have an understanding of the nuances of the market that cannot be codied or captured in algorithms or cannot be easily transmitted to offshore providers via documentation. a private equity investor needs to understand the business of the client as well as be able to judge the quality of the management of the company in which he plans to invest. similarly a wealth management specialist needs to have a clear understanding of the social and nancial context of a highnetworth individual as well as her personal goals in order to offer her a wealth management solution. these skills cannot be acquired without actually working in the business environment in which they are required. employees of nancial service rms in developed economies have the domain experience needed to execute these tasks. the tasks that require interpretation, communication, persuasion, understanding of the business context, and so forth very often need domain experience to execute. those tasks that require computation, quantitative analysis, algorithmic execution, statistical analysis, and so forth can often be captured in terms of rules and expressed as techniques that can be learned. to execute such tasks it is enough for the agent to have domain expertisešthere is no need for domain experience. it is indeed this difference in the nature of the two sets of tasks that drives the divergence in perceptions of complexity. this difference is one of the principal reasons28 for the divergence in the approach to innovation adopted by managers in different parts of the world. the locus of innovation is different for the different regions in the world.the locus of innovationto launch new innovative features in nancial products or entirely new categories of nancial products it is necessary for the designers of these features (or products) to have considerable domain experience. it is not possible to launch new features or services for a segment of the market without knowing the business context of the market segment. on the other hand, it is possible to improve how some backofce support processes work without having the same level of domain experience. as an example, consider a credit cardbased nancial service that a company may offer to the merchants that accept its credit card. it is necessary for the company to know the needs of the merchants and have an estimate for their willingness to pay for the service, their preferred channel of service delivery, and the compliance procedures that they must follow. however, this company™s offshore captive center or bpo provider need not have the same level 28 other factors too are important. factors such as compliance regime in different countries, the economic systems, the extent of participation in the economy permitted by national governments, and the sociocultural beliefs of the consumers are also important. these factors can be thought of as exogenous or can be seen as parameters set by nature and constitute systemic variables.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 357of understanding of the market in order to make some of the supporting backofce processes work well. the offshore provider may be able to intelligently automate some segments of the process, may reengineer some information ˚ows, and may bring experts to resolve transactions that are otherwise difcult to reconcile. thus, he can innovate with processes to be able to better support the new innovative features that the product carries.product innovation requires domain experience while process innovation requires only domain expertise. executives in asia often focus on process innovation, leaving product innovation to their western counterparts. product and process innovations often have very different implications and market dynamics associated with them. we explore these two kinds of innovation in the section that follows.product and process innovationsthe principal difference between asian and western executives in the kinds of innovation that they bring to the market has to do with process and product innovations. while asian executives29šespecially in the nancial services industryšare far more likely to bring to market process innovation, their western counterparts focus almost exclusively on product innovations as a means of creating competitive advantage. this difference in focus of managerial priorities is because of the lack of domain experience on the part of the providers and is not due to any other factor. as we mentioned earlier, product innovation requires considerable domain experience, making it a daunting challenge for providers of offshore services to release innovations for the western markets.30 in addition to this, there are crucial differences between product and process innovation that explain why the offshore providers and their western clients specialize in different chunks of the value chain. our studies of the offshore nancial services industry since 2000 indicate that there is what amounts to a rough division of innovation laboršwestern corporations increasingly look to product innovations to boost growth while their service providers (and captive centers) in asia support them with process innovations.product innovationproduct innovation in nancial services is about adding new features to existing products or offering new products to the market. it is almost always customer 29 it does not matter whether these asian executives are employed by western or asian rms. their lack of domain experience does not go away irrespective of who employs them.30 of course for nonwestern markets this is less of a problem. in bangladesh, for instance, mohammed yunus was able to formulate a microcredit mechanism via the grameen bank and serve an underserved segment of the market.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.358 innovation in global industriesfacing.31 product innovation usually takes several months of r&d effort (including market research, research into product feature mix, pricing schemes, and the kinds of delivery channel to be deployed). it is usually piloted rst to a few market segments; once it reaches a stable state, it is rolled out in scale. examples of such innovation include the introduction of webbased banking and webbased insurance delivery. however, once product innovation is introduced into the market, the extent to which the innovation has succeeded takes a far shorter time to measure and it can be measured through relatively wellunderstood and unambiguous measures of product performance such as extent of consumer adoption, market share, protability indices (including measures of gross and net margins), and customer satisfaction scores.product innovation nevertheless has an interesting ﬁdark sideﬂšit often adds to the complexity of operations. each new suite of features or product offerings brings greater complexity in operations and more intense demands on the company™s service infrastructure. as an example consider the following: a bank adds a new featurešthe ability to apply online for a loan and consolidate all asset balances into a singleview account at the level of each customer. this feature places considerable strain both on the backofce operations and on the technology infrastructure needed to support the feature. the underlying information systems have to be modied to be able to store information in customercentric accounts as opposed to the legacy productbased storage of transactions. it will not sufce if the information is aggregated in real time based on customer requests from multiple accounts. as the number of customer requests increase, this realtime aggregation is bound to break down under the load of processing requests. the entire database has to be redesigned and applications have to be rewritten. if the technology were substantial, the human operations challenges tend to be even more daunting. the bank would have historically supported customer requests based on product type (banking related, credit cardrelated, etc.), while now it has to transition to a system where the customer™s requests have to be processed with a minimal set of interactions, both with the customer and between the bank™s backofce processors. the bank™s backofce staff are usually productlevel experts that specialize by product type. thus, a mortgage loan service staff will have little understanding on how to service a question related to credit card interest rate and the bank™s new feature of relationship banking may ˚ounder due to a sharp and signicant increase in operational complexity. adding new features and products often results in placing a strain on the organization™s service operations amplifying the levels of complexity. this is where process in31 customerfacing activities are those that involve direct interaction with end customers, have a direct impact on the end customer experience, or both. thus, a new product or service that is offered to the market is a customerfacing initiative, as opposed to sourcing a process from an overseas provider that will be subsumed into a service by a corporation. in the second case a corporation builds the process (sourced offshore) into its service but the offshore provider does not directly interact with the end customers.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 359novationšespecially by offshore providersšplays a signicant role as a complement to product innovation.process innovationunlike product innovation, process innovation is not marketfacing in its direct impact. process innovation is about making signicant changes to how tasks are executed, changing information ˚ows and work˚ows to achieve radical simplication of process execution in order to achieve greater process efciency and more effective support of the company™s market objectives. process innovation supports product innovation by reducing complexity in operations, making information work and its output more predictable, and improving the alignment between a company™s service and operations and its market objectives.in the preceding example of the nancial services corporation that introduced innovative features into the market, the offshore provider of backofce processes to whom the rm outsourced these processes was able to radically reengineer processes by changing both the process architecturešconsisting of information ˚ows and work˚owšand the skill sets of the agents that did the work. the company reengineered the entire backofce process from end to end to dispense with productbased specialists and instead moved to a model of deploying agents that had a 360degree view of customer accounts and could process all kinds of products. to be able to support this process architecture the company needed backofce workers of a higher skill level than before. under the changed scheme the agents had to be able to understand standard loans, splitcoupon rate loans, mortgages, and credit lines. they hired agents with the necessary skill sets and trained them additionally as needed.32in another example of process innovation supporting product innovation, a large nancial services mnc launched a new nancial loan product to its corporate customers whereby the company would offer a series of small tranche loans to corporations for funding working capital requirements. the loan amounts would be priced, negotiated, and delivered to the corporation within 24 hours notwithstanding the complexity of the deal. furthermore, the company offered to price each tranche based on the risk level associated with the tranche as opposed to a xedrate coupon for the whole loan. this was especially attractive to corporate customers who believed that there would be a reduction in risk as the business moved forward. to make this possible, the company had to radically redesign its operations. it offshored the loanprocessing tasks, including application management, credit risk assessment, and structuring the loan, rst to a captive center that broke up the operations into modules. thus, each set of related tasks 32 ﬁ‚smart growth™: innovating to meet the needs of the market without feeding the beast of complexity,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid= 1585&cfid=2650244&cftoken=97771378#.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.360 innovation in global industrieswould be carried by a modular operations unit team. whenever a new customer entered the market a new operational silo could be assembled in real time to service that customer. the corporate loanprocessing division was radically reorganized into modular units that specialized in a particular task.33 for each new customer an assembly line of services would be created in real time by plugging in the modularized components.the offshore rm was able to do this in very short time as it could recruit employees with the specialized skills needed to achieve this within a much shorter period than was possible in the united states.34 second, in order to get this design correct, the company had to carry some slack labor in the early months before it could reach a stable state of operations. this was not a problem in the offshore location because of the far lower wage costs. the rm™s redesigned, modularized business processes are shown in figure 3.product and process innovations differ in many aspects (as seen in table 5), which we highlight in this section. process innovation often complements product innovation and the two kinds of innovations have a lockandkey structure35 of complementarily. they also differ in some important ways; process innovation invariably takes far less time to deploy than product innovation. however, the metrics that measure the effectiveness of process innovation are rarely (if ever) directšthey tend to measure the impact of product innovation such as process output quality and customer satisfaction with service. however, these measures are compounded by a number of internal factors and are at best proxies for measuring process innovation effectiveness. second, it takes much more time to judge the effectiveness of process innovations. unlike the case of product innovation, where critical success factors such as market share and gross and net margins often provide an accurate picture of the success of the innovation, in the case of process innovation not only are there few (if any) direct metrics, there is also considerable lag between introducing the innovation and measuring its effectiveness. the absence of direct measures means that it is necessary to capture measures of a variety of indirect proxies and to compare their change over a period of time to get some idea of how successful the innovation has been. thus, while process and product innovations are complementary in the nancial services industry, 33 the reader should note the direct contrast with the preceding example, where such specialized units were broken down into more versatile operational divisions. what should be clear is that there is no canonical way of engineering process innovation and very different solutions would work in slightly different situations.34 mainly because it was located in a country with a very large labor pool with the necessary skills.35 the idea of a lockandkey structure is used to illustrate how one kind of innovation holds the key to the success of another kind. new product introduction tends to snarl up the operational processes of a rm. process innovation opens up operational silos, eases information ˚ow, and reengineers work˚ow, thereby reducing complexity and allowing the benets of product innovation to be delivered to end customers. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 361financial3.epscustomizeloanproductsassessingcustomer™sriskrevenueprofilecredit ratingprice theservicebundletreasuryservicesmanageworkingcapitalaccountset up an lcservicesetupworkingcapitalaccountcreatecustomerassetverifyfinancialassets andcollateralprocesstransaction,instruments &manage a/c.configurechannelsand deliverservicebundle pfsand retailfinancialservicescustomer interfacelcprocessing &managementaccountfigure 3 the modular operational unit.table 5 product versus process innovationinnovation factorproduct innovationprocess innovationlocus of innovationmarket facinginside the rm, directed at backofce and service operationsprincipal goalcompetitive advantage, higher market share and revenuesoperational efciency, redesign of operationsprincipal impactincreases operational complexitylowering of complexity, increases service effectivenessgestation timecomparatively long, often preceded by elaborate (several months of) r&d and market research effortsshort; time lag between design and deployment is minimalmetrics to measure effectivenessdirect metrics, including market share, and gross and net marginsonly indirect proxies exist for measuring the effectiveness of the innovationtime for market validationcomparatively short; within a couple of quarters of introducing the innovation, csfs can be measuredmuch longer; it takes several periods of observation of indirect proxies for success to arrive at some estimate of the innovation™s effectivenessprerequisite for innovationdomain experience and understanding of market and business contextdomain expertise, ability to manage complexity and deal with rapid changes in business volumeip assetsproprietary in nature; companies guard these carefullyrarely, if ever, proprietary, companies share these in a nonzero fashioncontract structurecoordination between rms, clearly dened boundaries and control structurescollaboration between rms and between departments within rms; blurring of organizational boundariesinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.362 innovation in global industriesit is clear that they are very dissimilar. table 5 contrasts process and product innovations.given the aforementioned nature of product and process innovation, are corporations willing to source from offshore providers? if so, what is the degree of acceptance of such sourcing mechanisms?sourcing innovations offshorewe surveyed the views of senior executives of fortune 1000 corporations on their willingness to source innovations from offshore providers (see tables 6 and 7).36 while the survey was not restricted to corporations in the nancial services industry alone, we captured data about the industry to which respondents belonged and were able to extract the responses from the executives of the nancial services industry.37 we found that senior executives in corporations are prepared to source innovations from offshore providers as long as they have a means of dealing with the risk inherent in such a relationship.in response to the question, ﬁcan you partner with an offshore provider of innovation?ﬂ most executives (68 percent surveyed38) expressed their willingness to source innovations from offshore outsourcing rms. only a small minority (13 percent) expressed the view that it was strategically risky to source innovations from offshore rms. it is particularly interesting to note that there is little or no concern expressed about the ownership of the offshore provider. of those managers that were open to sourcing from offshore providers only a minority wanted to have full ownership control of the offshore provider. about 56 percent of these managers were open to sourcing from a rm that could become a strategic partner and another 15 percent or so were satised with additional control over outcomes offered by a joint venture with the offshore rm.product innovation often results in the creation of ip assets that corporations try to protect. large investment banks have proprietary program trading algorithms that they go to great lengths to safeguard. similarly corporate banks have developed risk assessment and management systems for different kinds of businesses that are protected as valuable ip assets. as opposed to this, process innovation rarely results in the creation of sensitive ip assets. the gains of process innovation in nancial services can be shared in a nonzerosum fashion between the offshore provider and its western clients.a nal contrast between product and process innovation that we wish to comment on is that product innovation usually involves tight control via contract 36 the survey was conducted by knowledge@wharton in 2006. about 75 percent of respondents worked either in nancial services rms or were executing processes that belonged to the nance and accounting category.37 this is a subset of a larger set of responses.38 sum of the rst three rows, which represent the willngness to source innovations from offshore providers under different conditions.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 363table 6 sourcing innovations from abroadcan you partner with an offshore provider of innovation?number of responsespercentageyes, if it is our fully owned subsidiary127%yes, if we can establish a jv with an overseas rm2715%yes, if we can exert some measure of operational control over the overseas rm and make it a strategic partner10156%no. we cannot risk sourcing innovative products and processes from an overseas rm2313%other please specify169%total responses179table 7 product and process innovations and ip assetsproduct innovation usually results in valuable intellectual property (ip) assets that need to be protectedstrongly disagree32%somewhat disagree32%neither agree nor disagree76%somewhat agree5140%strongly agree6249%total126process innovation, rarely, if ever, results in proprietary ip assetsstrongly disagree119%somewhat disagree1713%neither agree nor disagree1915%somewhat agree4838%strongly agree3125%total126the company that brings an innovative product to the market often takes ownership of the innovationstrongly disagree11%somewhat disagree86%neither agree nor disagree119%somewhat agree5947%strongly agree4737%total126gains from process innovation are often shared in a zerosum mannerstrongly disagree3125%somewhat disagree3326%neither agree nor disagree4939%somewhat agree119%strongly agree22%total126innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.364 innovation in global industriesby one rm, due in part to the nature of the proprietary ip assets, which takes ownership of the innovation and takes it to the market. as opposed to this, process innovation works through collaboration. some of the most successful examples of offshore process innovations feature close collaboration between the client in the united states/united kingdom and the provider located in india/sri lanka/china. the work that occurs on ofcetiger™s premises involves a high degree of collaboration between the clients in the united states and united kingdom and ofcetiger™s asian ofces. sometimes the same project may be broken up in real time so that one chunk of it is handled in sri lanka while another is executed out of the philippines even as a third piece is executed in chennai in india. ofcetiger™s managers work with the client, monitor the progress of work in three countries in real time, and stitch together the output so as to create a seamless delivery vehicle for the client.this kind of collaboration raises the question of governance: what is the optimal governance structure for these offshore innovation centers? is it necessary for corporations to own (via a captive center) the innovations or will they be able to source these innovative solutions from a thirdparty provider? it turns out that the emergence of a new governance structure made possible by advances in information and communication technologies is particularly well suited to sourcing innovations from offshore providers. before we investigate this governance structure we will rst discuss the different governance options open for sourcing services from offshore providers. we term this collection of options the governance spectrum.the governance spectrumeconomists, following in the central tradition of ronald coase in 1933 (coase, 1937) have long posited that the two principal ways of coordinating work are through an organization or the market. these two solutionsšorganization and marketšthat straddle opposite ends of the means of governing the production of work, map onto the ﬁmake or buyﬂ options that executives face. the make option corresponds to doing the work inhouse while the buy option is about outsourcing work to a third party. in offshore outsourcing in particular there are some interesting options that have emerged in recent years. figure 4 provides a schematic representation of the spectrum of governance solutions.build operate transfer (bot) and run to outsource (rto) are temporally separated variants of the make and buy options. in several offshoring deals in the nancial services domain we saw both bot and rto arrangements. in the bot model, a third party runs an offshoring center for the client that after a period of time, is bought by the client and made into an inhouse offering. ownership in an rto moves in the opposite direction: the client sells an inhouse facility to a thirdparty provider after a prespecied period of time. a key point that is worth noting in this context is that offshore sourcing of nancial services deals are parinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 365financial4.epscaptiveservicecenter(hierarchy)jointventurebuildoperatetransferruntooutsourcethird partyserviceprovider(marketsolution)hierarchymarketthe extendedorganizationalformfigure 4 the governance spectrum.ticularly well suited for the governance structuresšbot, rto, and the extended organizational form (eof)šthat we discuss here. furthermore, we believe that the sourcing of innovations in nancial servicesšas opposed to the sourcing of services that are chie˚y about labor arbitrage39šrequires some special features of governance, which we term the eof and which we discuss later in this section.in cases of both bot and rto, the transfer of ownership as well as the handover of assets is easier for nancial services rms for a variety of reasons. first, the input, output, and work in process are all information. there are no messy transfers of seminished inventory nor is there transfer of raw materials and commodities that are factors of production (such as oil or coal). as a result there are few if any issues that have to do with valuing tangible assets that enter production. second, it is possible for buyers to exert considerable operational control over suppliers via technological monitoring mechanisms and to integrate the work of the offshore supplier closely with the buyer™s rm. investment banks and corporate banks have used negrained monitoring mechanisms to keep a close watch on the production process taking place offshore. due to the continuous proximity enabled by technology, the transfer of control from suppliers to buyers (or the other way around) becomes a lot easier than in the case of offshore production of other products and services. finally, nancial services rms have a culture of measurement and use of metrics to track the critical success factors of their major initiatives (whether in their endcustomer markets or having to do with offshore suppliers). as a result, both the buyer and the supplier have a reasonably clear idea of the health of the operation at the time of transfer of control.39 lower wages for comparable skills in asia and parts of eastern europe.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.366 innovation in global industriesthese three factorsšmonitoring, transfer of control, and metricsštaken together allow offshore nancial services centers to work as if they are an extension of a client™s organization and to be able to sense and respond to the client™s context. for the sourcing of process innovations it is essential that the service provider be allowed the leeway to experiment and arrive at innovative solutions to problems. second, too rigid a controlling structure results in the service provider being reduced to execute against specications and not try to formulate process innovations that may complement the client™s product innovations and address the problems of complexity. the optimal governance structure that allows both the sourcing of process innovations and delivers on contractual terms is a hybrid governance structure that has some measure of ˚exibility built into the contract while giving the client sufcient monitoring capabilities. we call this hybrid governance structure, which has features of both marketbased governance and a hierarchy, the extended organizational form. this is a governance structure that is seen predominantly in the nancial services industry for the aforementioned reasons.emergence of the extended organizational formthe extended organizational form (eof) is a hybrid governance structure that brings together some elements of market and hierarchy. the strength of marketbased governance (or sourcing processes from a thirdparty provider) is that it enforces the discipline of cost containment. thirdparty rms have to compete with each other, and in order to lower costs they specialize or acquire scale economies and contain costs. however, the weakness of this mode of production is that the incentives of the supplier of services and the buyer are not aligned. the supplier would prefer to minimize the effort at any given price while the buyer would like to induce the highest possible effort from the supplier at the lowest possible price, thus setting up the classic problem of moral hazard.40 the use of contracts to mitigate moral hazard often involves wasteful expenditure involved in monitoring work, inspecting output, enforcing penalties, and so forth, which economists often refer to as transaction costs associated with marketbased governance (coase, 1937). as opposed to marketbased governance the rm could produce these services inhouse through a captive center in an offshore location. this would largely eliminate the misalignment of incentives and provide the corporation control over its production facilities offshore through the device of organizational hierarchy. however, the corporation would lose the benets of scale and specialization and the reduction in costs due to competition that a market solution would offer.40 the situation that arises when the incentives of the supplier and buyer diverge. when buyers cannot fully observe the effort level of the supplier, the supplier™s incentives would be to cut costs (make a suboptimal effort).innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 367a solution to this problem of bringing together the strengths of the two forms of governance is the eof. it affords the clients both more control over the supplier of services and lower costs of production. some examples of the eof include pipal research, a rm that provides expertisedriven nancial analytics and research services to corporations in the united states and the eu. the company is headquartered in chicago and has ofces in india, china, and london. once the client and provider establish a contractual relationship, the client works directly with researchers in india and china and the client™s managers can direct pipal research™s associates as well as collaborate with them in research.an example of the eof can be seen in the operation of ofcetiger, a u.s.based company with operations in several countries including india, philippines, sri lanka, and switzerland. the rm faces deadlines for work that range from one hour to a month. as a result of facing short deadlines, ofcetiger does not have the luxury of negotiating arm™slength contracts each time a client commissions a project. the corporation has established a managerial control mechanisms called the ﬁprogram ofceﬂ by which its managers work closely with managers of the clients. furthermore, the company has created one of the most comprehensive management information systems that we have studied, called ttracks, which it deploys through extranets at the client™s site. client managers as well as ofcetiger™s managers can track the progress of work and slice and dice the work by project, by team, by shift, and even by individual agent in real time. the use of a very negrained monitoring system combined with a system of metrics that allows every aspect of work to be tracked and monitored allows both ofcetiger and clients to execute projects of considerable complexity.41 in fact ofcetiger™s agents become extensions of the client™s organizationšan example of the eofšwhich in turn allows the client to migrate the production of strategically signicant services such as nancial analytics, equity research, and market research to ofcetiger™s production teams.another example of this phenomenon is the company equinoxcorp.42 equinoxcorp provides services across the mortgage nance value chain that range from simple loan processing to predictive analytics leading to customer protability gradient and retention. the company has created a network of partnerships along the mortgage processing value chain so that it is able to offer predictive analysis and customer retention services based on the use of a proprietary platform that captures data from several stages of the mortgage nancing process.43 corporations such as equinoxcorp and ofcetiger are networks that span several corporations. their ability to offer innovative solutions results from process 41 ﬁhow some bpo providers seek to build and protect their turf,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=1101.42 recently acquired by iflex solutions a subsidiary of oracle inc.43 ﬁhow some bpo providers seek to build and protect their turf,ﬂ knowledge @ wharton, see http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=1101.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.368 innovation in global industriesinnovations that they forge across the value chain in the production and delivery of several products ranging from mortgage nancing in retail nancial services through tax analysis and nancial analytics in corporate banking to strategic market analysis, forecasts, and research in investment banking.to be able to deliver process innovations and calibrate their needs to the context of the clients and their changing market needs, companies such as ofcetiger and pipal research require both considerable ˚exibility to try and experiment with their solutions as well as the ability to collaborate in real time with their clients. the eof allows this ˚exibility as well as establishes deep collaborative links that span joint technology platforms, interorganization information systems, extranetbased tools, and managerial mechanisms (such as the program ofce) that allow the rms to deliver innovations to clients offshore. in the survey (mentioned earlier) we asked executives what forms of governance might be best suited to source different kinds of services and products. their responses are shown in figure 5.44 it is clear in the assessment of these executives that for sourcing innovations the form of governance structure that works best is the ﬁsense and adjustﬂ collaborative networks.the eof is a recent phenomenon. the strength of this form of governance emerges from the combination of negrained monitoring enabled by technology and the ˚exibility of work enabled by removal of restrictions on experimentation. in our survey of business process offshoring starting in 1999, we found few if any cases of eof in the rst few years. it is only in the past 5 years or so that this organizational structure has become relatively more prevalent. the eof, as we saw earlier, is a particularly effective tool for mitigating risk and for aligning the interests of the buyer and the provider of services, especially in nancial services where the provider™s ability to innovate and create value for the buyer is signicant (economist, 2006). indeed our past research also points in this direction: we nd the eof being deployed in domains where close collaboration between the buyer and the provider of nancial services is necessary to transform sourcing via contracts into collaborative networks that can deliver innovations.conclusionthe diffusion of innovations in nancial services across the regions of the world has been propelled by the twin forces of market participation by nancial services rms and by the sourcing of process innovations that emerged as a result of global sourcing of nancial services. a key factor that drives the division of labor in bringing innovations to market is the divergence in perceptions of process complexity. as we showed earlier, process complexity is subjective and the divergence in views of complexity often stem from the fact that many executives in asia and eastern europe have domain expertise but domain experience is needed 44 based on 102 responses.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 369figure 5 governance structures, sourcing, and innovations.financial5.epsaxis labels were behind clipping masks020406080100raw materials standardizedcomponents mro goods call centerservices nonexpertbpo expertisedriven bpor & d /product design/ development innovations type of service sourcedpercentage of respondentscommand and control coordination via contracts sense & adjust collaborative networksto deliver innovative products. thus, service providers in asia and elsewhere have often restricted themselves to process innovations while their counterparts in the united states and eu have been able to deliver product innovations.the strength of this model, however, is the complementarity between process and product innovations. process and product innovations have a lockandkey structure, where process innovations hold the key to resolving the problem of complexity that is unleashed by the introduction of new products. finally, the sourcing of innovations in nancial services requires forms of governance that are very different from the contractual, commandandcontrol mechanisms used for the procurement of more routine and highly codiable forms of work such as call centers and data processing. for sourcing innovations from offshore providers it is necessary to be able establish a collaborative mechanism that allows the western clients to monitor their offshore service providers in negrained fashion, which in turn allows them to give these rms the leeway to experiment and arrive at innovative processbased solutions. second, this form of governance also establishes deep collaborative linkages between rms, thus enabling the client and the buyer to come up with highly customized solutions in relatively short time frames.where do we expect to see these trends lead? the cost of bandwidth has been falling over the past decade even as the reach of the internet has been increasing. interoperability between computing platforms has made it relatively easy to transport vast datasets between rms that are on very different platforms. the emergence of collaborative technological platforms such as wikis and web serinnovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.370 innovation in global industriesvices (that can connect disparate systems over the internet) as well as structured blogs will deepen the collaborative capabilities of corporations. increasingly companies are able to monitor the working of the offshore providers at ner and ner levels of detail thanks to technological advances. these forces will result in greater global sourcing of innovations from various regions and will expand the sourcing footprint of corporations to include regions other than china and india. brazil, sri lanka, philippines, the republic of south africa, and poland could well become important providers of nancial services innovations in the near future. international trade trends are also making it easier for corporations to compete in offshore markets. freetrade agreements between the united states and singapore and between the united states and australia, as well as the integration of eastern european countries into the eu, have all resulted in increased market participation in global markets by nancial services rms the world over. technology has brought instant transparency to business practices and product strategies adopted by rms in different regions and markets. as a rm introduces a new product or new features of an existing product, it will rapidly get copied by all other rms and will become a standard feature of the next generation of products. firms will thus have to compete constantly for prots and market share. competition is perhaps the most powerful driving force of innovation. as competition intensies in world markets, we will surely see greater innovation in these markets.acknowledgmentswe wish to thank the mack center for technological innovation and the fishman davidson center for service and operations management at the wharton school, university of pennsylvania, for supporting this research.referencesaron, r., and j. singh. (2005). getting offshoring right. harvard business review december: 135143.coase, r. (1937). the nature of the rm. economica 4:386405.economist. (2006). partners in wealth. january 19.emloh, david von, and yi wang. (2005b). competing for china™s credit card market. mckinsey. available at http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/competingforchinascreditcardmarket1713.ensor, b. (2004). how ing direct stole $17 billion in bank deposits. forrester. available at http://www.forrester.com/research/document/excerpt/0,7211,41632,00.html.gary, l. (2004). taking disruption to the bank, strategy & innovation, septemberoctober 2004.gupta, rajat k. (2005). fullling india™s promise. mckinsey quarterly special edition. available at http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/publicsector/economicpolicyfulllingindiaspromise 1673.innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.financial services 371roxburgh, charles. (2006). industry comment: the outlook for european corporate and investment banking. mckinsey quarterly web edition. available at http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/industrycommenttheoutlookforeuropeancorporateandinvestmentbanking1838.segupta, j., and renny thomas. (2005a).what indian consumers want from banks. mckinsey. available at http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/what indianconsumerswantfrombanks1662. innovation in global industries: u.s. firms competing in a new world (collected studies)copyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.