detailsdistribution, posting, or copying of this pdf is strictly prohibited without written permission of the national academies press. (request permission) unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this pdf are copyrighted by the national academy of sciences.copyright © national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies pressvisit the national academies press at nap.edu and login or register to get:œ œ 10% off the price of print titlesœ special offers and discountsget this bookfind related titlesthis pdf is available at sharecontributorshttp://nap.edu/12800spectrum management for science in the 21st century248 pages | 7 x 10 | hardbackisbn 9780309385893 | doi 10.17226/12800committee on scientific use of the radio spectrum; committee on radiofrequencies; board on physics and astronomy; division on engineering andphysical sciences; national research councilspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.committee on scientic use of the radio spectrumcommittee on radio frequenciesboard on physics and astronomydivision on engineering and physical sciencesspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academies press 500 fifth street, n.w. washington, dc 20001notice: the project that is the subject of this report was approved by the governing board of the national research council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the national academy of sciences, the national academy of engineering, and the institute of medicine. the members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.this study was supported by the national science foundation under grant no. 0410006, by the national aeronautics and space administration under award no. nnh05cc15c, and by the department of commerce under award no. dg133r04cq0009, to #26. any opinions, ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.international standard book number13: 9780309146869international standard book number10: 0309146860copies of this report are available from the national academies press, 500 fifth street, n.w., lockbox 285, washington, dc 20055; (800) 6246242 or (202) 3343313 (in the washington metropolitan area), internet: http://www.nap.edu; and from the board on physics and astronomy, national research council, 500 fifth street, n.w., washington, dc 20001, internet: http://www.nationalacademies.org/bpa.copyright 2010 by the national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.printed in the united states of americaspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.the national academy of sciences is a private, nonprot, selfperpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientic and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the congress in 1863, the academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientic and technical matters. dr. ralph j. cicerone is president of the national academy of sciences.the national academy of engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the national academy of sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. it is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the national academy of sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. the national academy of engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. dr. charles m. vest is president of the national academy of engineering.the institute of medicine was established in 1970 by the national academy of sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. the institute acts under the responsibility given to the national academy of sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. dr. harvey v. fineberg is president of the institute of medicine.the national research council was organized by the national academy of sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the academy, the council has become the principal operating agency of both the national academy of sciences and the national academy of engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientic and engineering communities. the council is administered jointly by both academies and the institute of medicine. dr. ralph j. cicerone and dr. charles m. vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the national research council.www.nationalacademies.orgspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vcommittee on scientific use of the radio spectrummarshall h. cohen, california institute of technology, cochairalbin j. gasiewski, university of colorado at boulder, cochairdonald c. backer, university of california, berkeleyroberta balstad, columbia universitysteven w. ellingson, virginia polytechnic institute and state universitydarrel emerson, national radio astronomy observatoryaaron s. evans, university of virginia and national radio astronomy observatoryjoel t. johnson, ohio state universitypaul kolodzy, kolodzy consulting, llcdavid b. kunkee, the aerospace corporationmolly k. macauley, resources for the future, inc.james m. moran, harvardsmithsonian center for astrophysics lee g. mundy, university of maryland at college parktimothy j. pearson, california institute of technologychristopher s. ruf, university of michiganfrederick s. solheim, radiometrics corporationdavid h. staelin, massachusetts institute of technologyalan b. tanner, jet propulsion laboratorystaffdonald c. shapero, director, board on physics and astronomybrian d. dewhurst, program ofcer (through july 2009)david lang, program ofcermercedes ilagan, administrative assistant (through february 2008)caryn knutsen, program associate (from march 2008)van an, financial associate (through may 2008)beth dolan, financial associate (from june 2008)spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.vicommittee on radio frequenciespaul a. vanden bout, national radio astronomy observatory, chair jeffrey piepmeier, nasa goddard space flight center, vicechairana p. barros, duke university douglas c.j. bock, university of california, berkeley/combined array for research in millimeterwave astronomy steven w. ellingson, virginia polytechnic institute and state universitydavid g. long, brigham young university darren mckague, university of michigan james m. moran, harvardsmithsonian center for astrophysics melinda piketmay, university of colorado at boulder steven c. reising, colorado state university alan e.e. rogers, massachusetts institute of technology/haystack observatory lucy ziurys, university of arizona staffdonald c. shapero, director, board on physics and astronomydavid b. lang, program ofcercaryn j. knutsen, research associatespectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.viiboard on physics and astronomymarc a. kastner, massachusetts institute of technology, chairadam s. burrows, princeton university, vicechairphilip h. bucksbaum, stanford universitypatrick l. colestock, los alamos national laboratoryjames drake, university of marylandjames eisenstein, california institute of technologyandrea m. ghez, university of california, los angelespeter f. green, university of michiganlaura h. greene, university of illinois at urbanachampaignmartha p. haynes, cornell universityjoseph hezir, eop group, inc.mark b. ketchen, ibm thomas j. watson research centerjoseph lykken, fermi national accelerator laboratorypierre meystre, university of arizonahomer a. neal, university of michiganmonica olvera de la cruz, northwestern universityjose n. onuchic, university of california, san diegolisa j. randall, harvard universitycharles v. shank, janelia farm, hhmimichael s. turner, university of chicagomichael c.f. wiescher, university of notre damestaffdonald c. shapero, directormichael moloney, associate directorrobert l. riemer, senior program ofcerjames lancaster, program ofcerdavid b. lang, program ofcerteri thorowgood, administrative coordinatorcaryn j. knutsen, research associatebeth dolan, financial associatespectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.ixin the early years of the 21st century, policy ofcials recognized both the need for additional blocks of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum for new technologies and the desires of existing users to obtain additional bandwidth. a number of activities were thus begun, with the goals of identifying unused frequencies and suggesting methods by which the regulatory structure could encourage their more efcient use. in june 2002, the federal communications commission (fcc) formed the spectrum policy task force for the following purposes:1. to provide specic recommendations to the fcc for ways in which to evolve the current ﬁcommandandcontrolﬂ approach to spectrum policy into a more integrated, marketoriented approach that provides greater regulatory certainty while minimizing regulatory intervention; and2. to assist the fcc in addressing ubiquitous spectrum issues, including interference protection, spectral efciency, effective publicsafety communications, and implications of international spectrum policies.the spectrum policy task force concluded that ﬁwhile the commission has recently made some major strides in how spectrum is allocated and assigned in some bands, principally through ˚exible rules and competitive bidding, spectrum policy is not keeping pace with the relentless spectrum demands of the market. the task force has begun the process of reexamining 90 years of spectrum policy to prefacespectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xprefaceensure that the commission™s policies evolve with the consumerdriven evolution of new wireless technologies, devices, and services.ﬂ1 recognizing the growing importance of radio observations to their respective missions and the increasing potential for interference from new wireless technologies, nasa, the department of commerce, and the national science foundation commissioned the national research council (nrc) to identify the spectrum needs of today™s scientic activities and to assist spectrum managers in balancing the requirements of scientic uses of the spectrum with those of other interests. this report is written in response to that request. the committee discussed its original charge at length and chose to consider only the passive (ﬁreceiveonlyﬂ) scientic applications of the radio spectrum, and specically how the requirements for spectrum could be expected to evolve over the next two decades.2 this decision did not imply any prioritization of the active versus passive scientic uses of the spectrum, but instead stemmed from the committee™s recognition that passive scientic uses involve unique issues and that the committee had a limited amount of time in which to complete its task. to address its task, the nrc™s committee on scientic use of the radio  spectrumšcomprising representatives of universities, private industry, and nonprot organizations3šemployed four inperson meetings, four town hall meetings, and numerous teleconferences in the development of its report. the committee™s work was aided by presentations from a number of outside experts who provided detailed information at inperson meetings. the committee focused on three major topics: earth remote sensing (see chapter 2), radio astronomy (see chapter 3), and interference mitigation (see chapter 4). it conducted an indepth study of each of the major topics, including the current and expected future status of earth remote sensing and radio astronomy and applicable radio frequency interference mitigation technologies. the committee developed a series of ndings on the basis of the material presented in these chapters, together with an associated series of recommendations, to help ensure the viability of these scientic endeavors. the ndings and recommendations are detailed in chapter 5. as dictated by the statement of task, the committee did not make recommendations on the allocation of specic frequencies, but it did comment on spectrum use by the relevant scientic communities and how it might be protected in the future.this report attempts to lay the foundation of an effort to identify the spectrum needs of radio astronomy and earth remote sensing, identify the benets of these two activities, and develop practical, forwardlooking approaches to spectrum 1 federal communications commission, report of the spectrum policy task force, washington, d.c., november 2002.2 the committee™s statement of task appears in appendix a.3 biosketches of the members of the committee are provided in appendix b.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiprefaceaccess that are needed to ensure the necessary conditions for their important observations.it is noted that a report on the uses of passive service4 bands for both earth remote sensing and radio astronomy by a panel of the nrc™s committee on radio frequencies (corf) was published in 2007.5 the present report differs from the 2007 report in assessing both the current and future uses of the passive services. this report also includes a focus on technology for interference mitigation. 4 the passive services are those for which the signal is produced by nature and the applications are ﬁreceiveonly.ﬂ5 national research council, handbook of frequency allocations and spectrum protection for scientic uses, washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2007.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xiiithis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the national research council™s (nrc™s) report review committee. the purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. the review comments and draft manuscript remain condential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. we wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:paul feldman, fletcher, heald & hildreth, plc,dale n. hateld, independent consultant, longmont, coloradoanthony janetos, pacic northwest national laboratory,roger lang, george washington university,michael marcus, marcus spectrum solutions,thomas meissner, remote sensing systems, inc.,steven reising, colorado state university,chris salter, national astronomy and ionosphere center, cornell university, paul vanden bout, national radio astronomy observatory, william ﬁjackﬂ welch, university of california, berkeley, anddavid woody, california institute of technology, owens valley radio observatory.acknowledgment of reviewersspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xivacknowledgment of reviewersalthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see the nal draft of the report before its release. the review of this report was overseen by martha haynes, cornell university. appointed by the nrc, she was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. responsibility for the nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvsummary 11 introduction 61.1 the passive radio spectrum, 81.2 prospects for future scientic use of the radio spectrum, 121.3 the interference problem, 131.4 interference mitigation, 151.5 enabling scientic uses of the radio spectrum, 162 the earth explorationsatellite service 182.1 specic application areas of passive microwave remote  sensing, 23weather forecasting and monitoring, 24severe weather and disasters, 30climate and global change, 33resource management, 41aviation, 43defense and public safety, 45international partnerships, 46education and technology, 47contentsspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xvicontents2.2 brightness temperatures, geophysical measurements, and  missions, 48fundamentals of microwave radiometry for eess  applications, 48measurement of specic geophysical parameters, 522.3 current and future space missions, activities, and spectrum  usage, 532.4 current and future nonspacebased activities and spectrum  usage, 592.5 the impact of radio frequency interference on earth exploration satellite service observations, 61introduction to the problem of radio frequency interference: immediate impacts on eess, 61evidence of impact of radio frequency interference on eess observations, 63potential future radio frequency interference and its impact on  eess observations, 802.6 summary of the importance of and risks to continued  contributions of the earth explorationsatellite service  in the future, 863 the radio astronomy service 883.1 the scientic impact of radio astronomy, 90origin of planets and the solar system, 90origin and evolution of the universe, 92pulsars and general relativity, 95galactic nuclei and black holes, 96galaxies, 101solar physics and space weather, 102serendipity and the transient universe, 104summary, 1053.2 radio observatories and radio telescopes, 1063.3 spectrum requirements and use, 113continuum and line observations, 113atmospheric windows and absorption features, 115current radio astronomy service allocations, 115spectrum use, 1153.4 sensitivity requirements, 120sensitivity limits, 122spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviicontents3.5 interference and its mitigation, 123examples of interference in a protected band, 125mitigation, 1273.6 importance of radio astronomy to the nation, 130radio interferometry, 130communications disruptions, 131fundamental physics, 132technology development, 132precision antennas, 132distributed network computing, 133education and public outreach, 1334 technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interference 1354.1 trends in active spectrum usage, 136current allocations, 136current utilization studies, 1384.2 major drivers of spectrum use, 145assessment of trends in spectrum use for 2008œ2015, 145thirdgeneration and fourthgeneration systems, 148unlicensed uses of the radio frequency spectrum, 149regulatory changes that impact use, 151technology changes that impact use, 153summary, 1554.3 unilateral mitigation techniques, 156technologies for unilateral mitigation, 1574.4 mitigation through cooperative spectrum usage, 1684.5 mitigation costs, limitations, and benets, 172earth explorationsatellite service (eess), 173radio astronomy service (ras), 173nature of the costs of radio frequency interference to  the eess and the ras, 174summary, 1765 findings and recommendations 1775.1 societal value of the passive services, 1785.2 characteristics of the passive spectrum services, 1805.3 threats to the eess and the ras from unintentional radio  frequency interference, 182spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.xviiicontents5.4 technology for mitigation of radio frequency interference, 1855.5 protection of the eess and the ras, 1875.6 the path forward, 1915.7 conclusion, 193appendixes a statement of task 197b biosketches of the committee members 199c density of interferers equation 208d analysis of outofband emission impacts to the eess from §27.53  of the fcc rules 210e descriptions of earth explorationsatellite service parameters  related to table 2.1 214f acronyms and abbreviations 221g glossary 226spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1natural radio emissions from objects as diverse as hurricanes and distant  galaxies yield vital information about the planet earth and its place in the universe. observations of earth are central to weather forecasting and climate studies, and radio observations of the cosmos are similarly critical for increasing our understanding of the universe and answering grand questions such as that on the origin of planets. such information is gathered by geoscientists using complex earthorbiting satellites and groundbased equipment and by radio astronomers using large, groundbased radio telescopes. signals from natural radio emissions are extremely weak, and the equipment used to measure them is becoming more and more sophisticated and sensitive.the radio spectrum is also being used by radiating, or ﬁactive,ﬂ services, ranging from aircraft radar to rapidly expanding consumer services such as cellular telephony and wireless internet. these valuable active services transmit radio waves and thereby potentially interfere with the receiveonly, or ﬁpassive,ﬂ scientic services, which do not radiate. transmitters for the active services create an articial ﬁelectronic fog,ﬂ which can cause confusion and, in severe cases, totally blind the earth explorationsatellite service (eess) and radio astronomy service (ras) receivers.both the active and the passive services are increasing their use of the spectrum, and so the potential for interference, already strong, is also increasing. this tension between the active services™ demand for greater spectrum use and the passive users™ need for quiet spectrum is at the heart of this report™s discussion and motivates the ndings and recommendations of the study committeešthe national research council™s committee on scientic use of the radio spectrum. summaryspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century2many billions of dollars have been invested in the nation™s radio astronomy and earth remote sensing facilities. the public marvels at new discoveries made at radio astronomy observatories, and the nation remains ever more reliant on accurate and uptodate weather and climate information retrieved from earth remote sensing satellites. the use of the radio spectrum to obtain these observations is regulated and protected in accordance with national and international spectrum rules, but the relatively recent proliferation of wireless technology is challenging engineers™ abilities to mitigate unwanted interference from the active services.complex rules govern the occupancy and use of the electromagnetic spectrum, both nationally and globally, but these rules have not adequately evolved with technology. inefciencies in spectrum use exist while demand increases, and most regulations are not aligned with or even cognizant of the special needs of passive scientic users. these issues are identied in this report, and addressing them presents the nation with an exceptional opportunity to adapt to the wireless revolution while protecting the passive users of the radio spectrum. the radio spectrum is a nite resource that has been managed as such for the past 70 years by the federal government. this management enabled the growth of strong commercial and scientic communities. the endless pursuit of better techniques to leverage the unique characteristics of the radio spectrum has led to discoveries and innovations of enormous scientic and societal value. over the past 20 years, rapid technological improvements have exponentially increased the capabilities of scientic, commercial, and government users. but today, the current regulatory regime is straining to enable the capabilities and meet the needs of the various communities of users. a new path is needed to preserve access to the radio spectrum, in which important scientic discoveries are made and civilian and government remote sensing operations are conducted, while allowing for growth that serves an increasingly mobile society. this summary presents the report™s key ndings and recommendations.finding: passive remote sensing observations are essential for monitoring earth™s natural systems and are therefore critical to human safety, the daytoday operations of the government and the private sector, and the policymaking processes governing many sectors of the u.s. economy.finding: radio astronomy has great potential for further fundamental discoveries, including the origins and evolution of the universe, the nature of matter, and life in other solar systems, which will have an enormous impact on our understanding of fundamental physics and the place of humanity in the universe. recommendation: recognizing that the national investment in passive radio astronomy and earth remote sensing is dependent on access to the radio spectrum, spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.3summarythe committee recommends that the federal communications commission (fcc) and the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia) ensure that access to spectrum for passive radio and microwave observations of earth environmental variables and radio astronomical observations of the sky is protected in the development of future spectrum policy.technological innovations continue to increase the utility of the radio spectrum. the advent of new technologies designed to exploit the diversity of the radio spectrum in space, frequency, polarization, and time will increase the efciency of its use. however, the current means for managing spectrum use must be changed, as the current policies threaten to thwart scientic discovery, diminish the usefulness of critical environmental observations, and limit economic growth because of the inefcient use of nite spectral resources. therefore, new spectrum management policies need to be explored for the sake of ensuring these critical national capabilities.finding: radio wave bands (10 mhz to 3 thz) are indispensable for collecting information associated with specic astronomical and environmental phenomena. often the same bands are equally indispensable for both passive earth remote sensing and radio astronomy, and the passive nature of both services enables them to share the spectrum productively. currently, 2.07 percent of the spectrum below 3 ghz is allocated to the ras and eess on a primary basis, and 4.08 percent is allocated on a secondary basis (measured in hertz). finding: important scientic inquiry and applications enabled by the earth  explorationsatellite service and the radio astronomy service are signicantly impeded or precluded by radio frequency interference (rfi). such rfi has reduced the societal and scientic return of eess and ras observatories and necessitates costly interference mitigation, which is often insufcient to prevent damage from rfi.finding: better utilization of the spectrum and reduced rfi for scientic as well as commercial applications are possible with better knowledge of actual spectrum usage. progress toward these goals would be made by gathering more information through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. this would be benecial to both the commercial and the scientic communities.recommendation: the department of commerce/national telecommunications and information administration (ntia), in collaboration with the national science foundation (nsf), nasa, and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa), should spearhead the development of a national spectrum assessment system that measures the radio frequency (rf) environment with appropriately high spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century4resolution in time, space, and frequency for purposes of spectrum development and management, based on the spectral and spatial density of emitters.the next generation of spectrum management policies must enable better sharing of the spectrum as well as diminishing the impact that users have on the rf spectrum. this can be done by exploiting currently available technologies and hastening the development of nascent technologies. new policies should encourage the following: the development of the means for direct interaction between active and passive spectrum users to protect current and future scientic uses of the spectrum. the nation needs to provide the policies that will make the spectrum more useful and productive for all users.recommendation: the eess and ras communities should be provided additional support through nsf, nasa, and noaa to increase their participation in spectrum management forums within the international telecommunication union (itu), fcc, ntia, and other organizations. the goal of such participation is to foster outreach, advance the understanding of interference and regulation issues, and initiate mutual cooperation for interference mitigation.the development and implementation of technology to address rfi for current and future satellite systems to ensure that the national investment in scientic uses of the spectrum is preserved.recommendation: investment in the development of mitigation technology should be increased so that it is commensurate with the costs of data denial that result from the use of systems without mitigation. to this end, nsf and nasa should support research and development for unilateral1 rfi mitigation technology in both eess and ras systems. nasa, noaa, and the department of defense should require that appropriate rfi analyses and tests and practical rfi mitigation techniques be applied to all future satellite systems carrying passive microwave sensors.a regulatory environment that enables sharing the spectrum in both space and time. this is a ﬁwinwinﬂ scenario that will enable additional scientic uses without impacting commercial development.recommendation: the nsf, nasa, and ntia should jointly support research and development for cooperative rfi mitigation techniques and the associated forums 1 as discussed in chapter 4.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.5summaryand outreach necessary to enable the development of standards for greater spectral utilization and interference avoidance. recommendation: as cooperative spectrumsharing techniques come into use, nsf and nasa spectrum managers should work with the regulatory agencies to enable observations that require an extremely wide spectral range. such observations would provide a useful metric for the effectiveness of spectrumsharing techniques for the passive services.these new initiatives are not easy, nor will they make success a certainty. it will take a national effort to understand clearly the needs of both communities, scientic and commercial, and to motivate each to make the choices necessary to enable greater access for each to the radio spectrum. the next generation of scientic users of the radio spectrum needs to be afforded the capacity to develop the technology to seek new horizons. recommendation: the ofce of science and technology policy should create a new, permanent, representative technology advisory body to identify technical and regulatory opportunities for improving spectrum sharing among all active and passive users, both government and nongovernment.in one sense, spectrum used for passive purposes, including earth remote sensing and radio astronomy, can be likened to parkland preserved for public use. the true societal value of small parcels of land, especially in crowded urban areas, dees monetization, and proactive measures are required to ensure the preservation and shared use of such land. a small fraction of the radio spectrum allocated for passive purposes performs a similarly valuable societal function and requires proactive management to remain availablešin this case for scientic purposes. the passive services both offer a critical return to society through operations in support of environmental prediction and provide scientic intellectual value. although the impacts of the passive services are difcult to quantify, they are valuable to society for providing vital information for climate and weather studies and in allowing astronomical studies of the heavens. the quiet radio bands, like public parks, deserve protection. it would be in the strongest interests of the nation to ensure that access to spectrum for scientic purposes is maintained during the coming decades. the committee™s recommendations provide a pathway for putting in place the regulatory mechanisms and associated supporting research activities necessary to accomplish this important task. the committee believes that such a pathway will also lead to greater efciency in the active use of the spectrum, which should benet all direct and indirect consumers of wireless telecommunications and data services. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.61introductionnatural radio emissions from objects as diverse as hurricanes and distant galaxies are employed by scientists to study the objects themselves. this information is vital for analyzing and forecasting weather and climate and for understanding the distant cosmos. the geophysical studies use remote sensing satellites and groundbased instruments, and the radio astronomy observations employ large, groundbased radio telescopes, or antennas. the techniques used by the two groups are fundamentally similar. the variations in the strength and polarization of the radio signals with direction, frequency, and time are measured with receivers of everincreasing sensitivity and sophistication. the detailed techniques must be different because satellites pass quickly over any given spot on earth, whereas a radio telescope can track a given source in the sky for hours. the two groups of users, working within the earth explorationsatellite service (eess) and the radio astronomy service (ras), use many of the same frequency bands, and they have many interference problems in common.the launch of the rst u.s. earth remote sensing satellite, tiros1, in 1960, ushered in an era of unprecedented scientic understanding of the planet as a complex system of systems. for the rst time humanity was provided the opportunity to visualize and understand the interactions of many of earth™s constituent processes. this global view was only made possible by the development of advanced sensors that were able to take advantage of the new perspective offered by satellites. chief among the new classes of sensors used in the nearly ve decades since tiros has been the passive microwave radiometer, which holds the unique advantage over optical and infrared systems of being able to probe through clouds. these sensors spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.7introductionare passive in that they do not transmit any signals or communications; they only receive naturally occurring signals. passive instruments are thus much different from active devices, with which people are most familiar. active devices include cellular telephones, wireless internet networks, garagedoor openersšanything that emits a signal, whether purposefully or not. owing to the unique purposes for which passive instruments are used, these instruments also have unique designs and needs, which are discussed in detail in this report. these passive devices are used by earth scientists for economically and scientically important observations of earth™s environment and by astronomers to observe the vast reaches of the cosmos beyond this planet. the use of passive microwave sensors allows rainfall, clouds, ocean surface winds, temperature, and moisture distributionsšthe primary variables of  meteorologyšto be quantied over the globe, under clear and cloudy conditions and during both day and night. data from passive microwave sensors are now a vital component in the complex calculations used for weather prediction.in addition to enabling new understanding of atmospheric processes, passive microwave observations1 have brought about a new understanding of earth™s surface processes. the distinct microwave signatures produced by water in its various phases (liquid, ice, vapor) permit allweather measurements of environmental variables such as snowpack depth, soil moisture, sea ice extent, sea surface temperature, and sea surface salinity. these and other related passive microwave observables, including biomass and vegetation water content, are becoming increasingly important as drivers of industry and agriculture, particularly as global resources of freshwater, arable land, and sheries are further stretched to satisfy an increasingly large and demanding global population. the role played by passive microwave observations from space as well as from surfacebased and airborne platforms in the management of these resources and the understanding of their interactions with other natural systems cannot be overstated. currently, 21 satellites carrying passive microwave sensors are orbiting earth. during roughly the same era in which earth remote sensing was developedšbut preceding it by about a decadešpassive radio observations were used to study the makeup of the cosmos under what is now the discipline of radio astronomy. radio astronomy is a young science, about 60 years old, but it has contributed enormously 1 the terms passive microwave observations, microwave brightness, microwave emission, and similar terms that are used in chapter 3 of this report, on the eess (remote sensing), are synonymous with the terms radio observations, radio brightness, and radio emission that are used throughout chapter 4, on radio astronomy. the popular use of microwave within the passive remote sensing community may have arisen in an attempt to distinguish microwave observations from visible and infrared remote sensing observations in which the rayleighjeans approximation is not applicable, and radiance power is expressed as an equivalent brightness temperature. the eess passive microwave measurements are referenced to absolute temperature.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century8to the understanding of the universe. it provided the rst view of the cosmos outside the optical band and revealed an extraordinary variety of remarkable objects and phenomena that had never been suspected, including pulsars (spinning condensed stars acting as rotating radio beacons), the cosmic microwave background radiation (showing the universe to have started in an initial explosionšthe big bangšand to have been expanding ever since), gigantic molecular clouds where new stars are being born, and active galactic nuclei (in which reside giant black holes fed by a disk of gas and dust and from which emanates an enormously energetic pair of jets, going far across intergalactic space). in the near future, radio astronomical observations will provide insights about the events that occurred around the time that the rst stars were bornšknown as the epoch of reionization. radio sciences have a strong practical importance. accurate weather forecasting is vital for many activities critical to human health, welfare, and securityšincluding agriculture, transportation, military defense, and the mitigation of damage from extreme weather events such as hurricanes, wildre, and drought. these applications and others are discussed in detail in chapter 2 of this report. the longterm monitoring of earth is vital for climate assessment and prediction and is a major aid in the understanding of climate changešone of the most important problems currently facing humanity. the proper management of the environment both now and for decades to come will be contingent on remotely sensed data. on a larger scale, radio astronomy opened people™s view of the cosmos to take in the violent, enormously complex universe that it is now known to be. the shift in thought engendered by radio astronomy is analogous to that caused 500 years ago when it was rst recognized that earth orbits the sun: the notion of earth™s special location in the universe disappeared, and people began seeing their world as an element of the cosmos rather than as its center. but radio astronomy also has practical applications in technology that support today™s development of our information infrastructure, as discussed in chapter 3. these include technical developments in highperformance antennas, sensitive radio receivers, electronics, computing, signal processing, and scientic education.unfortunately, humanmade radio frequency interference (rfi) can make the radio science measurements more difcult, and in some cases it can render them unusable. this problem is introduced in §1.3 and §1.4 below and discussed in depth in chapter 4.1.1 the passive radio spectrumradio astronomy and passive earth remote sensing both rely on detecting, recording, and interpreting weak natural radio frequency emissions. these emissions are radiated by all absorptive bodies: for example, forests, clouds, the sun, and galaxies. the detailed features of the radiation provide information on the spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.9introductiontemperature, density, composition, motion, and other characteristics of the object or medium being observed. earth studies and astronomical studies cover most of the radio spectrum, ranging from about 15 mhz (the lower limit for the radio transparency of earth™s ionosphere), to the current limits of radio technology at many hundreds of gigahertz. the highest radio frequencies (at 1 thz and above) merge with infrared radiation, and some studies require continuous measurements from the radio into the infrared bands, and even on to optical bands or beyond. natural radio emissions are generated by a variety of mechanisms. all matter emits ﬁthermal noise,ﬂ with a characteristic frequency spectrum that depends on its temperature. while hot objects, such as stars, emit mainly in the infrared, optical, and ultraviolet portions of the electromagnetic spectrum, cold gas, dust between the stars, and materials on earth such as water, soil, and atmospheric gases with smaller temperatures (of a few hundred kelvin and below) emit mostly in the radio wave and submillimeterwave portions of the spectrum (see figure 1.1). radio radiation is also emitted from atoms and molecules when they move from one quantum state to another. this line radiation appears at characteristic figure 11r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 1.1 the characteristics of the electromagnetic spectrum. see figures 1.2 and 1.3 in this chapter for a more detailed picture of the atmospheric penetration of electromagnetic waves. image from nasa, science program for nasa™s astronomy and physics division, washington, d.c., 2006.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century10frequencies determined by the particular quantum transition of the atomic or molecular species in question (figures 1.2 and 1.3). the measurement of radiation at and near these transition frequencies is extremely important for both earth science and radio astronomy. in earth remote sensing, line radiation spectra can be used to obtain temperature and humidity proles in the atmosphere from the surface of earth on up into the mesosphere. observations for such proling purposes occur near the centers of atmospheric absorption lines and within the immediately adjacent ﬁwingsﬂ on either side of the line centers. in radio astronomy, a proper interpretation of line radiation provides information on the composition, density, and temperature of the material under study. radio astronomers are interested in frequency bands where an interesting atomic or molecular transition occurs and where earth™s atmosphere is particularly transparent. spectra from these bands are often used to derive the motions in cosmic clouds, or in galaxies. because different moleculesšfor example co and hcnšhave different excitation conditions, the study of several molecules (or several lines from one molecule) can give threedimensional information about the cloud. this is analogous to the way that atmospheric proles are found in earth science measurements. figure 1.2 the opacity of earth™s atmosphere in the radio range of frequencies from 1 to 1000 ghz for six scenarios. image courtesy of a.j. gasiewski, university of colorado.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.11introductionfor many nongaseous materials on earth (such as liquid water, ice, soil, snow, and vegetation), the radiation is broadened by the strong interaction of closely spaced molecules into a continuum that exhibits a slow spectral variation over a wide range of frequencies. continuum radiation spectra can also occur when the scale of surface roughness or feature size (i.e., raindrop or cloudparticle diameter) is comparable to or smaller than a wavelength of the radiation. in earth remote sensing, continuum radiation spectra are measured at a variety of microwave frequencies. optimal frequencies for measuring continuum radiation are between the major transition frequencies for oxygen and water vapor (see figures 1.2 and 1.3). in these ﬁwindows,ﬂ the ability to probe through the atmosphere is maximized, thus making the continuum radiation easy to observe. similar frequencies are used in radio astronomy for continuum measurements. the doppler effect, in which motion of the emitter toward or away from the observer shifts the received frequency, provides a means of determining the motion of the material. dopplershifted radiation enables the measurement of the rotation of matter in spiral galaxies and that of the motion of air in the upper atmosphere. the expansion of the universe leads to a similar shift in the frequencies of spectral 1008060402001000800600400200frequency (ghz)percent transmittancefigure 13r01628editable vector imagefigure 1.3 the transmission spectrum of earth™s atmosphere in the radio range of frequencies from 1 to 1000 ghz at mauna kea, hawaii, a very dry site at an altitude of approximately 14,000 ft. such high, dry sites are drier than scenario e as given in figure 1.2, making them suitable for astronomical observations above 200 ghz. note that the water vapor line at 22 ghz (see figure 1.2) causes negligible loss in transmission at this site, but the lines at 556 and 752 ghz are so strongševen on the high mountaintopšthat the atmospheric transmission is essentially zero, and no astronomical observations can be made from 520 to 580 ghz and 730 to 780 ghz. image courtesy of l. ziurys,  university of arizona.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century12lines that increase as the distance to the source increases. this effect, known as the cosmological redshift, allows distances to faraway galaxies to be accurately measured. (see box 3.2, ﬁredshift,ﬂ in chapter 3 of this report.)another widespread emission mechanism is synchrotron radiation, generated by the acceleration of electrons in a magnetized plasma. our milky way galaxy is suffused with a dilute plasma that emits synchrotron radiation at frequencies of about 1 ghz and below. over a much wider frequency range, this radiation is also associated with some of the most powerful events in the universe: pulsars, supernovae, gammaray bursts, and quasars, in which matter falling into a giant black hole radiates a prodigious amount of radiation; and radio galaxies, in which jets and giant cocoons of plasma ejected from a galaxy nucleus extend well outside the host galaxy. synchrotron and thermal radiation are emitted across broad frequency bands and with a characteristic spectral shape. their measurement is often not restricted to any one particular frequency, although when the band shape needs to be dened, many samples of the spectrum at wellseparated frequencies are needed. the spectral lines from quantum transitions, however, must be measured at their specic natural frequencies with allowance for doppler shifts. 1.2 prospects for future scientific use of the radio spectrumwith the threat of climate change and related environmental changes over the next several decades, the need for environmental information for critical policy and economic decision making will increase. the ability of passive microwave earth remote sensing to study water in various phases, at both continuum and spectral line frequencies, means that these instruments will be increasingly used to provide key information. whether obtained for use in daytoday weather forecasting operations or for longterm climate studies, passive microwave measurements of earth represent one of the most important scientic uses of the radio spectrum. a number of contemporary problems in physics also require radio astronomers™ continued ability to observe the cosmos. for instance, studies at radio frequencies provide the only way to investigate the epoch of reionization that occurred when ultraviolet radiation from the rst stars ionized intergalactic space, bringing the universe to the state in which it exists today. radio astronomy also provides the only way to study large numbers of pulsars to determine if einstein™s theory of general relativity is actually correct in the universe™s most extreme conditions.finally, the use of passive radio techniques to observe the sun provides the prospect of monitoring our own star for subtle changes in emission characteristics that may lead to geomagnetic disturbances. such disturbances regularly affect the operation of satellite communications, navigation systems, and terrestrial power grids. just as earth environmental information is expected to grow in societal importance in the decades ahead, so is space environmental information.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.13introduction1.3 the interference problembecause the total radio spectrum is a limited resource, competition exists among its various users. in the united states, spectrum use is regulated by the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia) for federal government users and by the federal communications commission (fcc) for all others. the regulation of spectrum use includes the assignment of frequency bands, the specication of maximum allowed power levels, and other specic conditions (ﬁfootnotesﬂ) regarding potential interference with other users. the regulations identify the uses as ﬁservicesﬂ (see §4.1 in chapter 4), and this report focuses primarily on the radio astronomy service and the earth explorationsatellite service.the u.s. regulatory system, as well as the international telecommunication union (itu) system, was organized prior to 1950, when there were far fewer uses for the radio spectrum than there are now.2 as new technologies have been developed, the fcc has allocated new bands for them. during the past two decades, however, the pace of development in radio communications has begun to strain the regulatory system, with the biggest problem being a lack of unallocated spectrum available for new technologies.there are two fundamentally different categories of spectrum users. one category consists of active usersšthose who transmit radio signals to achieve their ends, which may be voice or data communications, radar surveillance, or even earth remote sensing using radars or other transmitters. as a group, active users need everincreasing amounts of spectrum for the everincreasing uses that are invented; telecommunications companies (in particular) pay large sums of money to obtain the rights to use it. the other category consists of passive users, such as those in radio astronomy and passive remote sensing, who operate in receiveonly mode. these users also need increasing amounts of spectrum to obtain the increased sensitivity required for new studies and services. the uses and desires of these two communities of spectrum users are asymmetric, because the passive services do not transmit any radio signals. accordingly, active users can interfere with passive users but not vice versa. since the passive services can operate in any spectral band, they can face radio frequency interference from active services over much of the spectrum. this can include (at times) interference in the bands allocated on an exclusive, primary basis to the passive services. such interference is discussed in chapters 2, 3, and 4. see box 1.1 for more information.2 for a description of the u.s. regulatory process and the itu process, see national research council, handbook of frequency allocations and spectrum protection for scientic uses, washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2007, ch. 1.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century14box 1.1 passive service measurements and radio frequency interferencereceivers for earth explorationsatellite service (eess) and radio astronomy service (ras) activities are extremely sensitive, as they must respond to very weak natural radiations. following is a list of characteristics of eess and ras measurements that must be taken into account in considering radio frequency interference (rfi).technology improvements are enabling more ambitious and sophisticated earth remote sensing and radio astronomy experiments. thus system sensitivity requirementsšand hence rfi thresholdsšare steadily tightening.the spectral requirements of the ras and eess continue to increase, and some observations in the bands allocated to the active services are essential.weak radio interference can generate erroneous scientic results even when such interference is essentially undetectable. when such interference is detectable, it only becomes so after a long period of observation time has passed, meaning that the entire observation is ruined.radio astronomy bandwidths are large, up to 1 ghz and more, and integration times are often long, up to 105 seconds (about a day), and can extend to months.radio astronomy studies extend out to redshifts of greater than 6 (see box 3.2 in chapter 3), so that for the most distant objects, frequencies of the spectral lines are reduced by up to a factor of more than 7. for the important hydrogen (h) line at 21 cm (1.42 ghz), for example, this means that sensitive studies need to be made at essentially all frequencies from 1.42 ghz down to the very high frequency range (30300 mhz).satellitebased passive earth remote sensing measurements occur on a continuous basis and over the entire globe. a set of line and window frequencies extending from approximately 1 ghz to higher than 500 ghz is used. eess observations of trace gases such as ozone or compounds of nitrogen usually require the measurement of several spectral lines for every molecular species under study. this means that many specic frequency bands are required, and it is not practical to restrict measurements to the bands assigned to the passive services.to be more specic, three types of unwanted emissions that cause interference are dened in the fcc regulations: ﬁspuriousﬂ emission, ﬁoutofbandﬂ emission, and emissions in adjacent channels. see the glossary in this report for greater detail. loosely speaking, spurious emissions come from a transmitter emitting at frequencies outside its assigned band and are caused, for example, by nonlinearities that generate harmonics. outofband emissions are emissions at neighboring frequencies that are spread into adjacent bands by the modulation process. both can interfere with radio astronomy and earth remote sensing observations. the generation of small spurious and outofband signals is virtually inevitable due to the technological limitations in transmitter electronics, but the actual levels emitted can be controlled at the transmitter and kept to spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.15introductionwithin allowable limits. emission in adjacent channels can create a ﬁblockingﬂ interference within a receiver. however, this particular occurrence is a result of the technical limitations of the receiver, not the transmitter. the allowed emission levels within these categories are dened by regulatory agencies (the fcc and the ntia) and through international treaties, as discussed in chapter 4. in the vast majority of cases, both spurious and outofband rfi is inadvertent, that is, unintentional. nonetheless, such emissions are prohibited if they rise above the allowed level in a protected band. however, in cases where earth remote sensing or radio astronomy observations must be made in bands where no primary allocation for these uses exists, there is no recourse with respect to the problems and data outages caused by rfi.finding: owing to their receiveonly nature, the passive earth explorationsatellite service and radio astronomy service, operating from 10 mhz to 3 thz, are incapable of interfering with other services.1.4 interference mitigationusers of the ras and eess go to considerable effort to mitigate the effects of rfi. such effort includes careful attention to the design of the receivers to block authorized transmissions that are nearby (both in terms of geography and in terms of frequency), excision techniques (in time and frequency) to eliminate unwanted signals, and, now in development, advanced processing techniques to recognize rfi and either excise it or subtract it. these ﬁunilateralﬂ techniques are all expensive to do on a regular basis. furthermore, there are fundamental limitations on their ability to distinguish natural thermal noise (the desired signal) from an efciently modulated communications or radar signal (the rfi) in which power is uniformly distributed across the allocated band. cooperative interference mitigation involves cooperative use of spectrum, with ras and eess users coordinating their observations to take advantage of the large amounts of unused spectrum at any time and location. cooperative mitigation techniques hold great promise, but are untested and would require new spectrum use policies and practices so that these techniques could develop. both unilateral interface mitigation and cooperative interference mitigation are discussed in chapter 4.another major mitigation cost is incurred up front when an observatory is located in a remote area to escape rfi. current interest in locating receiver arrays to the far side of the moon is perhaps the most extreme example of this type of cost. while this strategy can be useful for radio astronomy, earth remote sensing satellites observe the entire earth over the course of each day and therefore could not avail themselves of a similar advantage. see box 1.2 for more information.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century16box 1.2 important characteristics of radio frequency interferencefollowing is a list of important characteristics of radio frequency interference (rfi):licensed transmitters, such as television, taxi radios, and cellular telephones occupy xed spectral bands. rfi from these sources can in some cases be eliminated by avoiding those frequency bands. however, vigilance in keeping spurious and outofband emissions down to acceptable levels is always necessary. strong spurious and outofband signals are in fact seen in radio astronomy service (ras) and earth explorationsatellite service (eess) experiments. for example, figure 3.10 in chapter 3 shows an example of interference in the band 1610.61613.8 mhz, a band allocated to the ras on a shared primary basis. figures 2.15 through 2.18 in chapter 2 show inadvertent rfi to the nasajapan aerospace exploration agency advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) sensors at 10.610.7 ghz. lowpower, unlicensed transmitting devices are rapidly proliferating. they range from cordless telephones to local area computer networks to digital cameras to automotive anticollision radars, to name only a few of many examples. since these are personal devices, the total emission level is generally proportional to the population and level of development in any given area.radio telescopes gain a great deal of protection from rfi by locating in remote areasšfor example, in the national radio quiet zone in west virginia, behind high mountains, or in remote desert areas. however, the ras cannot hide from rfi caused by airplanes or satellites ˚ying overhead. the locating of observatories far from commonly used ˚ight paths is considered, when possible. the eess, operating mainly from lowearthorbit satellites, cannot escape the rfi caused by multitudes of lowpowerradiating devices as it passes over populated areas. over parts of europe and north america, some eess data products are now ruined by rfi.many active communications systems, including television, are moving to more efcient use of spectrum, especially in lling up their assigned bands uniformly. this results in less white space where scientists might be able to operate with passive equipment. it also means that the signals more closely resemble the random noise of natural signals and are thus less recognizable as rfi.1.5 enabling scientific uses of the radio spectrumthe goal of this report is to highlight the importance of the passive uses of the radio spectrum, to identify issues that threaten the ability of the science services to provide benets to society, and to recommend steps for the mitigation or elimination of these threats while recognizing the importance of the other services. chapters 2 and 3 discuss the knowledge gained from and benets to society produced by the eess and ras, respectively, as well as current and future spectrum requirements for maintaining progress. chapter 4 discusses current trends in spectrum use and technology that shape the environment in which the eess and ras operate, as spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.17introductionwell as methods for mitigating the impact of interference. finally, chapter 5 provides the committee™s recommendations for continuing to enable passive scientic uses of the radio spectrum. the committee™s ndings are presented throughout the report and in chapter 5, and an acronym list and glossary of terms are provided in the appendixes, in addition to other useful supplementary material. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.182the earth  explorationsatellite servicein 1960 the rst weather satellite dramatically opened humanity™s eyes to the beauty and complexity of earth™s atmosphere. never before had anyone photographed a hurricane™s movement or cyclonic shape (see figure 2.1) or observed the global form of atmospheric waves on a planetary scale. after proving the usefulness of orbiting weather observations, nasa and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) began developing ever more sensitive and innovative spacebased instruments that help people understand the natural world around them and their impact on it (see box 2.1). modern observation systems offer economically and societally important forecasts extending farther into the future than ever before, but these advances depend on protected radio frequency allocations.with the development of more advanced instrumentation, it quickly became clear that there were great opportunities to observe at wavelengths other than what is usually called light. in fact, visible light is now only a small part of the story. most current satellite sensors also observe terrestrial emissions at infrared and/or radio wavelengths. these environmental applications have evolved over the past 50 years by combining radio astronomy and geophysical techniques to form the new scientic eld known as microwave remote sensing. human eyes evolved to detect visible light because earth™s atmosphere allows solar radiation to pass through an ﬁatmospheric windowﬂ at those wavelengths. in the same way, the ﬁeyeﬂ of the satellite (the receiver) is designed to view earth through atmospheric windows at other wavelengths, rather than observing re˚ected sunlight as human eyes do. analogous to what infrared goggles (providing heat spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.19the earth explorationsatellite servicefigure 21r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.1 hurricane camille as it approaches the gulf states in 1969, as photographed from the nasa nimbus iii satellite. image courtesy of nasa/nimbus iii satellite.vision) do, most satellite instruments detect the inherent emission of radiation (heat) from the atmosphere and terrestrial surface at wavelengths that reveal details invisible to human eyes. when the atmosphere itself is of interest, opaque wavelengths that do not pass through the atmosphere but are absorbed by it offer more information. each window and opaque band responds differently to the various properties of the terrestrial surface and atmosphere, allowing those properties to be studied by a simultaneous analysis at multiple frequencies. the accuracy of these studies increases with the number of observed frequencies. the unique ability of passive microwave sensors to ﬁsee throughﬂ most clouds makes those sensors essential, particularly where clouds are persistent. the sensors are passive in that they do not transmit signals but instead only receive the natural background emission. scientists can thus extract information from the radio spectrum on environmental properties as varied as atmospheric temperature and humidity, precipitation rate, soil moisture, ocean salinity, and ocean waves (and therefore surface winds and spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century20box 2.1 the origin of earth remote sensingearth remote sensing techniques have developed over many years, evolving out of astronomy and accelerating as satellite technology became more robust. before 1932: use of optical astronomy (initial passive spectral observations of stellar and planetary surface and atmospheric temperatures and compositions, demonstrating basic methods).1932: the rst radio astronomy observations by pioneer radio astronomer karl jansky, revealing cosmic radiation.19401945: wartime studies of centimeter and millimeterwave atmospheric absorption spectra and passive radiation; the development of sensitive radiometry.1968: launch of the rst passive microwave radiometer on the soviet cosmos243 satellitešit observed sea surface temperature, land temperature, snow/ice cover, water vapor, and liquid water using four unscanned window channels at 3.537 ghz (unfortunately shortlived, operating only for weeks).1972, 1975: the rst longlived satellites to image windowchannel parameters (humidity over ocean, sea ice, ocean roughness and wind, snow cover, precipitation, land temperature, etc.) and atmospheric temperature proles: nimbuse microwave spectrometer (nems; two window channels and three opaque channels) and electrical scanning microwave radiometer (esmr) imaging at 19.36 ghz launched on the nasa nimbus5 satellite in 1972, and the scanning microwave radiometer (a wideswath imaging version of nems) and the dualpolarized esmr imaging at 37 ghz launched on nimbus6 in 1975.1978: the rst operational weather satellites to incorporate imaging passive microwave spectrometers for temperature sounding (microwave sounding unit with four opaqueband channels at 5058 ghz on tirosn and noaa6 and 7).1987: the rst operational satellites to monitor surface parameters and atmospheric water (special sensor microwave/imager with seven window channels at four frequencies, 19.3585.5 ghz, rst launched by the defense meteorological satellite program).post1987: launch of continually improved research (nasa) and operational (national oceanic and atmospheric administration and department of defense) passive microwave instrument types.ocean internal waves). the full global coverage provided by satellites enables scientists to monitor earth™s environment far more accurately and completely than had been possible using traditional means such as weather stations and balloon sounders. satellite data have also greatly improved the accuracy of weather forecasts and enabled sensitive, largescale climate studies revealing, for example, the effects of ozonemodifying trace gases. figure 2.2 presents a typical image of the abundance of water vapor over the oceans as observed by combining observations in multiple frequencies obtained by the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) imaging passive microwave spectrometer.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.21the earth explorationsatellite servicefigure 22r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.2 advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) data showing tropospheric water vapor abundance over earth™s oceans, denoted by the colors in the image. land is denoted by shades of gray, its shade depending on the elevation; sea ice is denoted by white. amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures  discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com.today, the united states operates a suite of more than 30 satellites that measure earth™s planetary environment and collectively represent many billions of dollars invested by u.s. taxpayers. the signicance of the passive radio services is suggested not only by the substantial government investment in their development and operation, but also by their impact on the national economy. the environmental products facilitated by the passive services are critical for daytoday, longterm, and severe weather forecasting and also for the department of defense (dod) and for the energy, agriculture, and transportation industries.1 the u.s. investment in passive earth observatories provides the nation with a high degree of economic leverage over environmental events.1 the 2006 report economic statistics for noaa states that ﬁweather and climate sensitive industries, both directly and indirectly, account for about onethird of the nation™s gdp in sectors ranging from nance, insurance, and real estate to services, retail and wholesale trade and manufacturing. industries directly impacted by weather such as agriculture, construction, energy distribution, and outdoor recreation account for nearly 10 percent of gdp.ﬂ national oceanic and atmospheric administration, economic statistics for noaa, washington, d.c., 2006.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century22on a larger scale, earth™s climate is deemed so important to humanity that the 2007 nobel peace prize was awarded to the intergovernmental panel on climate change (ipcc) and albert gore, jr., ﬁfor their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about manmade climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change.ﬂ2 the prize was based on the laureates™ assessment that largescale climate change would irrevocably alter living conditions in many places in the world and thus lead to widespread civil unrest. consistent with this assessment of the importance of climate to humanity are estimates that the potential consequences of global change in its various manifestations (sea ice loss, global warming and drought, coral bleaching, tropical ecosystem collapse, and other interrelated environmental problems) would be associated with unprecedented societal costs to the united states and the world.3 these staggering costs demand that the most precise information on global environmental processes be made available to decision makers grappling with questions of environmental policy. the precision of this information and the overall understanding of climate change are driven by both observational science and improved understanding and models of the environment, which in turn are dependent on the availability of spectrum for use in environmental observation. at stake are potential measures including limits on emissions of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane, limits on aerosols and chloro˚uorocarbons, restrictions on deforestation and freshwater usage, and stiff requirements for agricultural and manufacturing practices and the transportation industry.it is also useful to note the educational value of government programs that apply radio science to environmental problems. these programs are largely conducted either through or in collaboration with universities and thereby train many graduate students at the cutting edge of both radio and microwavefrequency technology and earth science, thus contributing to economic sectors critical to u.s. global competitiveness and the defense of the nation.the importance of environmental radio services has increased in parallel with the use of public and commercial wireless and other electronics technologies (see discussion in chapter 4). collectively there has been a substantial increase in the number of humanmade radio signals that can interfere with and corrupt needed scientic and operational passive observations of the environment.4 the commoditization of wireless and other electronics technology has signicantly increased the pressure on the passive uses of the spectrum in terms of allocations and disruptive 2 available at http://nobelprize.org/nobelprizes/peace/laureates/2007/; accessed august 26, 2008.3 intergovernmental panel on climate change, working group ii report, impacts, adaptation and vulnerability, geneva, switzerland, 2007.4 scientic observations are those conducted for research purposes. operational observations are conducted in consistent, repeated ways for use in products such as weather forecasts.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.23the earth explorationsatellite serviceinterference. as quickly as techniques have been developed to mitigate humanmade interference, they are eroded by other expanding active uses of the spectrum. moreover, as the spectral efciency of wireless technology improves, the interference that it produces increasingly resembles random noise, which is more difcult to identify and mitigate. these difculties are compounded by the increased use of spectrum licenses that permit unlimited numbers of approved devices to be used, with decreasing means for enforcement or further mitigation. section 2.5 discusses these difculties in a variety of circumstances. most active services can use coding techniques, better antenna systems, and higherpower transmitters to survive even high levels of interference, but these techniques are not applicable to passive services. there is a fundamental asymmetry between the spectral requirements of active communications services and passive environmental uses. advances in wireless technology are rapidly increasing the abilities of competing communications services to share radio spectrum through agile timefrequency multiplexing, whereas the measurement precisions of the passive services are intrinsically limited by the strength of natural emissions, the reception bandwidth, and the observing time.the competition for radio spectrum also has global implications, as the u.s. environment is affected by environmental conditions in other nations and vice versa. both u.s. and foreign environmental satellites ˚y over almost the entire globe and continuously observe within the same spectral bands everywhere; thus critical environmental radio bands need to be uncontaminated everywhere. the data from these diverse, earthorbiting, multinational assets are increasingly being shared in the global public interest, which parallels the separate national interests, and can be obtained by no other means. furthermore, the national character of environmental services and the multidecadal times required for their development and use in space make them much less nimble than the private sector that can develop new radiating products in a period of months. it has therefore become clear that a new look at spectrum policies and regulations is necessary in order to protect the critical passive environmental observations by earth observation satellites and to permit the passive and active services to coexist productively. this chapter discusses the reasons behind the need for new regulations, which are further elaborated on in chapter 4.2.1 specific application areas of passive  microwave remote sensingearth remote sensing is critically important to the united states and to the advancement of human scientic knowledge about earth and the environmental processes that support life and commerce. microwave remote sensing, or the earth explorationsatellite service (eess) in regulatory parlance, provides direct ecospectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century24nomic benets to the nation by obtaining information that has economic value to both the public and private sectors. in addition, the collection of these data is a highly technical enterprise that strengthens the u.s. industrial, defense, telecommunications, and environmental sectors. the united states operates in a competitive, informationdominated economy that is dependent not only on having access to the passive spectrum for obtaining data for commercial, governmental, and public purposes, but also on having skilled engineers who are trained in the most sophisticated microwave engineering techniques.passive and active remote sensing act in tandem to collect environmental information and ultimately to provide the benets to society referred to above. much of the data that lead to these benets, however, is only available from passive microwave sensors, and these sensors have unique needs that must be met to enable the measurements that they make. for example, passive microwave remote sensing is indispensable for better numerical weather forecasting, largescale monitoring of subsurface soil moisture, and so on, and improvements in weather forecasting are important economically and strategically. this section presents a sampling of applications in which passive access to the microwave spectrum is essential for the country. the discussion is organized in the following broad topics: weather forecasting and monitoring, severe weather and disasters, climate and global change, resource management, aviation, defense and pubic safety, international partnerships, and education and technology. the subsection on international partnerships includes discussion of a recent international effort, initiated by the united states and the group of eight (g8), to ensure that the nations of the world engaged in space remote sensing collaborate in exchanging data to benet their societies.weather forecasting and monitoringsatelliteborne passive microwave sensors are a critical part of the global weather monitoring system. passive microwave sensors are particularly critical for measuring temperature, humidity, and precipitation proles in the cloudaffected troposphere below approximately 10 km, where most economically important weather occurs, and in measuring sea surface winds and temperatures and soil moisture. part of the reason for this importance is that weather radars measure only the re˚ectivity of water and ice droplets in the atmosphere but are insensitive to these other parameters. even so, the extraction of useful information from radar re˚ectivity measurements relies greatly on knowledge of the droplets™ size distribution, which requires complex and costly multiband radar measurements to measure directly. passive microwave radiometers, however, directly measure the total quantity of liquid water as well as water vapor and other variables. such radiometers can herald impending weather events by measuring the presence of water vapor in spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.25the earth explorationsatellite serviceadvance of cloud formation and then detect the formation of liquid water droplets well in advance of the detection by rain radars. moreover, when used in conjunction with weather radars, passive radiometers provide a high degree of precision in the measurement of the path or areaaveraged quantities being observed that serve to calibrate the radar™s signal. in this manner the radiometer is able to facilitate the radar™s capability to provide high resolution. radars are thus useful in conjunction with radiometers but not as a substitute for them, as exemplied by the recent tropical rainfall measuring mission (trmm) and the cloudsat and future aquarius and soil moisture active passive (smap) missions.modern weather forecasts are based primarily on numerical weather prediction (nwp) models run on massively parallel computers. these models use direct data assimilation (dda), a powerful technique developed during the past two decades that incorporates all available data from satellites, balloons, radars, and surface stations to steer nwp models. major worldwide centers developing and operating these models are located in the united states, europe, canada, china, japan, and australia. their algorithms, from the beginning, have relied heavily on passive microwave measurements of relevant environmental variables, and they will continue to do so as spatial and temporal resolutions improve. passive microwave data in the opaque temperaturesensitive bands above 50 ghz have been particularly helpful because of their insensitivity to most clouds; these observations probably constitute the single most valuable data source currently enabling 1week weather forecasts. the demand for improved space and time resolution has been relentless since the inception of nwp modeling in the 1970s and is expected to continue for the foreseeable future, particularly as wireless devices enabled by the global positioning system increase the demands for ever more sitespecic, personalized information on weather. in recent decades, the accuracy and usefulness of weather forecasts have increased tremendously because of progress in both nwp systems and satellitebased remote sensing systems. figure 2.3 illustrates this progress in terms of the number of days for which forecasts of a given quality are obtained. for the highestquality southern hemispheric forecasts, satellite data increase the forecast from 12 hours to 2 daysša factor of fouršand for an anomaly correlation of 0.6 the forecast doubles from 3.25 to 6.5 days. the anomaly correlation is a common measure of forecast accuracy, with values above 0.6 generally considered to be signicant.much of the improvement in forecasting shown in figure 2.3 is due to the direct use of passive microwave data on their own, and to the integration of microwave and infrared data that combine the best features of both sensor types. surface wind data over the ocean derived from spaceborne microwave measurements have also been helpful. these improvements are particularly striking in the southern hemisphere where data from surface stations and balloon soundings are sparse, but they also extend forecasts in the northern hemisphere by roughly spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century26s. hemisphere 1000 mb ac z 20s  80s waves 120 aug 15  sep 20, 20030.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.951012345678forecast [days]anomaly correlation controlno satellitefigure 23r01628editable vector imagefigure 2.3 anomaly correlation for days 0 to 7 for 500 hectopascal geopotential height in the zonal band 20°80° south for august/september. the red and blue arrows indicate that the use of satellite data in the forecast model has doubled the length of a useful forecast (i.e., a forecast with anomaly correlation = 0.6). image courtesy of noaa.25 percent. passive microwave sensors are also useful for tracing the movement of water through normal weather cycles. for instance, surface soil moisture, snow cover, and snowwaterequivalent drive energy exchange with the atmosphere and therefore affect weather forecasts. the major impact of these surface variables on forecast accuracy is just beginning to be seen (figure 2.4). brief discussions of a few specic weathermonitoring topics follow.soil moistureaccurate knowledge of the parameters of soil moisture (sm) has been shown to improve forecasts of local storms and seasonal climate anomalies. in figure 2.5, panel (c) shows the observed difference in rainfall between two extreme years, the ˚ood year of 1993 minus the drought year of 1988, over the middle of the united states. current atmospheric models tend to use sea surface temperatures (ssts) as their primary boundary condition because so much of earth™s surface is spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.27the earth explorationsatellite service12hours ahead weather forecastswithliswithoutlisobservedrainfallfigure 24r01628editable vector type overlies bitmapped imagesfigure 25r01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 2.4 a depiction of the impact of observations of soil moisture (left) on 12hour rainfall forecasts that use weather research and forecasting models (for june 12, 2002). panels at right: forecasts with and without the land information system (lis) providing improved soil moisture initial and boundary conditions. image courtesy of nasa.figure 2.5 the value of soil moisture data to climate forecasts. predictability of seasonal climate is dependent on boundary conditions such as sea surface temperatures (sst) and soil moisturešsoil moisture being particularly important over continental interiors. in the results of a simulation driven only by sst (panel a), the climate anomaly in panel c (observed difference in rainfall between the ood year of 1993 minus the drought year of 1988) is not reproduced. results of the simulation driven by sst and soil moisture (panel b), however, accurately predict this seasonal anomaly. source: d. entekhabi, g.r. asrar, a.k. betts, k.j. beven, r.l. bras, c.j. duffy, t. dunne, r.d. koster, d.p. lettenmaier, d.b. mclaughlin, and w.j. shuttleworth, ﬁan agenda for land surface hydrology research and a call for the second international hydrological decade,ﬂ bulletin of the american meteorological society, 80(10): 20432058 (1999).ocean. however, models just using ssts do not do a good job of capturing seasonal climate anomalies in the middle of large continents. as seen from the results in figure 2.5(a), the climate anomaly is not reproduced. however, if sm data such as those derivable from spacebased 1.4 ghz passive microwave measurements are incorporated, atmospheric models can accurately predict the seasonal anomalies in bcaspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century28extreme weather, as seen in figure 2.5(b). in the second example of the importance of sm data (figure 2.6), nwp can be improved over the continental united states by more accurately initializing the land surface state with soil moisture data. soil moisture is also a key parameter in forecasting relating to agriculture, drought, and ˚ooding and for predicting vegetative stress and establishing related government policies. passive microwave radiometers operating at frequencies of 10 ghz and lower are sensitive to variations in soil density, type, and moisture content and are needed for sm measurements. radiometry in the 12 ghz range is arguably the best means for measuring subsurface soil moisture on a national or global basis. sea surface windsglobal sea surface wind data are critical for highquality nwp forecasts, for developing data pertinent to tropical cyclone warnings, aircraft and ship operations, ship routing, and other civil and military operations. sea surface wind data constitute one of the most important parameters in operational meteorological remote sensing. spacebased remote sensing of sea surface wind vector (sswv) depends on precision measurements of polarimetric microwave emissions from the ocean surface. these measurements have been shown to improve the forecasting capability of nwp models signicantly, thus contributing to maritime and coastal safety and commerce. the accuracy of the wind vector products obtained from the naval research laboratory™s (nrl™s) windsat retrievals to date has reached or exceeded the accuracy of the wind vector products available from active  scatterometer systems such as quikscat at moderate to high wind speeds. also, the ability of microwave radiometers to measure simultaneously atmospheric and sea temperature properties motivates attempts to improve further the accuracy figure 26r01628uneditable bitmapped imageﬁbuffalo creek basin, paﬂ replaced in image to rightbuffalocreekbasin, pafigure 2.6 soil moisture data improve numerical weather prediction over continents by accurately initializing land surface states. in this example, 24hour prior forecasts of a highresolution atmospheric model of rainfall are shown without (a) and with (b) soil moisture input data. the observed data are shown in panel c. provided by the national snow and ice data center.bcaspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.29the earth explorationsatellite serviceof the radiometer products. in addition, the national polarorbiting operational environmental satellite system (npoess, which will be the next generation of u.s. weather satellites) will include a microwave radiometer (called the microwave imager/sounder, or mis) that will likely have many capabilities similar to those of windsat, including the capability to measure multiple parameters. sea surface temperatureglobal, allweather sea surface temperature data are critical for nwp and for climate research. sst measurements are important for understanding heat exchange and the coupling between ocean and atmosphere, and sst data are required by operational ocean analyses in order to properly constrain upperocean circulation and thermal structure. sst measurements in clear air can be obtained using electrooptical (traditional) instruments; however, clouds prevent these measurements, so passive microwave measurements within the approximately 411 ghz region are critical for obtaining coverage in areas that are seasonally cloudcovered. for example, areas in the u.s. exclusive economic zone off the coast of washington and oregon are not imaged with traditional satellite sst sensors for weeks at a time owing to persistent stratus cloud cover, necessitating an allweather solution. the standard sst measurement uncertainty for spacebased sst measurements is 0.5 k at 50 km passive microwave (allweather) capability. water vapor prolesglobal water vapor proles are essential to the numerical weather prediction of rainfall and drought and help constrain such predictions in general. as in the case of temperature prole measurements, combined microwave and infrared spectral data can yield what is nearly allweather global performance, even in most cloudy conditions. two different types of microwave observations are used: those in transparent bands within which the water vapor absorption stands out (1) against the colder ocean background (ocean partially re˚ects the extremely cold cosmic background radiation), or (2) against that of cold lowemissivity land. no prole information is usually retrievedšonly an estimate of the columnintegrated abundance. the frequencies most often used for this purpose include 18.7, 22, 23.8, 31.4, 37, and 89 ghz. to improve retrieval accuracies, these channels are often dualpolarized (horizontal and vertical) and scanned at a near constant angle of incidence (e.g., trmm microwave imager [tmi], special sensor microwave/imager [ssm/i], special sensor microwave/imager sounder [ssm/is], windsat, and amsre). in addition, the opaque water vapor resonance near 183 ghz is often used in combination with some of the lower frequencies; these frequencies generally include 89, 150, 164168, and 176191 ghz, but they must spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century30be used in combination with temperature prole information to yield the most accurate results (e.g., advanced microwave sounding unit [amsu], ssm/is). instruments retrieving water vapor proles are generally used to retrieve other parameters simultaneously, such as cloud water content, precipitation rate, and ice and snow cover information.severe weather and disastersone impact of world population growth over the past 50 years is an increased vulnerability to natural disasters. weatherrelated disasters include tornadoes, hurricanes, hail, blizzards, ˚oods, mudslides, heat waves, forest res, and drought. some disasters have immediate impacts and others longterm effects; for example, rising sea levels could have major impacts on coastal areas, and severe declines in snow cover in the western united states could yield less spring snowmelt and water for summer agriculture and urban needs. extreme weather events and other natural disasters can be costly, not only in terms of the immediate loss of life and property that they can cause, but also because of the efforts needed to anticipate and respond to such disasters and in the longterm economic and societal consequences of such events. noaa estimates that the cost in the united states of damages from tornadoes, hurricanes, and ˚oods alone averages around $11.4 billion annually.5 even one major hurricane, however, can signicantly exceed these costs. although the full cost of hurricane katrina, which made landfall near new orleans on august 28, 2005, will not be known for many years, insured losses alone are estimated at $40.0 billion.6 eess observations enable signicant economic and societal savings owing to their ability to predict such costly natural events and to allow people to prepare for them.to provide a perspective on the types of costs referred to above, figure 2.7 highlights major u.s. weatherrelated disasters over the past 25 years. as growing population density along the coasts of the nation has increased the cost of coastal disasters, the mitigating effect of improved weather forecasting has been reducing those costs by increasing the warning times and the accuracy of the forecasts, leading to increased lifesaving evacuation and costreducing physical preparations while precluding such steps where they are not needed. according to a report from the national research council™s space studies board, the error in 3dayforecast landfall positions of hurricanes was reduced from 210 miles in 1985 to about 110 miles in 2004, arguably halving the preparation area while increasing the population response and preparation effectiveness. further, the accuracy 5 national oceanic and atmospheric administration, ofce of the chief economist, economic statistics for noaa, 5th ed., april 2006, p. 10.6 ibid, p. 18.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.31the earth explorationsatellite servicefigure 27r01628editable vector imagedollar amounts shown are approximate damages/costs in $ billions.location shown is the general area for the regional event. several hurricanesmade multiple landfalls.additional information for these events is available at ncdc www sitewww.ncdc.noaa.gov/ol/reports/billionz.html1998 / $1.11993 / $1.31986 / $2.31998 / $8.31992 / $2.01980 / $48.41994 / $3.71988 / $61.61993 / $26.71997 / $4.11994 / $1.21995 / $3.61991 / $3.519951996 / $6.01983 / $5.91991 / $2.11998 / $1.51998 / $1.71996 / $1.219961997 / $3.41993 / $1.31992 / $35.61995 / $2.5(u.s. virgin island)1994 / $1.21985 / $2.81985 / $2.41998 / $6.51989 / $13.91990 / $1.41994 / $1.21998 / $1.11995 / $6.81997 / $1.1/ 1993/ $7.01996 / $5.81999 / $6.51999 / $1.41999 / $1.71989 / $1.52000 / $2.12001 / $5.119821983 / $2.22002 / $10.0+llegend1992 / $2.4lbillion dollar weather disasters 1980  2005hurricanetropical stormfloodsevere weatherblizzardfiresnor'easterice stormheat wave/droughtfreeze2003 / $2.52003 / $1.62004 / $14.02005 / $2.02004 / $7.02004 / $9.02003 / $5.02003 / $3.42005 / $125.0noaa™snational climatic data center2002 / $2.02000 / $4.2198283 / $2.22001 / $1.91999 / $1.11996 / $3.01998 / $1.11983 / $4.01985 / $2.21995 / $3.62004 / $15.02005 / $16.02005 / $16.0the u.s. has sustained 67 weather related disasters over the last 26 years with overall damages/costs exceeding $1.0 billion for each event. 55 of the disasters occured during or after 1990. total costs for the 67 events were approximately $540 billion using an inflation/wealth index.2005 / $ 1.0figure 2.7 billiondollar weatherrelated disasters in the united states from 1980 to 2005. note: earth explorationsatellite system measurements are now an important data source for improving the accuracy of forecasts. image courtesy of noaa.of today™s 4day forecasts is about the same as the 2day forecasts of 20 years ago.7 eess measurements have played a major role in improving these forecasts. the insurance industry is also increasingly interested in using passive microwave data to arbitrate claims involving hurricanerelated ˚ooding or winds that can often only be distinguished by passive microwave observations. figure 2.8 illustrates the value of allweather microwave sst measurements for hurricane forecasting. figure 2.8(a) shows how the nasa tmi viewed the cold wake of hurricane bonnie through cloud cover as the hurricane moved up the eastern coast of the united states on august 2426, 1998. figure 2.8(b) shows the same scene as viewed in infrared by the advanced very high resolution radiometer (avhrr) a few days later as hurricane danielle moved up the coast on august 27. 7 national research council, earth science and applications from space: urgent needs and opportunities to serve the nation, washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2005, p. 9.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century32figure 28r01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 2.8 (a) microwave imagery at 10 ghz supplied by the nasa tropical rainfall measuring mission (trmm) microwave imager (tmi) showing a cold wake (blue region near the white dots) produced by hurricane bonnie on august 2426, 1998. (b) the cold wake was not seen by the visible and infrared advanced very high resolution radiometer (avhrr) imager because of the areas of persistent rain and cloud cover (white patches) over the 3day period. when danielle crossed bonnie™s cold wake on august 29, danielle™s intensity dropped. although the cloud cover prevented avhrr from observing this sequence, tmi was able to measure characteristics of the sea surface. hurricane bonnie™s track is shown by the white dots, and hurricane danielle™s track is shown by the gray dots. image courtesy of nasa trmm microwave imager.the cold wake was invisible to avhrr because of persistent clouds and rain. a retrospective analysis showed that the magnitude of the cold wake left by hurricane bonnie was critical to being able to predict the weakening of the second hurricane, danielle, a few days later and could not have been done without the microwave measurements of sea surface temperature by tmi.8 the strong dependence of hurricane growth on local sea surface temperatures makes such measurements through hurricane cloud shields important, particularly since the overturning of the water by the hurricane itself can alter those temperatures rapidly. an example of the ability of satellitebased passive microwave sensors to observe the high wind speeds of a hurricane is provided in figure 2.9, an image of the wind speed of hurricane katrina as it made landfall near new orleans on august 28, 2005. in addition, an airborne system, the stepped frequency microwave radiometer (sfmr), is currently included in noaa™s hurricaneobserving research aircraft. measurements from this system contributed to 23 hurricane advisories in 2005, including the landfall intensity advisories of hurricanes katrina 8 f.j. wentz, d.s. gentemann, and d. chelton, ﬁsatellite measurements of sea surface temperature through clouds,ﬂ science, 288(5467): 847850 (may 5, 2000).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.33the earth explorationsatellite service92°90°88°86°+24°+26°+28°+30°+32°hurricanekatrina,20050829,1214utc05101520253035404550knotsfigure 29a (left)r01628fully editable vectorsfigure 29b (right)r01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 2.9 (left) image of the wind speed of hurricane katrina (in knots), observed by passive microwave radiometers on windsat, a naval research laboratory satellite, as katrina makes landfall near new orleans on august 28, 2005. (right) output from a model that combines data from windsat and other remote sensing instruments. the model provides information on the hurricane™s wind speed. the values over land are extrapolations. courtesy of the u.s. naval research laboratory.and rita. the passive microwave technique is so effective that the u.s. congress mandated sfmr instruments for the ˚eet of u.s. air force wc130j hercules operational weathermonitoring aircraft.key impact areas for passive microwave observations of natural disasters include hurricane observations and the forecasting and monitoring of severe regional weather and both drought and ˚ood activity. the general usefulness of passive microwave observations in observing global meteorology also aids in the monitoring of other natural disasters and helps with the associated publicsafety requirements.climate and global changeperhaps the most signicant global issue of the early 21st century is the possibility of global environmental change in response to human activity. the potential consequences of global change in its various manifestations (sealevel rise, sea ice loss, global warming and drought, coral bleaching, tropical ecosystem collapse, and other interrelated environmental problems) can be associated with societal costs from a reduction of 1 to 5.5 percent in global gross domestic product by spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century342050, depending on the carbon dioxide (co2) stabilization level.9 such costs demand that the most precise and relevant information on global environmental processes be available to decision makers. in many cases the measurement of key climaterelated geophysical variables on a global scale is required, and spacebased passive microwave radiometry is often the only reasonable means to collect these measurements.atmospheric temperature prole and cloudsamong the most important of human in˚uences on climate is the production of greenhouse gases, including co2, methane (ch4), and various chloro˚uorocarbon (cfc; hydrochloro˚uorocarbon [hcfc]) and hydro˚uorocarbon (hfc) compounds. of these, co2 and ch4 rapidly become well mixed in the lower atmosphere and affect earth™s radiation budget by trapping infrared radiation that would otherwise be expelled to space. although co2 and ch4 are themselves potent greenhouse gases and the primary cause of observed global warming, their indirect in˚uence on atmospheric water vaporša more potent and less predictable greenhouse gasšis perhaps even more important. tropospheric water vapor provides a feedback mechanism through which increased global warming adds to the capacity of the atmosphere to contain water vapor while simultaneously elevating evaporation rates. the monitoring of water vapor and cloud water content and their effects on global radiation ˚uxes is thus critical to understanding the causes of climate change and predicting future climates. currently, cloud coverage and type are the most signicant sources of uncertainty in global climate modeling. radar observations are strongly dependent on unknown drop size distributions, and optical sensors do not penetrate clouds well; thus microwave radiometers on all types of platforms (satellite, aircraft, ships, and ground sites) are essential to making water vapor measurements and thus to the science of climate change.the ability of passive microwave sensors to observe through clouds, in combination with frequent global microwave measurements of average midtropospheric and stratospheric temperatures near 54 ghz, has provided a unique record of global atmospheric change over the past two decades that validates other measures. the observed longterm warming of the midtroposphere is roughly 0.2  0.04 k per decade.10 9 intergovernmental panel on climate change, climate change 2007: synthesis report, geneva, switzerland, 2007.10 c.a. mears and f.j. wentz, ﬁthe effects of diurnal correction on satellitederived lower  tropospheric temperature,ﬂ science, 309(5740): 15481551 (september 2, 2005).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.35the earth explorationsatellite servicecloud ice water pathcloud ice water path (iwp) is the vertically summed mass of cloudborne ice particles per unit of area. as ice clouds can re˚ect a signicant amount of sunlight, their impact on global radiative energy ˚uxes and hence climate change is considerable. future global iwp measurements from space using passive microwave techniques at frequencies from 89 ghz up to approximately 1 thz could characterize the coupling of the global hydrologic and energy cycles through upper tropospheric cloud processes.11 such measurements would enable the development and testing of new selfconsistent parameterizations of ice cloud processes and cloud systems, which could in turn guide improvements in ice cloud representation in global earth system models. these improvements would signicantly advance the understanding of the hydrological cycle and climate predictability.ozone depletion and trace gasesclimate is also strongly affected by trace gases in the upper troposphere,  stratosphere, and mesosphere; some of these trace gases also facilitate the destruction of stratospheric ozone.12 a diminished ozone layer allows harmful ultravioletb (uvb) radiation from the sun to reach earth™s surface, where it signicantly enhances the probability of the occurrence of basal and squamous cell skin cancers and cataracts. the underlying chemical reactions that cause ozone depletion require chlorine and bromine to be present in sufcient quantities in the stratosphere.13 this revelation was central to the framing of the 1987 montreal protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer, which explicitly identied ozonedepleting substances that were subsequently banned in a series of international treatiesšin 1989, 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1995, 1997, and 1999. the u.s. environmental protection agency estimated in 1999 that the provisions of the montreal protocol, which sought to arrest runaway ozone depletion, would save 6.3 million lives from reduced levels of skin cancer, prevent 299 million cases of nonfatal skin cancers, and prevent the development of 27.5 million cases of cataracts in the united states alone between 1990 and 11 k.f. evans, j.r. wang, p. racette, g. heymseld, and l. li, ﬁice cloud retrievals and analysis with data from the compact scanning submillimeter imaging radiometer and the cloud radar system during crystalface,ﬂ journal of applied meteorology, 44: 839859 (2005).12 j.r. holton, p.h. haynes, m.e. mcintyre, a.r. douglass, r.b. rood, and l. pster, ﬁstratospherictropospheric exchange,ﬂ rev. geophys., 33: 403439 (1995); p.m. de f. forster and k.p. shine, ﬁradiative forcing and temperature trends from stratospheric ozone changes,ﬂ journal of geophysical research, 102: 1084110857 (1997).13 m.j. molina and f.s. rowland, ﬁstratospheric sink for chloro˚uoromethanes: chlorine atomcatalysed destruction of ozone,ﬂ nature, 249: 810812 (june 28, 1974).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century362165.14 passive microwave observations provide a valuable means for monitoring the distribution and concentration of ozone and other trace gases.ocean altimetry and sea surface variablesmicrowave remote sensing plays a crucial role in monitoring the global ocean, with radiometry, altimetry, scatterometry, and synthetic aperture radar observations all having important climate applications. ocean altimetry maps the topography of the ocean surface, from which ocean currents and atmospheric surface pressure can be derived. maps of the currents are routinely used to help route commercial and military naval vessels and, in the commercial shing industry, to help locate large sh populations. sealevel anomalies in the tropical pacic, derived from altimeters, are perhaps the most sensitive precursor indicators of el niño and la niña events up to 1 year in advance.15 the recent series of satellite altimeter missionsštopography experiment (topex)/poseidon, jason1, and the ocean surface topography mission (or jason2)šhas been able to monitor the rise in global sea level, thus providing an important means of verifying the expansion of the oceans in response to climate change. these missions have also contributed signicantly to the ability to forecast the occurrence of el niño events as much as 1 year in advance.16 for each radar observation, coincident passive microwave radiometer measurements are needed in order to correct the radar altimeters™ determination of sea level for the variations in integrated atmospheric refractivity due to tropospheric water vapor.17 these refractivity radiometers operate near 19, 23 and 34 ghz and require measurements of brightness temperature that are free of radio frequency interference (rfi).18 more generally, the global climate observing system (gcos) implementation plan19 includes sustained observations of sea surface temperature, ocean wind 14 u.s. environmental protection agency, the benets and costs of the clean air act, 1990 to 2010, epa410r99001, prepared for the u.s. congress by epa ofce of air and radiation/ofce of policy, november 1999, p. 64.15 d. chen, ﬁapplying satellite remote sensing to predicting 19992000 la nina,ﬂ remote sensing of environment, 77(3): 275 (2001).16 d. chen, ﬁapplication of altimeter observation to el niño prediction,ﬂ international journal of remote sensing, 22(13): 26212626 (2001). 17 s.j. keihm, m.a. janssen, and c.s. ruf, ﬁtopex/poseidon microwave radiometer (tmr): iii. wet tropospheric range correction and prelaunch error budget,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 33(1): 147161 (1995).18 ibid.19 global climate observing system secretariat, ﬁimplementation plan for the global observing system for climate in support of the unfccc (2010 update),ﬂ draft v1.0, november 13, 2009, geneva, switzerland. available at http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/gcos/documents/gcosip10draftv1.0131109.pdf, accessed 12/30/09.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.37the earth explorationsatellite service vector, and total columnar integrated atmospheric water vapor in the list of essential climate variables (ecvs) for satellitebased climate studies. all of these climate variables can be sensed simultaneously through the use of polarimetric, multiplefrequency microwave radiometry, as practiced using nrl™s windsat sensor. rainfall and snowfall rates rainfall and snowfall rates and total amounts of precipitation are highly valuable measurements that can be determined by onorbit and groundbased microwave and millimeter wave radiometers.20, 21 knowledge of these quantities is important to the prediction of ˚oods, of crop health and yield, and of catchment replenishment for hydroelectric, irrigation, and domestic uses, and for other societal benets and impacts. snowinformation about snow and frozen ground is critical for understanding fundamental hydrological processes and for detecting environmental change, assessing its impact, and validating environmental models. snow cover and snow water equivalent (swe) data are derived using microwave imagery that is sensitive to emission from different snow depths and structure, in combination with visible imagery. in 2004, a global monthly swe climatology data set that blended scanning multichannel microwave radiometer (smmr) and ssm/i passivemicrowavederived swe with noaa optical sensor snow maps was completed. the data set serves as an important tool for climate research (see figure 2.10). snow cover and swe are also important parameters for analyzing and improving numerical models of the atmosphere, including surface and atmosphere exchange processes, diagnostics, and forecasting.20 f. marzano, p. ciotti, d. cimini, and r. ware, ﬁmodeling and measurement of rainfall by groundbased multispectral microwave radiometry,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 43: 10001011 (may 2005); and f.s. marzano, d. cimini, and r. ware, ﬁmonitoring of rainfall by groundbased passive microwave systems: models, measurements, and applications,ﬂ advances in geosciences, 2: 259265 (2005).21 see c. surussavadee and d.h. staelin, ﬁglobal satellite millimeterwave precipitation retrievals trained with a cloudresolving numerical weather prediction model: part ii: performance evaluation,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 46(1): 109118 (2008), which evaluates satellite observations of both rain and snowfall rates from satellites. a good conical scanning reference is c. kummerow, j. simpson, o. thiele, w. barnes, a.t.c. chang, e. stocker, r.f. adler, a. hou, r. kakar, f. wentz, p. ashcroft, t. kozu, y. hong, k. okamoto, t. iguchi, e. kuroiwa, e. im, z. haddad, g. huffman, b. ferrier, w.s. olson, e. zipser, e.a. smith, t.t. wilheit, g. north, t. krishnamurti, and k. nakamura, ﬁthe status of the tropical rainfall measuring mission (trmm) after two years in orbit,ﬂ journal of applied meteorology, 39(12): 19651982 (2000).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century38figure 210r01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 2.10 national snow and ice data center global monthly equalarea scalable earth (ease)grid snow water equivalent (swe) climatology for the northern hemisphere, december 2004. the overall data set in which this climatology appears comprises monthly satellitederived swe climatologies from november 1978 through june 2003. the global data are gridded to the northern and southern 25 kilometer easegrids. available at http://nsidc.org/research/projects/armstrongswe.html. provided by the national snow and ice data center.glacierspassive microwave sensors can perform spatial mapping of the amount of snow overburden and the melt state of large ice sheets such as those over greenland and antarctica. annual mapping of the ablation zone of the greenland ice sheet is particularly important as a sensitive means of determining the melt state of the glacial margins and the region of continued deposition of snow.22 passive 22 w. abdalati and k. steffen, ﬁsnowmelt on the greenland ice sheet as derived from passive microwave satellite data,ﬂ journal of climate, 10(2): 165175 (1997).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.39the earth explorationsatellite servicemicrowave window channels from approximately 10 ghz to approximately 90 ghz are sensitive to re˚ection caused by melting ice water and have been used to study subtle, regionally dependent climate trends in greenland and antarctica for nearly two decades. knowledge of snow overburden is important as a means of estimating the heat transfer from the glacier to the atmosphere, as snow is a good thermal insulator. passive microwave channels at 18 and 37 ghz are useful for measuring snow depth by virtue of the differential scattering signature available using these two bands. sea surface salinitysea surface salinity (sss) is a critical missing parameter that scientists need in order to meet climate research goals. measuring global sss over time will contribute to scientists™ understanding of change in the global earth system and of how the system responds to natural and humaninduced change. global measurements of sss can be achieved to approximately 0.2 practical salinity units using spacebased passive microwave radiometry at 1.4 ghz and radar scatterometry at 1.26 ghz. these measurements can provide signicant new information on how global precipitation, evaporation, and the water cycle are changing. global sss variability provides key insight regarding freshwater ˚ow into and out of the ocean associated with precipitation, evaporation, ice melt, and river runoff. global sss measurements will also provide important background about how climate variation induces changes in global ocean circulation. the combination of global sea surface salinity and sea surface temperature measurements can be used to determine seawater density, which regulates ocean circulation and the formation of water masses. sea iceone of the rst applications of spacebased passive microwave imagery was that of monitoring the location, extent, and thickness of sea ice. the esmr data set provides the earliest allweather, allseason imagery of polar sea ice. some satellite data of sea ice in the visible and infrared wavelengths were available in the late 1960s and early 1970s (before the introduction of spacebased passive microwave observations), but because the polar regions are either dark or cloudcovered for much of the year, the generation of consistent, longterm data records from visible and infrared sensing was not practical.passive microwave data introduced a major advance in the usefulness of satellite sea ice imaging. the value of passive microwave data for sea ice studies derives from the large contrast in microwave emissivities between sea ice and open water. at 19.35 ghz, open water has an emissivity of approximately 0.44, whereas various sea ice types have emissivities ranging from approximately 0.8 to 0.97. the spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century40resulting contrast in microwave brightness temperatures allows accurate estimates of sea ice concentrations (percentages of ocean area covered by sea ice) and hence identication of sea ice distributions throughout the region of observation, as well as temporal variations of these distributions throughout the time period of observation.freezethaw transitionan area of study similar to sea ice involves the seasonal freezethaw transition of the northern hemisphere, which is a signicant source and sink of atmospheric co2. the exact timing of the spring thaw and the resulting length of the growing season can fundamentally affect the net carbon exchange budget between land and atmosphere.23 the thawing of polar tundra also results in more solar absorption and heating, with the possible runaway production of methane from the anaerobic decomposition of subsurface biomass. passive microwave observations from spacešaugmented by radaršare the primary means for observing the freezethaw transition on a global scale.24 determining the freezethaw transition requires the use of all of the primary atmospheric window channels between 1.4 and 90 ghz, up to and exceeding the eess allocated bandwidth on primary or secondary basis.25biomassearth™s vegetation canopy, or biomass, is a signicant component of the global carbon inventory. it is also a major contributor to the net longwave/shortwave albedo of the planet and hence to earth™s energy balance and temperature. for these reasons, climate change can both be affected by and can itself affect the global distribution of biomass. the ability to perform comprehensive inventories of biomass from space is recognized as a critical step toward modeling and understanding earth™s climate system.26 passive microwave observations operating in all of the 23 s. frolking, m.l. goulden, s.c. wofsy, et al., ﬁmodeling temporal variability in the carbon balance of a spruce/moss boreal forest,ﬂ global change biology, 2: 343366 (1996); j.t. randerson, c.b. field, i.y. fung, and p.p. tans, ﬁincreases in early season ecosystem uptake explain recent changes in the seasonal cycle of atmospheric co2 at high northern latitudes,ﬂ geophysical research  letters, 26(17): 27652768 (1999); t.a. black, w.j. chen, et al., ﬁincreased carbon sequestration by a boreal deciduous forest in years with warm springs,ﬂ geophysical research letters, 27(9): 12711274 (2000).24 t. zhang and r.l. armstrong, ﬁsoil freeze/thaw cycles over snowfree land detected by passive microwave remote sensing,ﬂ geophysical research letters, 28(5): 763766 (2001).25 national research council, handbook of frequency allocations and spectrum protection for scientic uses, washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2007.26national research council,  earth science and applications from space: national imperatives for the next decade and beyond washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2007.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.41the earth explorationsatellite serviceprimary atmospheric window channels between 1.4 and 90 ghz are valuable for monitoring the full range of vegetation canopy water content found in nature and are complementary to optical and synthetic aperture radar techniques. improved techniques for biomass estimation using passive microwave methods are continuously being developed.27 resource managementanother application for eess measurements involves the management of water, energy, and land use, including agriculture and urbanization. all of these applications use observations from multiple sources, including satellites as well as aerial and groundbased measurements. passive microwave remote sensing is particularly important for assessing phenomena such as soil type and moisture, which can then be related to lake, wetlands, and reservoir storage, to river discharge, and to linkages in the water, energy, and carbon cycles. other passive microwave products can be used to monitor the size, nutrient status, and other health measures of forests, crops, and vegetation; changes in vegetation type, deforestation, and other land cover; and geographic characterization of the ﬁfootprintsﬂ of urban areas. urban and suburban areas play an oftenoverlooked but important role in earth™s physical and ecological systems, adding to the understanding of mesoscale climatic, hydrologic, and ecologic processes.28 box 2.2 summarizes typical uses of eess data in reservoir management, the deployment of renewable energy systems, and agricultural forecasting, as reported in a recent evaluation of uses of earth observations by the u.s. climate change science program. an additional, longstanding use of data includes the assessment of food securityšfor instance, in the famine early warning system network of the u.s. agency for international development29 (see an overview of and details about the network in a report published by the national research council in 200730 ).one of the most recent applications of eess data involves the use of information about water quality, vegetation health, population distribution, and other observations as pathways by which to track disease vectors and their implica27 s. paloscia and p. pampaloni, ﬁmicrowave vegetation indexes for detecting biomass and water conditions of agricultural crops,ﬂ remote sensing of environment, 40: 1526 (1992); g. macelloni, s. paloscia, p. pampaloni, and e. santi, ﬁglobal scale monitoring of soil and vegetation using active and passive sensors,ﬂ international journal of remote sensing, 24(12): 24092425 (2003).28 people and pixels: linking remote sensing and social science, washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1998.29 gregory e. glass, ﬁrainy with a chance of plague: forecasting disease outbreaks from satellites,ﬂ future virology, 2(5): 225229 (2007).30 national research council, contributions of land remote sensing for decisions about food security and human health, washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2007.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century42box 2.2 examples of earth explorationsatellite service measurements in managing water, energy, and agriculturereservoir managementriverware is a river basin modeling system that integrates features of reservoirs (recreation, navigation, ˚ood control, and water quality and supply) and electric utility requirements in order to provide basin managers and power managers with a method for planning, forecasting, and scheduling reservoir operations. inputs to riverware include microwave data from the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) and data from other sensors such as the moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometer (modis) and the advanced spaceborne thermal emission and re˚ection radiometer (aster). riverware is a collaborative project among the center for advanced decision support for water and environmental systems at the university of colorado at boulder, the bureau of reclamation, the tennessee valley authority, and the army corps of engineers. renewable energy deploymentthe u.s. department of energy™s national renewable energy laboratory uses data from modis, the multiangle imaging spectroradiometer (misr), advanced very high resolution radiometer, special sensor microwave/imager, and a host of weather and other datašincluding measurements of ocean wind, solar and geothermal resources, upper air, and digital terrain/land coveršto assist in the deployment of renewable energy technologies. this model, the hybrid optimization model for electric renewables (homer), is used to design gridconnected and offgrid renewable energy systems. agricultural forecastingagricultural management has long employed moderateresolution optical imagery, beginning with the agriculture and resources inventory surveys and continuing with both the aerospace remote sensing and the large area crop inventory experiment programs during the 1970s and 1980s. passive microwave data (from the ssm/i and amsre and other systems) are now routinely incorporated into new agricultural applications. perhaps most prominent among these is the system run by the u.s. department of agriculture™s foreign agriculture service (usda/fas): the production estimate and crop assessment division™s crop condition data retrieval and evaluation (pecad/cadre) system. the fas collects and analyzes global crop intelligence information and provides estimates to inform ofcial usda forecasts for the agricultural market. that market includes farmers, agribusiness enterprises, commodity traders, and researchers, as well as federal, state, and local agencies. pecad/cadre is one of the  largest users of data from eess agriculturerelated measurements.source: u.s. climate change science program, synthesis and assessment product 5.1, ﬁuses and limitations of observations, data, forecasts, and other projections in decision support for selected sectors and regions,ﬂ november 7, 2008. available at http://www.climatescience.gov/library/sap/sap51/nalreport/.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.43the earth explorationsatellite servicetions for human health.31 glass, in future virology, discusses the challenges and opportunities provided by eess data and notes the potential for eess to advance health assessment beyond the monitoring of disease outbreaks to the forecasting of outbreaks.32 the advance notice provided by accurate forecasting of outbreaks could allow better deployment of health resources to minimize the spread and impact of disease. passive microwave observations of the hydrosphere and the cryosphere are similarly important. a scientic understanding of the mechanism of cycling of freshwater and the amount and distribution of the world™s frozen water stores is essential for human survival. again, passive microwave measurements made at a number of frequencies and from a number of platforms are unique in being able to provide this information. aviationfor aviation, the most useful passive services are the u.s. and global weather services and forecasts, which benet greatly from the inclusion of passive microwave data from satellites. surfacebased, upwardlooking microwave radiometers have the unique ability to remotely detect supercooled liquid water that adheres to aircraft ˚ight surfaces and helicopter rotors, and which has been responsible for numerous losses of aircraft and lives. these same radiometers also improve the skills of the forecasters of shortterm local aviation weather. currently, a sparse network of balloonbased proling (i.e., ﬁradiosondeﬂ) sites across the united states, with an average spacing of 315 km, sounds the atmosphere every 12 hours, supplemented by satellite overpasses every several hours. this sparse sampling severely limits shortterm forecasting, especially that of severe weather. groundbased radiometers can duplicate continuously, autonomously, and with minimal ongoing costs many of the dataproviding functions of radiosondes (except for measuring winds aloft and providing high vertical resolution). fog events have a signicant effect on aviation, slowing or halting airport air trafc operations and causing diversions of incoming air trafc.33 these events are seasonally chronic at some locations and infrequent at others. the onset, duration, and dissipation of fog are difcult to measure and to predict with currently employed technologies (radars, radiosondes, visibility and surface meteorology systems). groundbased radiometers can measure the vertical proles of temperature, 31 ibid.32 gregory e. glass, ﬁrainy with a chance of plague: forecasting disease outbreaks from satellites,ﬂ future virology, 2(5): 225229 (2007).33 for more information, see ﬁairline regulators grapple with engineshutdown peril,ﬂ wall street journal, monday, april 7, 2008.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century44water vapor, and fog liquid water and therefore have the ability to characterize such fog events. dubai in the united arab emirates has recently had a highly capable threedimensional fog prediction and monitoring system installed at its airport; the system is based on a microwave radiometer, a wind proler, surface meteorology, and a computer system.as an example of the disruptions that fog events can create, on february 15, 2001, a surfacebased temperature, water vapor, and cloud liquid water microwave radiometer detected precursors and the onset of meteorological conditions characteristic of persistent ground fog. this fog subsequently shut down denver international airport (dia) for 18 hours at tremendous cost, stranded thousands of passengers, and caused a ripple across the entire air trafc scheduling and ˚ow system. when the situation, including the microwave radiometric temperature, water vapor, and cloud liquid prole data, was replayed into the socalled ﬁmm5ﬂ nwp model at the national center for atmospheric research, the model accurately predicted the onset, persistence, and dissipation of this fog. in another episode, on march 4, 2003, light, freezing drizzle was foreseen, detected, and tracked by a research microwave radiometer monitoring surfacebased temperature, water vapor, and cloud liquid water. this condition caused the failure of six jet engines owing to the ingestion of ice on united airlines (ual) 737s that were taxiing for takeoff at denver international airport, grounding the six aircraft. the direct cost to ual was reported to be $1.2 million, with an unknown cost resulting from the grounding of the aircraft for engine repairs, other resultant ˚ight cancellations, and further associated costs. in april 2007, this same meteorological condition was foreseen by microwave radiometers, whereupon the radiometer operator unsuccessfully attempted to contact ual at dia to forewarn the airline. two more ual aircraft lost engines and were grounded. such losses should diminish as these sensors become operational. to date, ual has reportedly lost 18 engines at dia as a result of this meteorological condition. an operational system would have been able to forecast and nowcast this condition, allowing ample warning time for the implementation of preventative procedures.beyond aviation issues, fog often causes hazardous surface transportation conditions. it was the cause of a 78vehicle pileup on interstate 5 near fresno, california, in 2002, as well as the precipitator of a number of recent multiplevehicle accidents across the united states.34 groundbased radiometers are being installed in europe at problem locations for predicting and monitoring fog events.34 gary sanger, ﬁwinter weather summary,ﬂ available at http://newweb.wrh.noaa.gov/hnx/newslet/spring02/summary.htm; accessed june 22, 2008.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.45the earth explorationsatellite servicedefense and public safetyalthough the passive eess bands are not specically allocated for defense purposes, they are extensively used by meteorological satellites that support analyses and forecasts serving many defense needs. in fact, many radiometers on operational meteorological satellites are or have been part of the defense meteorological satellite program (dmsp) satellite constellation operated by the u.s. department of defense (as listed in table 2.2 later in this chapter). for example, the special sensor microwave/imager sounder radiometer, which is aboard a dsmp satellite, measures atmospheric temperature and moisture proles, sea surface winds, cloud liquid content, and land surface parameters on a continuous basis from low earth orbit. this military meteorological polarorbiting satellite program has been merged with those of noaa and nasa in the noaa integrated program ofce to form the npoess program, which will soon launch its rst satellite. microwave meteorological satellites improve forecasts of the following: (1) weather, which in˚uences essentially all combat missions in the air, on the ground, and at sea; (2) the dispersal and transport of released chemical, biological, or radiological agents, where such knowledge supports defensive measures; (3) the monitoring of the ducting of radio waves over the ocean caused by high gradients in the refractivity of the boundary layer, where such ducting can make ships and aircraft visible to radar at anomalously large distances or invisible at normal distances; (4) the traversability of muddy roads, tundra, or pack ice; (5) battleeld visibility; and (6) trajectory corrections for artillery and other projectiles. in addition there are nonmeteorological covert defense applications of passive sensors: for example, the passive detection of metallic objects, such as tanks and trucks concealed by foliage or camou˚age or ships shrouded in fog. groundbased microwave radiometers can accurately and precisely measure (to better than 0.5oc in most cases) the temperature prole in the tropospheric boundary layer on a continuous basis. this capability is being used to measure and track inversions that trap clouds, pollution, and aerosols. knowledge of boundary layer temperature proles is also important in predicting the transport and spread of accidental or hostile releases of biological agents, nerve agents, and radioactive agents. such radiometers are being used for continuous monitoring at nuclear power plants in switzerland, las vegas, beijing, taiwan, and elsewhere. these radiometers can also measure the water vapor and cloud liquid prole in the boundary layer. such data are highly important because of the interaction of clouds with aerosols and other gases to form smog. radiometers can also be used to continuously monitor the atmospheric effects associated with large urban heat islands that can impact health, public utility loads, and human activities.3535 mikhail n. khaikin, iren kuznetsova, evgeny n. kadygrov, and evgeny a. miller, ﬁinvestigation of temporalspatial parameters of an urban heat island on the basis of passive microwave remote sensing,ﬂ theoretical and applied climatology, 84(13): 161169 (2006).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century46international partnershipsit has long been known that sound management of the earth system, in both its natural and human aspects, requires information that is timely, of known quality, long term in its availability, and global. in 2003, the united states hosted a ministeriallevel earth observation summit in washington, d.c., to promote joint multilateral action that would lead to the continuous monitoring of the state of earth in order ﬁto increase understanding of dynamic earth processes, to enhance prediction of the earth system, and to further implement our international environmental treaty obligations.ﬂ36 an ensuing series of summits established a mandate for the development of the global earth observation system of systems (geoss).37 geoss is a complex system of sensors, communication devices, storage systems, and computational and other devices used to observe earth and to gather the data needed for a better understanding and enhanced prediction of earth™s processes. geoss is a ﬁsystem of systemsﬂ consisting of existing and future earth observation systems contributing to an international and interoperable data network. the emphasis of geoss is on societal benets in nine key areas:disasters: reducing loss of life and property from natural and humaninduced disasters;health: understanding environmental factors affecting human health and wellbeing;energy: improving the management of energy resources;climate: understanding, assessing, predicting, mitigating, and adapting to climate variability and change;water: improving water resource management through better understanding of the water cycle;weather: improving weather information, forecasting, and warning;ecosystems: improving the management and protection of terrestrial, coastal, and marine resources;agriculture: supporting sustainable agriculture and combating desertication; andbiodiversity: understanding, monitoring, and conserving biodiversity.the united states is a key signatory to the development of geoss through the international group on earth observations (geo). 36 group on earth observations, ﬁdeclaration of the earth observation summit,ﬂ washington, d.c., july 31, 2003, available at http://earthobservations.org/docs/declarationnal%2073103.pdf; accessed december 30, 2009.37 see http://www.earthobservations.org/aboutgeo.shtml; accessed march 31, 2008.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.47the earth explorationsatellite servicewhile geoss data originate from a variety of sources, there are many important environmental parameters needed by geoss users that can be measured only by passive microwave sensors. these include global ocean salinity; sea ice characteristics; soil moisture; rain, cloud, and related atmospheric hydrometric variables; water vapor and temperature proles under clouds; and trace gases. without the protection offered by eess passive radio allocations, the international community would be denied information vital to achieving the goals of geoss designed for the benet of society. finding: passive remote sensing observations are essential for monitoring earth™s natural systems and are therefore critical to human safety, the daytoday operations of the government and the private sector, and the policymaking processes governing many sectors of the u.s. economy.education and technologya large number of engineers working in the u.s. telecommunications and defense electronics industry have learned basic radio science skills through graduate or earlycareer work on any of a number of dod, nasa, noaa, national science foundation, or department of energy passive microwave sensor programs. examples include spaceborne, airborne, shipborne, and groundbased sensor programs for environmental observation. not all students trained in the passive microwave area continue their careers in the eld, but the importance ascribed to precise instrument calibration, the detection of low signal levels, and innovative signal and image processing provides unusually strong training for careers in many other economically important technology areas. the same can be said for students trained in radio astronomy (see §3.6). accordingly, earth remote sensing contributes indirectly to those economic sectors that are critical to u.s. global competitiveness and defense.in addition to radio science education, the application of passive microwave radiometry to environmental monitoring provides a key means of training earth scientists. whether they work in the u.s. government or in organizations around the globe, the next generation of students entering this discipline will need global experience in environmental stewardship and sustainability. the interconnectedness of regions, states, countries, and continents by environmental ties makes u.s. prosperity ever more contingent on the capabilities of environmental scientists, engineers, and managers outside the nation™s borders. to this end, valuable global experience in environmental observation is provided through satellitebased passive microwave studies. technological spinoffs from passive microwave earth remote sensing studies are numerous. they include new techniques for instrument calibration, image prospectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century48cessing, and dataassimilation capabilities that extend beyond the elds of weather forecasting, radio detection methods using statistical moments, and radio imaging techniques for aircraft navigation in allweather conditions and for homeland security needs. additionally, the technology underlying passive earth remote sensing has led to new submillimeterwave imaging capabilities for detecting hidden weapons. this technology is now beginning to make its way into screening operations at airports across the united states. also, the design of costeffective, stable, integrated microwave receivers has been furthered as a result of needs for such receivers within the passive remote sensing community. such receiver technology is now found in active communications and radar sensing devices. finally, the requirement of extremely high mainbeam efciency antennas in passive remote sensing has engendered the development of antennas with low sidelobes for other commercial and defense applications.finding: passive microwave earth remote sensing provides a diverse and valuable set of educational opportunities.finding: in addition to the intellectual benets that they provide, passive microwave remote sensing studies provide many technological benets to american society. 2.2 brightness temperatures, geophysical measurements, and missionssection 2.1 established the range of applications and the importance of passive microwave radiometry. this section describes the processes by which these sensors operate, providing detailed information on the specic geophysical measurements that result. in addition, a summary of previous and future radiometer missions is presented in order to provide context for the current state of passive microwave sensing.fundamentals of microwave radiometry for eess applicationsall matter emits low levels of electromagnetic radiation. this radiated ﬁthermal noiseﬂ is determined by the temperature and electromagnetic properties of the emitting medium, including its ability to absorb, emit, and scatter electromagnetic waves. geophysical properties of the medium can be inferred from microwave radiometer measurements of emitted thermal noise power to the extent that those properties are related to the bulk electromagnetic properties of the medium. the thermal noise power radiated at a given frequency is commonly expressed as a ﬁbrightness temperature.ﬂ this is the physical temperature of an ideal emitter spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.49the earth explorationsatellite service(called a blackbody) that would radiate the same amount of noise power at that frequency. the brightness temperature of a scene (reported in units of kelvin by a microwave radiometer) contains the geophysical information of interest. although multiple geophysical parameters may affect the brightness temperaturešfor example, the temperature and moisture level of earth™s surface and the temperature, humidity, and cloud properties of the atmospherešthese parameters can be distinguished when they have distinctive frequency and/or polarimetric signatures, so that simultaneous observations of the brightness temperature at multiple frequencies and polarizations enable simultaneous solutions for the geophysical properties of interest. there exists a long history of innovation in passive microwave eess observations for solving this multipleparameter estimation problem. for many applications, it is necessary for simultaneous measurements to be made over several octaves of the microwave spectrum in order to distinguish adequately the contributions to the brightness temperature made by the surface and the atmosphere. traditional radiometer receivers simply estimate the thermal noise power (in watts) received within a particular radio band by a noncoherent radio receiver consisting of (typically) an antenna, a lownoise amplier, a lter that limits the observed portion of the frequency spectrum, and a squarelaw detector that provides a measurement of power in the channel. the output of the squarelaw detector is averaged over time and then recorded and processed to yield geo physical information. it is well known that the uncertainty in measurements of brightness temperature is reduced by using larger bandwidths (insofar as is permitted by spectral allocations) and longer integration times (constrained for spaceborne eess observations by satellite orbit and coverage requirements). while calibration accuracy and internal noise once commonly dominated overall system uncertainty, continuing instrument improvements now often achieve the fundamental sensitivity determined by the timebandwidth product, thus reaching the maximum achievable sensitivity of the estimated geophysical parameters.38 therefore, radio interference to passive systems must be compared to this fundamental limit. in contrast, modern communications systems have yet to approach this socalled shannon limit. in other words, further improvement in eess sensor technology will, in general, have minimal impact on measurement accuracy compared to greater timebandwidth product usage. this is especially true for the most important measurements currently being carried out on an operational basis in eess. however, technological improvements in the use of spectrum for communications systems are still possible.38 see §3.4, ﬁsensitivity requirements,ﬂ for more information on the signaltonoise ratio of passive microwave measurements.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century50although the physics that determines brightnesstemperature signatures can be complex, usually just a few principal effects dominate. the absorption and emission of radio waves propagating through the terrestrial atmosphere are strong functions of frequency owing to resonant absorption by atmospheric gases. figure 1.2 in chapter 1 shows the total zenith attenuation of microwaves propagating upward through a clear standard atmosphere from sea level. gas resonances are apparent near 23, 60, 118, 183, and 325 ghz. the primary atmospheric absorbers below 350 ghz are molecular oxygen (resonances near 60 and 118 ghz) and water vapor (23, 183, and 325 ghz). above the troposphere, absorption and emission by trace gases become more pronouncedšfor example, hno3 at 182 ghz, n2o at 201 ghz, clo at 204 ghz, and o3 at 206 ghz. radio frequencies used for the earth explorationsatellite service are usually designated either as ﬁwindowsﬂ used for observing the surface or total atmospheric attenuation, or as ﬁopaqueﬂ and used for estimating atmospheric proles of temperature or composition. since radio astronomy uses these same windows to observe the universe from the ground, there is much spectrum compatibility between the two sciences. systems for sensing atmospheric properties can be designed to exploit atmospheric absorption and emission resonances. for example, many radiometers include observations near the semitransparent window frequencies 23 and 37 ghz in order to estimate the integrated columnar water vapor and liquid water content of the atmosphere. it is possible to estimate these two unknown abundances because the lower frequency is near the 22.235 ghz water vapor resonance, whereas at 37 ghz cloud absorption is relatively stronger. observations at the two bands yield two relations that can be inverted to nd the two unknowns, that is, the amounts of water vapor and liquid water. it is furthermore possible to estimate atmospheric temperature and/or molecular abundance versus altitude (i.e., temperature or abundance ﬁprolesﬂ) by measuring atmospheric brightness temperature as a function of frequency near a resonance. frequencies in the more transparent regions farther from any resonance generally see deeper into the atmosphere, whereas frequencies near the more opaque core of a resonance sense only conditions relatively near the sensor. comparing such measurements permits the temperature prole to be determined if the composition is known, or the composition if the temperature prole is known. by combining measurements of different spectral lines, both temperature and composition can be determined simultaneously.a few underlying physical principles characterize the capabilities of most passive microwave sensors operating in the ﬁwindowﬂ channels. first, lowerfrequency waves generally penetrate intervening media better and sense deeper beneath the surface. thus low frequencies such as 1.4 ghz are preferred when sensing subsurface soil moisture beneath vegetative canopies. second, the in˚uence of surface roughness tends to be largest when the length scales of the roughness are compaspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.51the earth explorationsatellite servicefrequency (ghz)wind speedliquid cloudswater vaporsalinityseasurface temperaturetbpi403020100+œfigure 211r01628editable vctorscopied from figure 211, r00897rable to the electromagnetic wavelength. this fact motivates the use of xband or higher frequencies in attempting to sense the short sea waves (capillary waves) that are most sensitive to sea surface winds at low wind speeds. third, the dielectric constant of water is a strong function of frequency, temperature, and the water™s phase (i.e., ice, liquid, or vapor). a result is that the frequencies most sensitive to sea surface salinity are below approximately 2 ghz, whereas those most sensitive to sea surface temperature lie nearer to 510 ghz. figures 2.11 and 2.12 illustrate for sea and land scenes, respectively, typical sensitivities of microwave radiometers to various environmental properties versus frequency.since multiple geophysical properties typically contribute to the observed brightness at a given frequency, multiple frequencies must be observed simultaneously in order to estimate them separately. because all window channels exhibit some atmospheric absorption and emission, and even atmospheric resonant frefigure 2.11 ocean scene: relative sensitivity of sea surface salinity, sea surface temperature, cloud liquid water, and integrated water vapor as a function of frequency for spacebased measurements. original ˚gure by thomas t. wilheit, nasagsfc.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century52510152025303540frequency (ghz)soil moisturevegetation biomasssurface roughnessintegrated water vaporcloud liquid waterfigure 212r01628editable vector imagessome type reset as requested10œ1tbpimaxfigure 2.12 land scene: relative sensitivity of the brightness temperature to soil moisture, cloud liquid water, and integrated water vapor as a function of frequency for spacebased measurements. quencies are often not completely opaque, most instruments incorporate both window and opaque channels.finding: effective passive microwave band allocations are necessary for the performance of environmental observation functions. finding: radio wave bands (10 mhz to 3 thz) are indispensable for collecting environmental information associated with specic physical phenomena. often the same bands are similarly indispensable for radio astronomy, and the passive nature of both services enables them to share the spectrum productively.measurement of specic geophysical parameterswhereas figure 1.2 in chapter 1 presents the basic physics of observations through earth™s atmosphere for passive microwave spectral observations, figures 2.11 and 2.12 also take into account fundamental characteristics of the measured parameters. because the estimates of the geophysical parameters, also called environmental data records (edrs), are computed as a function of observed brightness temperatures, it is possible to nd the average ratio of a change in a specic edr to the corresponding change in a particular brightness temperature. this ratio is called the ﬁsensitivityﬂ of the edr (as distinguished from the radiometric uncertainty of the original radiometer measurement). for example, the sensitivity of surface wind speeds over ocean is expressed in units of msœ1kœ1. while the numerous spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.53the earth explorationsatellite servicechannels used in retrieving many edrs can make this a complicated quantity to determine exactly, the values in figures 2.11 and 2.12 generally re˚ect the sensitivity from the primary channels in˚uencing errors in a particular edr. this ratio permits the accuracy requirements of a particular edr to be related to the accuracy requirements of the associated radiometric system. alternately, radio frequency interference levels (k) can be related to resulting errors in edrs. for example, the sensitivity of sea surface temperature (sst) to the vertically polarized 5 ghz brightness temperature is roughly 0.5 k(tb)/k(sst). since current scientic requirements for climate studies include retrievals of sst accurate to within 0.5 k or better, radio frequency interference that causes a 0.25 k change in 5 ghz brightness temperatures would pose a major problem for the retrieval of accurate sea surface temperatures. similar quantitative statements can be made regarding other edrs. it is important to recognize that the edr products shown in figures 2.11 and 2.12 are simply unavailable on a global scale from any other type of sensor, particularly for allweather conditions. these products include critical atmospheric parameters for nwp such as atmospheric temperature, humidity proles, and precipitation rate. considering global cloud conditions, surface infrared measurements are possible over an average of 5 percent of earth™s surface and over 30 percent of earth for the upper troposphere. at somewhat higher altitudes, atmospheric temperature and moisture proles from microwave measurements (e.g., amsu) are possible over 70 percent of earth™s surface and 95 percent for the upper troposphere.39table 2.1 provides a summary of the common geophysical products and the microwave frequencies used for their measurement in current, future, and proposed missions, with an indication of the potential impact of those measurements from radio frequency interference (rfi) based on the current radio frequency environment.2.3 current and future space missions,  activities, and spectrum usagebecause of the wide range of eess applications of microwave radiometry, numerous spacebased missions are currently in operation or are planned for the near future. table 2.2 provides a detailed list of such missions, including their planned spectrum usage and intended applications of environmental data records. it is evident that microwave radiometry is widely used by the space agencies of the united states and other nations for sensing both atmospheric and surface properties and that passive microwave radiometry will continue to be widely 39 r. saunders, ﬁuse of microwave radiances for weather forecasting,ﬂ presentation at the 24th annual space frequency coordination group meeting, france, september 20, 2004.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.54 table 2.1 summary of common geophysical products and the microwave frequencies used for their measurement in current, future, and proposed missions, including the potential impact of those measurements from radio frequency interference based on the currently known radio frequency environmentenvironmental data record role and significanceearth explorationsatellite service passive microwave frequencies (ghz):summary of radio frequency interference (rfi) potential1.46.810.718/192337506089150183ocean products sea surface salinityglobal ocean circulation/heat exchange1.4 high: impact from outofband (oob) emissions and adjacent emissionssea surface temperaturenumerical weather prediction (nwp), heat exchange, storm tracking and forecasting, climate operations6.8 moderate over ocean: no frequency allocationsea surface windsnwp, storm tracking, operations10.7 sea18.723.8 (sea)37 moderatelow: over ocean, some potential for rfi at 10.7 ghzsea ice concentrationclimate, operations18.737 low: higher frequencies and remote locationssea ice ageclimate, operations18.737 low: higher frequencies and remote locations atmospheric products temperature profilenwp, storm forecasting, climate5060 moderatelow: potential for rfi due to spectrumsharing rules at 5557moisture profilenwp, storm forecasting, climate23.8506089150 166183moderate: collision avoidance radars at 24 ghzintegrated waternwp, clouds, climate23.8 moderate: collision avoidance radars at 24 ghzcloud liquid waterclouds, storms18.723.837 moderatelow: slightly reduced sensitivity to collision avoidance radarscloud ice water storms, climate89150 166183low: higher frequenciesprecipitationoperations, climate10.718.7375056150 166183 moderatehigh: 10.7 ghz over landšespecially europeland parameters soil moistureclimate, nwp forecasting1.46.810.718.7 high: over land with 1.4 ghz oob emissions and adjacent emissions and no allocations for 6.8 ghzsnow water equivalentclimate, nwp, forecasting18.723.837 moderatelow: some sensitivity to collision avoidance radars (over land)surface typeclimate 37 89150 low: higher frequenciesnote: additional detail on earth explorationsatellite service parameters related to this table is provided in appendix e. in the columns ﬁearth explorationsatellite service passive microwave frequenciesﬂ and ﬁsummary of rfi potential,ﬂ red indicates high rfi potential, yellow indicates moderate rfi potential, and green indicates low rfi potential. the colors in between (redyellow and yellowgreen) indicate moderatehigh and moderatelow rfi potential.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 55table 2.1 summary of common geophysical products and the microwave frequencies used for their measurement in current, future, and proposed missions, including the potential impact of those measurements from radio frequency interference based on the currently known radio frequency environmentenvironmental data record role and significanceearth explorationsatellite service passive microwave frequencies (ghz):summary of radio frequency interference (rfi) potential1.46.810.718/192337506089150183ocean products sea surface salinityglobal ocean circulation/heat exchange1.4 high: impact from outofband (oob) emissions and adjacent emissionssea surface temperaturenumerical weather prediction (nwp), heat exchange, storm tracking and forecasting, climate operations6.8 moderate over ocean: no frequency allocationsea surface windsnwp, storm tracking, operations10.7 sea18.723.8 (sea)37 moderatelow: over ocean, some potential for rfi at 10.7 ghzsea ice concentrationclimate, operations18.737 low: higher frequencies and remote locationssea ice ageclimate, operations18.737 low: higher frequencies and remote locations atmospheric products temperature profilenwp, storm forecasting, climate5060 moderatelow: potential for rfi due to spectrumsharing rules at 5557moisture profilenwp, storm forecasting, climate23.8506089150 166183moderate: collision avoidance radars at 24 ghzintegrated waternwp, clouds, climate23.8 moderate: collision avoidance radars at 24 ghzcloud liquid waterclouds, storms18.723.837 moderatelow: slightly reduced sensitivity to collision avoidance radarscloud ice water storms, climate89150 166183low: higher frequenciesprecipitationoperations, climate10.718.7375056150 166183 moderatehigh: 10.7 ghz over landšespecially europeland parameters soil moistureclimate, nwp forecasting1.46.810.718.7 high: over land with 1.4 ghz oob emissions and adjacent emissions and no allocations for 6.8 ghzsnow water equivalentclimate, nwp, forecasting18.723.837 moderatelow: some sensitivity to collision avoidance radars (over land)surface typeclimate 37 89150 low: higher frequenciesnote: additional detail on earth explorationsatellite service parameters related to this table is provided in appendix e. in the columns ﬁearth explorationsatellite service passive microwave frequenciesﬂ and ﬁsummary of rfi potential,ﬂ red indicates high rfi potential, yellow indicates moderate rfi potential, and green indicates low rfi potential. the colors in between (redyellow and yellowgreen) indicate moderatehigh and moderatelow rfi potential.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.56 table 2.2 past, current, future, and proposed operational and scienti˚c earth explorationsatellite service missions providing critical operational data for weather forecasting and for military and civil operations in which the united states has participatedpast and current missionsfrequency (ghz)radio frequency interference (rfi) experiencesmeasurementsesmr (2 past)19.35minimum observedsea icesmmr (2 past)6.6, 10.76 and 10 ghz, landocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationnems/scams (2 past)23.8, 31.4, 5060 (3 channels)atmospheric temperature profiletovs (msu) (1 current, 9 past)5060minimum observedatmospheric temperature profilessm/i (3 current, 4 past)19.35, 22.2, 37, 85.523 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radarocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationssm/t (3 current, 5 past)5060, 89minimumatmospheric temperature profilessm/t2 (4 current, 1 past)89, 150, 183.31minimumatmospheric moisture profileamsua (4 current)23.8, 31.4, 5060, 8923 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radaratmospheric temperature profileamsub (4 current)89, 150, 183.31significant rfi from nearby spacecraft downlinksatmospheric moisture profiletopex (tmr) (1 past)18, 21, 37minimumwave mode product correction for ocean altimetrytmi (1 current)10.7, 19.35, 23.8, 37, 8510 ghz, japanprecipitation, ocean wind speed, sst*, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid waterjason1 jmr (1 current)18.7 23.8, 34minimumwave mode product correction for ocean altimetryhsb (1 current)89, 150, 183.31minimummoisture profileamsre (1 current)6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 36.5, 896 and 10 ghz, landocean wind speed, global sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationamsr (1 past)6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 50.3, 52.8, 36.5, 896 and 10 ghz, landocean wind speed, global sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationwindsat (1 current)6.8, 10.7, 18.8, 22, 376 ghz, land; 10 ghz, ocean and land; 18 ghz, oceanocean wind vector, sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationssm/is (2 current)19.35, 22.2, 37, 5060, 91.6, 150, 183.3123 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radarocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and moisture profile, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationmhs (2 current)89, 150, 183.31minimumatmospheric moisture profilemls (1 current)115.3122.0, 177.2206.2, 221.4240.5, 606.7667.5, 2481.92506.0minimumatmospheric trace speciesjason2 amr (1 current)18.7, 23.8, 34minimumwater vapor corrections for altimetryfuture missionsfrequency (ghz)rfi susceptibilitymeasurementssmos (miras) (1)šest. 20091.4high impacts from outofband (oob) emissionssoil moisture, sea surface salinityaquarius (1)šest. 20101.4high impacts from oob emissionssea surface salinityamsr2 (gcomw) (1)šest. 20116.9, 7.3, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 376 ghz rfi mitigationocean wind speed, sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationgmi (gpm) (2)šest. 201310.7, 23.8, 37, 89, 166, 183.3110 ghzšeuropean unionocean wind speed, precipitation, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, sst*atms (npoess) (3)šest. 201322.2, 31, 5060, 89, 166, 183.3123 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radaratmospheric temperature and moisture profilesmap (1)šest. 20131.4high impacts from oob emissions soil moisture and freezethaw for weather and water cycle processesmis (npoess) (3)šest. 201667, 10.7, 18, 23, 37, 5060, 89, 166, 183.316 ghz, rfi mitigation; 10 ghzšeuropean unionocean wind vector, sst, atmospheric moisture and temperature profile, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid waterssm/is (3)šest. 200919.35, 22.2, 37, 5060, 91.6, 150, 183.3123 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radarocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and water profile, precipitation, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid waterspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved. 57table 2.2 past, current, future, and proposed operational and scienti˚c earth explorationsatellite service missions providing critical operational data for weather forecasting and for military and civil operations in which the united states has participatedpast and current missionsfrequency (ghz)radio frequency interference (rfi) experiencesmeasurementsesmr (2 past)19.35minimum observedsea icesmmr (2 past)6.6, 10.76 and 10 ghz, landocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationnems/scams (2 past)23.8, 31.4, 5060 (3 channels)atmospheric temperature profiletovs (msu) (1 current, 9 past)5060minimum observedatmospheric temperature profilessm/i (3 current, 4 past)19.35, 22.2, 37, 85.523 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radarocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationssm/t (3 current, 5 past)5060, 89minimumatmospheric temperature profilessm/t2 (4 current, 1 past)89, 150, 183.31minimumatmospheric moisture profileamsua (4 current)23.8, 31.4, 5060, 8923 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radaratmospheric temperature profileamsub (4 current)89, 150, 183.31significant rfi from nearby spacecraft downlinksatmospheric moisture profiletopex (tmr) (1 past)18, 21, 37minimumwave mode product correction for ocean altimetrytmi (1 current)10.7, 19.35, 23.8, 37, 8510 ghz, japanprecipitation, ocean wind speed, sst*, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid waterjason1 jmr (1 current)18.7 23.8, 34minimumwave mode product correction for ocean altimetryhsb (1 current)89, 150, 183.31minimummoisture profileamsre (1 current)6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 36.5, 896 and 10 ghz, landocean wind speed, global sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationamsr (1 past)6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 50.3, 52.8, 36.5, 896 and 10 ghz, landocean wind speed, global sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationwindsat (1 current)6.8, 10.7, 18.8, 22, 376 ghz, land; 10 ghz, ocean and land; 18 ghz, oceanocean wind vector, sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationssm/is (2 current)19.35, 22.2, 37, 5060, 91.6, 150, 183.3123 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radarocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and moisture profile, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationmhs (2 current)89, 150, 183.31minimumatmospheric moisture profilemls (1 current)115.3122.0, 177.2206.2, 221.4240.5, 606.7667.5, 2481.92506.0minimumatmospheric trace speciesjason2 amr (1 current)18.7, 23.8, 34minimumwater vapor corrections for altimetryfuture missionsfrequency (ghz)rfi susceptibilitymeasurementssmos (miras) (1)šest. 20091.4high impacts from outofband (oob) emissionssoil moisture, sea surface salinityaquarius (1)šest. 20101.4high impacts from oob emissionssea surface salinityamsr2 (gcomw) (1)šest. 20116.9, 7.3, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 376 ghz rfi mitigationocean wind speed, sst, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitationgmi (gpm) (2)šest. 201310.7, 23.8, 37, 89, 166, 183.3110 ghzšeuropean unionocean wind speed, precipitation, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid water, sst*atms (npoess) (3)šest. 201322.2, 31, 5060, 89, 166, 183.3123 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radaratmospheric temperature and moisture profilesmap (1)šest. 20131.4high impacts from oob emissions soil moisture and freezethaw for weather and water cycle processesmis (npoess) (3)šest. 201667, 10.7, 18, 23, 37, 5060, 89, 166, 183.316 ghz, rfi mitigation; 10 ghzšeuropean unionocean wind vector, sst, atmospheric moisture and temperature profile, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid waterssm/is (3)šest. 200919.35, 22.2, 37, 5060, 91.6, 150, 183.3123 ghz rfi possible from vehicle anticollision radarocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and water profile, precipitation, integrated water vapor, cloud liquid watercontinuedspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.58 proposed missionsfrequency (ghz)rfi susceptibilitymeasurementspath (1)microwave array spectrometerminimumhighfrequency, allweather temperature and humidity sounds for weather forecasting and sea surface temperaturesclp (1)ku and xband radars; k and kaband radiometerpossible rfi experience similar to that of windsatsnow accumulation for freshwater availabilitynote: sst (*) indicates reduced capability in colder regions (less than about 12°c). the number of each type of eess radiometer currently in operation, planned for operation, or proposed for operation is included in parentheses with the listing of its u.s.based associated missions. acronyms are defined in appendix f. in the column ﬁradio frequency interference (rfi) experiences,ﬂ/ﬂrfi susceptibility,ﬂ red indicates high rfi potential, yellow indicates moderate rfi potential, and green indicates low rfi potential. the colors in between (redyellow and yellowgreen) indicate moderatehigh and moderatelow rfi potential.table 2.2 continuedspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.59the earth explorationsatellite serviceemployed. of particular note are the soil moisture ocean salinity (smos) (launch: 2009) and aquarius (estimated launch: 2010) missions, which will provide the rst demonstration of spacebased sensing of sea salinity; the soil moisture active passive mission (estimated launch: 2013 or 2014) for the measurement of global soil moisture; and the npoess sensor suite (including the advanced technology microwave sounder [atms] and the microwave imager/sounder system currently being designed) that will provide a wide range of edr records. the rst u.s. passive microwave radiometer missions date back to 1972. since then, eess has continued to ˚y passive microwave radiometers with everincreasing capability and covering an expanding range of frequencies. of note is the current interest in measurements of 1.4 ghz and 6.8 ghz brightness temperature to support sea surface salinity and soil moisture measurements, critical to the continued improvement of weather and climate measurements as described in §2.1, with additional background supplied in appendix e. in table 2.2, the number of each type of eess radiometer currently in operation is included in parentheses with the listing of its u.s.based associated missions. there is currently a total of 30 missions. including international missions in which the united states is not involved, the total number is more than 44 missions. planned and proposed missions include at least 18 more spacebased passive radiometers. the complete list of missions represents substantial national and international investment in passive radiometry. table 2.2 also indicates that several of these new and existing measurements are either currently being impacted by rfi or are highly likely to be impacted by rfi in the near future. a description of the rfi problem at each of the frequencies indicated in either red or yellow in table 2.2 can be found in §2.5.finding: scientic advances have required increasing measurement precision by passive radio and microwave facilities in order to obtain more accurate and thus more useful data sets. this need for precision will continue to increase.finding: large investments have been made in satellite sensors and sensor networks and in major radio observatories. new facilities costing billions of dollars are under construction or are being designed. finding: radio frequency interference threatens the scientic understanding of key variables in earth™s natural system, now and in the future.2.4 current and future nonspacebased  activities and spectrum usagealthough satellites are now the primary data source driving global numerical weather prediction models, over the united states, groundbased meteorological spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century60sensors and radiosondes launched at 12 hour intervals from 80 sites have long been the primary source. however, the everincreasing power of computers leaves nwp models without data between radiosonde sites and launch times, thus limiting models™ forecasting capabilities. moreover, the annual cost per radiosonde launch site is approximately $200,000. to address the problem of cost and sampling density in time and space, lessexpensive, continuously operating autonomous groundbased microwave sensors are being developed to augment or replace parts of the present u.s. radiosonde network and thereby to reduce the number of potentially serious unexpected meteorological events that can arise between sample times and places.40 moreover, such cloudpenetrating sensors can help calibrate those spaceborne sensors observing water vapor and cloud water content, parameters that vary so rapidly in time and space that they are difcult to validate. because of their reliability, economy, and simplicity of deployment, as well as the value of their observations, groundbased radiometers are being implemented in networks in korea, china, and europe and are included in a current request for proposals by the national weather service. operational installations are being considered for oil platforms in the gulf of mexico. groundbased radiometers were also deployed around the 2008 olympics site in beijing to improve shortterm weather forecasts.groundbased radiometers can also continuously and locally generate valuable predictive meteorological parameters such as connective available potential energy (cape), kindex, total of totals index (tti), lifted index (li), and a dozen or so other indices, many of which are associated with severe and suddenonset weather events. an example of a current program for the monitoring of global change is the u.s. department of energy™s atmospheric radiation monitoring (arm) program, which employs groundbased uplooking passive microwave sensors to characterize the global radiation budget and clouds. these unattended systems continuously measure water vapor proles and cloud liquid water accurately and inexpensively, relative to radiosondes. moreover, they provide an integrated measurement that is thought to be more representative of the largescale behavior of the atmosphere than are the measurements returned by radiosondes. tropospheric water vapor proles are measured using a number of bands near the water vapor lines at 22.235 or 183.310 ghz. bands near the 22.235 ghz water vapor line yield integrated precipitable water vapor (pwv). for 15 years, arm has used microwave radiometers installed in the tropical western pacic and at locations up to 70 degrees north latitude for fundamental measurements of atmospheric water vapor. these obser40 knupp, r. ware, p. herzegh, f. vandenberghe, j. vivekanandan, and e. westwater, ﬁgroundbased radiometric proling during dynamic weather conditions,ﬂ journal of atmospheric and oceanic technology, 26(6):10571073 (2009). spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.61the earth explorationsatellite servicevations have also helped to calibrate radiosondes around the world for weather forecasting and the generation of climate records.2.5 the impact of radio frequency interference on  earth explorationsatellite service observationsmicrowave radiometers are, by necessity, extremely sensitive radio receivers and are thus very sensitive to radiation from communications, navigation, and other active radio systems. most radiometers measure total power (brightness temperature) and have no means for distinguishing between naturally emitted thermal noise and the noiselike signals produced by other sources. interference can be detected if it is strong enough to be clearly distinguishable from the natural variations in scene brightness temperatures. lower amounts of interference (i.e., comparable to the geophysical brightness variability) are much more difcult to identify and separate and can therefore compromise the accuracy of the retrieved geophysical information. although efforts are underway to enhance the abilities of radiometers to detect and suppress interference (as described in chapter 4), such improvements generally increase costs, data rates, and power consumption while achieving only limited success because of the indistinguishable components of the interference. the following discussion details the process by which humanmade sources interfere with radiometry. it presents both specic examples of rfi impacts on earth observations and justied concerns about future sources of interference.introduction to the problem of radio frequency interference:  immediate impacts on eesseess radiometers measure the naturally generated background brightness temperature (noise power) of earth. since the received power is very small, these radiometers are, by necessity, extremely sensitive instruments. this complicates their design because the background noise temperature that is being measured is so faint that interference power levels of far less than even 10œ12 w can cause signicant measurement errors. additionally, for spaceborne instruments, the spot size for each individual observation is typically between 12 and 100 km, although smaller spot sizes exist: amsre™s spatial resolution is 5 km at 89 ghz. as a result of these spot sizes, pinpointing the precise location of interferers is extremely difcult after launch.signals emitted from transmitters operating at frequencies within or adjacent to the passbands of eess receivers (hereafter to include not only groundbased but also airborne radiometers for earth observation) are the primary causes of radio frequency interference in eess measurements. in many cases the interference is spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century62due to spurious or outofband (oob) emissions from transmitters operating in bands allocated for other radio services rather than due to signals that are intentionally transmitted in eess bands. in yet other cases (for example, rfi observed within the 14001427 mhz eess band), it is not always clear whether inadequate ltering within the eess system or oob or spurious emissions from active users are the cause, although it is noted that most eess systems employ stateoftheart ltering technology that cannot easily be improved. spurious and oob transmitter emissions from commercial devices typically are neither precisely controlled during manufacture nor essential to the devices™ intended purposes. the ultimate impact of such emissions on a specic eess geophysical measurement depends on the sensitivity of the geophysical parameter to changes in brightness temperature, as discussed in §2.2. the high radiometric accuracy and sensitivity achieved by current eess systems result in commensurately high sensitivity to rfi that can cause errors in the retrieved geophysical parameters. the maximum signalpower contamination that can exist without impacting the information contained in the eess measurement has been derived by eess scientists for each of the eess allocated bands and is documented in international telecommunication unionradio (itur) recommendation rs.10292. even when false measurements due to rfi are detected and eliminated, forecasts are degraded by the loss of data. appendix c provides a derivation of the errors in eess measurements of brightness temperature caused by a collection of anthropogenic sources within the eess radiometer antenna footprint and frequency passband. tables 2.1 and 2.2 also provide qualitative assessments of the rfi threat at particular frequencies and for particular missions, respectively.the rfi threat is especially serious at frequencies lower than 50 ghz, where the atmosphere is largely transparent to radio waves and where frequency bands are widely used by eess to provide information about environmental parameters. in the rst attempts at direct radiance assimilation,41 only oceanic observations at such transparent frequencies were assimilated into nwp models because the cold microwave background signature of the ocean strongly contrasts with that of the atmosphere. assimilation of radiances over land at these frequencies was not attempted owing to the relatively poor geophysical signature caused by the high emissivity of land. recently, though, it has been demonstrated that with increas41 direct radiance assimilation (sometimes just called radiance assimilation) involves the direct use of satellite brightnesstemperature measurements to drive the internal state of an environmental model (e.g., a numerical weather prediction model). now being widely adopted for forecasting purposes, this technique contrasts with the more established technique of performing a retrieval of an environmental parameter using the data. it is generally preferable to retrievals because it uses all available data to achieve the highest forecast accuracy. see, for example, l. phalippou, ﬁvariational retrieval of humidity prole, wind speed, and cloud liquidwater path with the ssm/i: potential for numerical weather prediction,ﬂ quarterly journal of the royal meteorological society, 122: 327355 (1996).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.63the earth explorationsatellite serviceingly accurate landsurface emission models, radiance assimilation at 23.8 and 31 ghz improves both forecasts and quality control of data from other bands. as a result, rfi as weak as 0.1 k or less can limit the use of these bands over land. a similar situation is anticipated with channels in the 1.4 ghz and 6 ghz bands, which are particularly sensitive to surface soil moisture. rfi below 10 ghz threatens to compromise or even eliminate the utility of these bands, which are unique in their ability to provide soil moisture information. since groundbased microwave radiometers are valuable for obtaining regionspecic temperature and humidity prole data on the lower atmosphere for both nowcasting (typically out to 6 hours) and forecasting, and because they have the unique capability of obtaining lowresolution proles of cloud liquid water, they are the instruments commonly used in urban areas and at airports where rfi is more likely. however, the tolerable interference levels are quite low for groundbased atmospheric sounding. for example, a 1 w isotropic transmitter at 1 km distance will contribute about 10 k of rfi to a typical uplooking microwave radiometer observing near the assemblage of oxygen lines centered at 60 ghz with a 15 cm antenna aperture, a 300 mhz bandpass lter, and 50 db antenna sidelobes near the horizon. for a groundbased radiometer, even a 1 k rfiinduced perturbation in a typical sevenchannel oxygen band temperatureproling radiometer can yield an unacceptable 1.4 k error in the retrieved temperature prole. in practice, root mean square (rms) instrument errors in oxygenband radiometer measurements are as low as 0.5 k (or lower), and the nominal tolerable rfi level for these systems is 0.05 k. increasing the number of observation channels in this wave band can mitigate, but not remove, the effect of narrowband rfi.evidence of impact of radio frequency interference on eess observationsthe corruption of eess data products by radio frequency interference, including impacts on eess observations made solely within protected portions of the radio spectrum, has been extensively noted. typical examples of interference within protected bands and nearby bands follow.protected bandslband (1.4001.427 ghz) observations at 1.4 ghz over land by groundbased and airborne systems in support of remote soil moisture and sea surface salinity estimation are often compromised by what can be identied as oob emissions from active systems. total inband emissions must remain below approximately œ140 dbm from 14001427 mhz to ensure that anthropogenic (i.e., humanmade) emissions do not in˚uence sss observations to more than a fraction of the necessary stability of 0.05 k that is spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century64required to obtain 0.2 psu (practical salinity unit) sss measurement uncertainty.42 the rfi contamination that can be tolerated for sm measurement is greater than that for salinity by approximately an order of magnitude; however, the density of transmitters over land is far greater than over ocean. accordingly, slightly higher rfi contamination levels can be tolerated for 1.4 ghz sm measurements. but in both cases, the maximum tolerable interference level is lower than typical inband interference from oob emissions by legal radar transmissions in adjacent spectrum (e.g., at 1.385 ghz). normal oob emission limitations determined by the applicable oob emission mask at 1 percent away from the center bandwidth (e.g., 1400 vs. 1385 mhz) are only slightly below œ40 dbc. using this value, signals within the adjacent eess band arising from radars within the radiometer antenna footprint can easily exceed the maximum allowed emission level (set at about œ140 dbm; see appendix d).43 while few spacebased lband observations have been obtained to date, airborne and groundbased sensors have provided evidence of rfi corruption at levels that prevent geophysical measurements. a recent summary of data measured within the 14001427 mhz protected band in april 2005 using the emirad lband radiometer of the technical university of denmark showed signicant daily changes in the rfi environment. the percentage of emirad ocean observations impacted by rfi were as low as 1 to 2 percent on most days, but reached 40 to 50 percent in some cases. repeated occurrences of rfi using the electronicallyscanned thinned array radiometer (estar) lband airborne eess hybrid syntheticandreal aperture radiometer in the protected 14001427 mhz band have been noted in ˚ights over the eastern shore region of virginia in 1999 and over oklahoma city, oklahoma, in 1997.44 these observations have shown clear instances of rfi (figures 2.13 and 2.14). a key concern at lband is the possible in˚uence of longrange air surveillance radar systems in nearby bands. appendix d presents estimates for the rfi impact on future highquality soil moisture measurements made by a spacebased lband 42 the stability gure of 0.05 k cited here is a conservative estimate of what is needed to achieve 0.2 psu based on cold water temperatures. d.m. levine, ﬁaquarius: an instrument to monitor sea surface salinity from space,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 45(7): 20402050 (july 2007), proposes a somewhat higher stability gure of 0.13 k based on measurements averaged over a 7 day window. 43 n. skou, s. misra, s. sobjaerg, j. balling, and s. kristensen, ﬁrfi as experienced during preparations for the smos mission,ﬂ proceedings of 2008 ursi general assembly, chicago, ill., august 916, 2008.44 d. le vine, ﬁestar experience with rfi at lband and implications for future passive microwave remote sensing from space,ﬂ proceedings of the 2002 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium. (igarss), toronto, ontario, canada, 2002, pp. 847849; d. le vine and m. haken, ﬁrfi at lband in synthetic aperture radiometers,ﬂ proceedings of the 2003 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (igarss), toulouse, france, 2003, pp. 17421744.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.65the earth explorationsatellite servicefigure 213ar01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 213br01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 2.13 an example of interference to an airborne eess radiometer system operating at 1413 mhz from airtraf˚c radar operating in adjacent segments of spectrum that is possibly due to a combination of spurious emissions from the radar and limitations of adjacent signal rejection in the eess radiometer. (a) image from the electronicallyscanned thinned array radiometer (estar) showing the effects of radio frequency interference (rfi) at 1413 mhz in the vicinity of richmond, virginia. the small vertical stripes are artifacts in the image due to strong rfi. (b) the signal is the output of the total power channel. these data were recorded at the location of the arrow in part (a). source: d. le vine, ﬁestar experience with rfi at lband and implications for future passive microwave remote sensing from space,ﬂ in ieee int. geosci. and remote sens. symp. proc. (igarss), toronto, ontario, canada, 2002, pp. 847849, figures 1 and 2. © 2002 ieee.abspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century66figure 214ar01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 214br01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.14 (a) electronicallyscanned thinned array radiometer (estar) image at 1413 mhz from the southern great plains experiment (sgp97). the vertical lines west of oklahoma city are distortions due to radio frequency interference (rfi). (b) example of rfi in the vicinity of oklahoma city during sgp97. the signal represents total power and was recorded west of the arrow in part (a). source: d. le vine, ﬁestar experience with rfi at lband and implications for future passive microwave remote sensing from space,ﬂ in ieee int. geosci. and remote sens. symp. proc. (igarss), toronto, ontario, canada, 2002, pp. 847849, figures 3 and 4. © 2002 ieee. abspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.67the earth explorationsatellite serviceradiometer, assuming various spurious emission levels at the eess radiometer at 1413 mhz (the center of this eess frequency allocation).45 the results indicate that over the united states where the density of radars is high, rfi would be a signicant problem. synthetic aperture interferometric radiometers (sairs) have a wide eld of view that, relative to real aperture antennas, increases their vulnerability to strong interference from outside the synthesized antenna beam. such persistent rfi is a cause for concern for planned spacebased eess systemsšfor example, the european space agency™s smos sensor.in both figure 2.13 and figure 2.14, it is unclear if the observed rfi was dominated by spurious emissions that fell within the eess band or by limitations of the eess passband ltering of emissions in adjacent channels. regardless, these data demonstrate the need for the mitigation of interference and/or the regulation of oob emissions radiated in adjacent bands, particularly in lband. since the rejection of highpower radar signals in adjacent spectrum is critical to eess, highperformance frontend lters and other rfi mitigation schemes are essential and have been developed by the eess community. however, the implementation of ltering schemes, if they are able to suppress rfi to manageable levels, also increases the eess measurement uncertainty, reduces system sensitivity, increases eess system cost, and impacts the geophysical data availability. accordingly, there are practical limitations to minimizing band separation between eess and active services that need to be considered in developing spectrum usage policy. in addition, in order to design effective rfi mitigation for eess or prescribe equitable spectrum policy, the interfering signal parameters need to be precisely known. however, only limited information about interfering signals is currently available.xband (10.610.7 ghz) passive microwave observations at xband are critical for measurements of sea surface winds (useful for weather prediction and storm tracking) and precipitation (useful for climate and weather monitoring). they are also important for the correction of the effects of land cover on lower frequency (e.g., 1.4 ghz) measurements of soil moisture (useful for climate and weather forecasting). within xband, only the subband from 10.6810.70 ghz is protected in the united states and globally for eess by the itu, although the wider (and more useful) 10.610.7 ghz subband has a shared primary allocation within the united states and globally. in addition, observations are also often made including the adjacent subband 10.710.8 ghz, or including even wider subbands on an asavailable basis with active services. an example of the use of a wider total band is the naval research laboratory™s windsat sensor, which uses 10.5510.85 ghz. 45 ibid.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century68currently, xband passive microwave imagery over north america appears to be free of obvious rfi from anthropogenic emissions, as illustrated by the example in figure 2.15 from amsre. the eess measurements in this band required the use of the full allocated bandwidth of 100 mhz (10.610.7 ghz). it is important to note that all but the top 20 mhz of the eess allocated band is shared with the fixed service (fs; pointtopoint transmissions, such as radio relay towers); thus, based on figure 2.15, it appears that u.s. frequency assignments have avoided the 10.610.68 ghz segment, which has been benecial to eess. however, as the need for spectrum for active services continues to expand, there is concern that signicant usage of the 10.610.68 ghz band (currently shared with fs) could lead to a scenario at xband that would resemble the worsening rfi environment at cband observed between 1987 and 2003 (depicted in figure 2.23 later in this chapter). a comparable degradation at xband would be highly detrimental to eess measurements and their associated data products. similar concerns also exist at kband (18.618.8 ghz), wherein eess measurements have begun to display occasional rfi, as can be observed in windsat imagery (see figures 2.19 and 2.20 later in this chapter).figure 215r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.15 brightness temperature as measured by the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) at 10.6 ghz with horizontal polarization over the united states. this observation appears to be free from interference. (l. li, e. njoku, e. im, p. chang, and k. st. german, ﬁfrequency interference over the u.s. in aqua amsre data,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 42(2): 380390 (february 2004), from figure 1.) amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.69the earth explorationsatellite servicerfi in global 10.7 ghz brightnesstemperature measurements was rst detected by the tmi radiometer in 1997 during observations over both urban and remote locations of japan. subsequently, amsre, launched in may 2002, showed substantial rfi in several european locations that were not observable by tmi due to its nearequatorial orbit (figures 2.16 and 2.17). currently, about 2 percent of the land area of europe is unavailable to amsre for measurements at 10.7 ghz, and an unknown, larger fraction may be adversely affected below the threshold of obvious detectability. however, the looming problem of rfi at xband is not conned to land areas. data at 10.7 ghz, such as those provided by windsat and amsre for sst, ocean wind, and maritime precipitation measurements, often experience substantial rfi from geostationary transmitters operating immediately adjacent to the upper edge of the 10.7 ghz eess band segment. this maritime rfi is caused by downwardpropagating geosynchronous broadcast signals re˚ecting from the ocean surface into the antenna beam of the eess sensor. the rfi results in areas of the mediterranean sea, the eastern atlantic ocean north of the equator, and figure 2.16 passive microwave imagery from the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) on the nasa earth observing system aqua at 10.7 ghz over europe. strong emissions over the united kingdom and portions of italy are seen as saturated brightness temperatures (black spots). these areas, and nearby yellow and red areas in this example, cannot be used for the retrieval of geophysical parameters such as soil moisture, precipitation, and cloud water. amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com.figure 216r01628uneditable bitmapped imagespectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century70figure 217r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.17 expanded region of europe shown by the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) brightness temperatures at 10.65 ghz indicating the dependence of radio frequency interference (rfi) on political boundaries. rfi can be seen in england, italy, and belarus, whereas other countries appear to show none. these instances show the critical role of informed frequency managers and assigners within their respective jurisdictions for limiting impact between services of shared spectrum segments. amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com.the western atlantic off the coast of brazil being unavailable for sea surface wind, temperature, and heavy rain measurements, as shown in figure 2.18.46 southerly views of upwelling microwave brightness temperatures are typically measured by polarorbiting eess satellites in the descending phases of their orbits, so such rfi is typically observed in half of all such data over the mediterranean sea. the problem also manifests itself as rficorrupted calibration views of what should otherwise be cold space during portions of the windsat orbit. analysis of the windsat polarimetric channels has shown that signicant rfi is occurring within the subband 10.5510.85 ghz. based on earlier measurements 46 hotbird 4 channels 110 (10.71918 ghz), 111 (10.72713 ghz), and 112 (10.75754 ghz) are likely candidates.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.71the earth explorationsatellite servicefigure 218r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.18 example of radio frequency interference (rfi; areas in green and yellow) occurring at xband from oceanic reections of geosynchronous broadcasts in bands adjacent to those observed by the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre). in this example amsre is operating in the eess band 10.610.7 ghz and is experiencing perturbations higher than 40 k in measured brightness temperature during its descending phase. this level of rfi is far greater than approximately 0.2 k, the minimum level of perturbation that degrades environmental models that use sea surface temperature data derived from amsre. amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com.using smmr compared with recent measurements using windsat, strong xband rfi in europe and japan appears to be increasing over time. the xband channels of the airborne polarimetric scanning radiometer (psr) have also detected rfi over the united states, although to a lesser degree than at cband. the high resolution psr mapping capabilities permit pinpointing the location of sources of rfi, but only within limited data sets.finding: whereas most frequency regulations for active services are dened on local or regional bases, passive eess observations are global by nature. as a result, spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century72a high level of international cooperation is required to maintain and enforce passive allocations.kband (18.618.8 ghz) the 18.618.8 ghz band is a critical resource for eess that supports many operational environmental products, such as snow cover, sea surface wind speed, and soil moisture measurements. snow water equivalent measurements, which are increasingly important for water management, specically require the use of observations at a frequency near this band. thus there is a global primary allocation for eess at 18 ghz. evidence of rfi has been found in 18 ghz windsat spacebased observations, as shown in figure 2.19 for the paris and london metropolitan areas. sparse but recurring rfi at 18 ghz has been observed on nearly every continent, as shown in figure 2.20. as a result, scientists are concerned that increasing use of the spectrum near 18 ghz will increase rfi for windsat and other eess radiometers. kband (23.624.0 ghz) space and airborne radiometric observations of the weak water vapor resonance near 22.235 ghz are at risk owing to recent rule changes that allow automofigure 219r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.19 brightnesstemperature data from the windsat 18.7 ±45° channels (both left) and 18.7 r/lcp channels (both right) showing strong radio frequency interference over paris and london. courtesy of the u.s. naval research laboratory.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.73the earth explorationsatellite servicefigure 220ar01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 220br01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 220c&dr01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.20 cumulative analysis over a 5 year period of windsat 18.618.8 ghz horizontally polarized data indicates sparse occurrences of strong radio frequency interference impacting 18 ghz brightnesstemperature measurements over land: (a) north america, (b) europe, (c) central africa, and (d) southeast asia/oceania. courtesy of the u.s. naval research laboratory.abcdspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century74tive anticollision radar to operate within the bands from 22 to 27 ghz, despite the allocation of the 23.624.0 ghz band to the passive services by both the federal communications commission in the united states and itu globally. observations at 23.624.0 ghz and nearby bands provide the primary data used to estimate atmospheric integrated water vapor, an edr that drives important atmospheric modes related to severe weather within nwp models (see §2.1). for a typical vechannel, 22 ghz groundbased upwardlooking water vapor proling radiometer, 1 k of rfi in a channel near the center of the water vapor line can induce a 10 percent error in retrieved water vapor abundance in the lower and midlevel troposphere. this error is comparable to the current performance of such a current technology microwave proler, and the tolerable rfi level is therefore about 0.1 k. the tolerable rfi level near 31 ghz for total integrated (as opposed to proles of) water vapor/cloud liquid measurements within the midlatitude coastal environment is about 0.6 k on humid days. higher rfi levels of up to 1 k can be tolerated for observations of integrated liquid water in clouds and rain where the atmospheric signals are higher.to date, only little evidence of the impact of rfi at 23.624.0 ghz has been documented, partly because automobile radars are still quite new and not yet widespread. in spite of the nascent state of automotive radar, groundbased measurements within 23.624.0 ghz have shown the presence of such transmissions. this topic is discussed in further detail in the subsection below entitled ﬁpotential future radio frequency interference and its impact on eess observations.ﬂ finding: the rules for outofband and spurious emissions in the primary allocated earth explorationsatellite service (eess) bands (e.g., 14001427 mhz) do not provide adequate interference protection for eess purposes.the rules that pertain to the nding above are given in appendix d.unprotected band cband (6.27.5 ghz) current spacebased observations within cband, specically near 6.8 ghz, are used to measure global sea surface temperature and soil moisture. in addition, airborne observations in cband are used for highresolution sm mapping for research purposes. data from ˚oodprone areas in texas in 2007 have suggested that airborne mapping at cband may also be useful for ˚ood forecasting in disaster management. because there is no eess allocation within cband and this portion of the spectrum is heavily used by the fixed service, brightnesstemperature measurements at cband over land are currently considered observations of opportunity. the observed area can contain many sources of rfi that require mitigation spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.75the earth explorationsatellite servicein order for the data to be useful. simulated data based on current active spectrum usage have shown that frequency diversity can facilitate effective rfi mitigation in this spectral region. the careful design of receivers and retrieval algorithms can also help facilitate mitigation, but mitigation techniques applied to data from current spacebased radiometers are limited in their effectiveness. the nasa amsre and the windsat spaceborne radiometers have shown clear evidence of active use impacting cband eess measurements (see figure 2.21) over large portions of global land area. however, the smmr cband channel that operated from june 1978 to august 1987 showed little to no evidence of transmissions over north america (figure 2.22) in this eess band of opportunity. while the precise bands for these three instruments differ slightly, it has also been qualitatively observed in repeated airborne observations over central oklahoma in 1999 and 2006 using the same instrument (the psr/c airborne scanning radiometer) that obvious instances of rfi have tended to increase over time. the major increase in the active usage of cband spectrum occurring from 1987 to 2003 has reduced the ability to perform eess observations of opportunity over land. cband measurements from amsre and windsat currently provide critical sst products over ocean sufciently far from the coasts. ongoing improvements in maritime product accuracies, particularly in nearshore sea surface temperature measurements improved to 0.10.2 k accuracy, may thus become limited in the near future by rfi, even far out at sea.in the examples given in figures 2.21 and 2.22, amsre imagery illustrates the prevalence and growth of rfi to eess at cband. shortly after the launch of amsre aboard nasa™s aqua satellite in may 2002, it was discovered that the 6.9 ghz passes over land (both ascending and descending and in both v and h polarizations) exhibited anomalous brightnesstemperature (tb) ﬁhotspotsﬂ exceeding 310320 k that were clearly unrelated to natural surface emission. tb values also appeared elevated by several degrees over large areas relative to expected values. the rfi not only biased the soil moisture retrievals toward dryness, but caused the multiplechannel iterative algorithm used at launch to fail frequently. several orbits of data were analyzed, focusing on the united states where the problem appeared to be worst, to see if a simple brightnesstemperature index could be devised to detect rfi so that contaminated observations could be ignored. it was found that a simple rfi index could identify the major rfi locations, but lowlevel rfi covered very large areas and could not be unambiguously distinguished from natural geophysical signals. the amsre rfi was later analyzed globally using a more sophisticated set of indices and statistics.47 rfi was found at 6.9 ghz over 47 e.g. njoku, p. ashcroft, t.k. chan and l. li, ﬁglobal survey and statistics of radiofrequency interference in amsre land observations,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 43(5): 938947 (2005).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century76figure 222r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 221r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 2.21 (top panel) an example of interference to eess observations of opportunity at 6.925 ghz primarily from inband signals arriving via the sidelobes of the main antenna beam of fixed service transmitters in legal operation. passive microwave imagery at 6.9 ghz from amsre on the nasa eos aqua platform. the black spots represent high levels of anthropogenic emission that saturate the amsre radiometer primarily over regions of california and arizona. the red spots over most of the remaining areas of the united states represent contaminated brightnesstemperature measurements. (bottom panel) radio frequency interference (rfi) is displayed as the perturbation from a zero mean (natural emission) level. perturbations of up to 50 k are common across the united states, affecting more than 50 percent of the total land area with rfi greater than 5 k. the pervasive nature of the interference makes impossible the retrieval of soil moisture using amsre 6.9 ghz data. source (top and bottom): l. li, e. njoku, e. im, p. chang, and k. st. german, ﬁfrequency interference over the u.s. in aqua amsre data,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 42(2): 380390 (2004), from figure 8. amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.77the earth explorationsatellite servicefigure 2.22 an example of interference to eess observations of opportunity at 6.6 ghz. passive microwave imagery at 6.6 ghz from the scanning multichannel microwave radiometer (smmr) from (a) 1979 and (b) 1987, showing no noticeable brightness temperature from radio frequency interference (rfi). in contrast, passive microwave imagery from the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) on nasa earth observing system aqua from 2003 (c) and 2004 (d) shows substantial rfi. the black spots represent high levels of anthropogenic emission that saturate the amsre radiometer, primarily over regions of california and arizona. the red spots over most of the remaining areas of the united states represent contaminated brightnesstemperature measurements. amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com.figure 223r01628uneditable bitmapped imageacdblarge parts of the middle east, asia, and japan, and even sophisticated statistical procedures could not adequately distinguish rfi from the background of natural brightness variability, nor lter it out in postprocessing of the data.48 because the 6.9 ghz rfi was so prevalent and difcult to identify and mitigate over the united states, this instrument channel was subsequently ignored in the global amsre algorithm used for the production processing and data archiving of sm data. reliance was instead placed on the higherfrequency amsre channels that are less sensitive to sm. over those parts of europe and japan where the 10.7 ghz channels were also affected by rfi, no amsre soil moisture retrievals at all were possible. 48 ibid.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century78on a research basis (separate from the global production algorithm), it is still possible to use the 6.9 ghz brightness data for soil moisture retrieval over signicant rfifree global areas such as most of africa, south america, and australia. extensive analysis of amsre and windsat data provides a clear picture and plausible explanation for rfi at cband, but not in other parts of the spectrum. other rfi surveys have been inconclusive, tied to a single location, and/or have not been able to provide much insight regarding the global status of potential rfi to eess. the duty cycle, waveforms, emitter spatial distribution, transmitter power, and spectral utilization of the rfi need to be measured to effectively and optimally design rfi mitigation strategies into eess radiometer systems and to further develop equitable spectrum usage policies. 49 in short, inadequate data on spectrum usage exist. the federal communications commission™s (fcc™s) 2002 spectrum policy task force came to this same conclusion:more information, however, is needed in order to quantify and characterize spectrum usage more accurately so that the commission can adopt spectrum policies that take advantage of these spectrum white spaces. currently, no federal agency or other organization systematically measures temporal spectrum use.50finding: better utilization of the spectrum and reduced radio frequency interference for scientic as well as commercial applications are possible with better knowledge of actual spectrum usage. progress toward the goal of improved spectrum usage could be made by gathering more information through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. such monitoring would benet both the scientic community and commercial interests by allowing more efcient use of the spectrum for communications. interference mitigation at cband has been demonstrated on a limited basis and for particularly strong (and therefore relatively obvious) interference in airborne images of thermal emission at cband.51 the radiometer and algorithm were designed to detect spectral variations that were not of natural origin by tting the spectrum to a standard model, then rejecting channels that compromised the t 49 j.r. piepmeier, ﬁradio frequency survey of the 21cm wavelength (1.4 ghz) allocation for  passive microwave observing,ﬂ in proceedings of the 2003 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (igarss), toulouse, france, 2003, pp. 17391741; and presentation by dennis roberson, illinois institute of technology, to the committee on september 29, 2007, in irvine, california.50 federal communications commission, report of the spectrum policy task force, november 2002, p. 10.51 a.j. gasiewski, m. klein, a.yevgrafov, and v. leuskiy, ﬁinterference mitigation in passive microwave radiometry,ﬂ proceedings of the 2002 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (igarss), toronto, ontario, canada, june 2428, 2002.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.79the earth explorationsatellite serviceto this natural model. the techniques have proven effective at mitigating largeamplitude interference (figure 2.23). however, they provide no guarantee that interference of amplitudes on the order of the system noise level can be detected and mitigated. finding: there is currently inadequate protected spectrum in cband and xband for operational passive microwave observations of sea surface temperature, soil moisture, and ocean surface wind speed and direction.finding: while unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.finding: important scientic inquiry and applications enabled by the eess are signicantly impeded or precluded by radio frequency interference (rfi). such rfi figure 2.23 polarimetric scanning radiometer cband maps from a swath segment observed during sp99 on july 14, 1999, over central oklahoma: (a) raw calibrated brightness maps for front and back looks for four subbands and (b) interferencecorrected maps using a spectral subband algorithm (a.j. gasiewski, m. klein, a.yevgrafov, and v. leuskiy, ﬁinterference mitigation in passive microwave radiometry,ﬂ proceedings of the 2002 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium [igarss], toronto, ontario, canada, june 2428, 2002). amsre data are produced by remote sensing systems and sponsored by the nasa earth science measures discover project and the amsre science team. data are available at www.remss.com. figure 224r01628uneditable bitmapped imagebaspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century80has reduced the societal and scientic return of eess observatories and necessitates costly interference mitigation, which is often insufcient to prevent rfi damage.potential future radio frequency interference and its impact on  eess observationsultrawideband devices and anticollision radar (124 ghz)a major concern for future eess observations is the proliferation of ultrawideband (uwb) devices that radiate over wide bandwidths at low power, typically in the 210 ghz and 2227 ghz ranges. automotive collisionavoidance radars that employ the entire 2227 ghz range have recently been included on new vehicles and are becoming widespread. in particular, the fcc™s 2002 approval of the use of uwb devices in the 310.6 ghz band and of anticollision radar operation as part 15 devices near 24 ghz has alarmed the eess community.52,53 these sources produce broadband signals that resemble thermal noise, making them difcult to distinguish from natural emissions. the potential for largescale market penetration of such devices further exacerbates the problem, particularly if they are permitted to radiate across protected frequency bands (particularly in the protected 1.4001.427 ghz and 23.624.0 ghz bands). emissions from uwb sources in these protected spectral bands present a serious problem, and action will need to be taken to prevent such emissions and limit the numbers of such devices.scenarios involving rfi to eess systems from multiple lowlevel emitters within the passband and footprint of eess measurements must be analyzed on a cumulative basis as outlined in appendix c. in these scenarios the maximum output power of each transmitter and their number per square kilometer are critical factors in eess compatibility studies. examples include uwb at 6 ghz and pointtopoint transmitters near 57 ghz (see vband scenarios later in this section). a study analyzing the impact of losing the protected 23.624.0 ghz channel suggests that although the ideal level of rfi in the band is zero, 0.03 k might be established as its maximum permissible value, which is equivalent to œ126.84 dbm of rfi within a 500 mhz band.54 more serious is the fact that unless the rfi level is 10 k or more, the nwp applications cannot reliably ˚ag the data as 52 see the glossary in this report for a denition of a part 15 device.53 fcc press release, ﬁnew public safety applications and broadband internet access among uses envisioned by fcc authorization of ultrawideband technology,ﬂ february 12, 2002, available at http://www.fcc.gov/bureaus/engineeringtechnology/newsreleases/2002/nret0203.html; accessed january 7, 2010.54 s. english, assessment of the requirement for 23.624.0 ghz observations for weather forecasting, forecasting research technical report no. 440, exeter, u.k.: met ofce, 2006.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.81the earth explorationsatellite service erroneous, thereby degrading forecasts within and downstream of any regions where intermediatelevel rfi is present. such intermediatelevel interference is difcult to detect with any condence except in locations where its effects become extreme. since automobiles are nearly ubiquitous over land and especially within populated regions where forecasts have the greatest economic value, the problem is endemic to users who rely the most on forecast data. this nal point is sufcient to support the exclusion of all intended emissions near the protected eess band, consistent with the intent of the original regulation. in addition, there is great concern for the future of eess measurements of opportunity at cband. this band covers much of the spectral region commonly used by eess for measurements of sea surface temperature and soil moisture on an asavailable basis. these measurements are critical for accurate weather forecasting, severe weather prediction, and drought prediction, among other applications. the wide proliferation of lowlevel uwb devices within cband is a signicant concern of the eess operational and scientic communities (see appendix c for the density of interferers analysis). since rfi in eess operations is cumulative, there is no protection from the impact of a high density of lowlevel emitters resulting from the strong market penetration of unlicensed products. in these scenarios, all mitigation techniques for amsre and windsat data would be rendered useless, and important future cband observations would not be possible without mandatory bilateral mitigation strategies (as described in chapter 4 of this report).it is instructive to contrast the scenarios at cband for eess, where a large number of emitters contribute to rfi within a single pixel of amsre and windsat data (especially over populated areas), with the rfi scenario outlined in appendix d. in the latter case, the impact of rfi on eess measurements from one or more radars is considered. for cases where only a few highlevel emitters in adjacent bands are present (for example, in lband radar rfi), the measured brightness temperatures are increased by spurious and/or oob emissions. such emissions contribute directly to the maximum allowed inband emissions for eess; however, the rfi is the result of a single emitter rather than the cumulative effect of many inband emitters. although current regulationsšif enforcedšcould preclude the effects of cumulative inband emissions on eess systems operating in allocated bands (e.g. 1.4001.427 ghz and 10.610.7 ghz), they are largely ineffective in their present form in limiting oob and spurious emissions. in considering these scenarios, it should be noted that the present specications on oob and spurious emissions were established decades ago, before heavy use was made of bands adjacent to where critical eess measurements are now conducted and prior to major advances in microwave signal processing and ltering technology. considerations of new technologies must be made in reassessing the effects of and in regulating oob and spurious emissions.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century82groundbased atmospheric sounding (23.8 ghz, 31.5 ghz, 5060 ghz, 89 ghz, 183 ghz)groundbased microwave radiometers are being used increasingly for the temperature, humidity, and cloud liquid proles in the lower troposphere for both nowcasting and forecasting. thus, they are being incorporated into weather observing networks as a replacement and augmentation of the global radiosonde network. it is expected that rms instrument errors in oxygenband temperature proling radiometer measurements will be as low as 0.2 k (or lower) in the future and that the nominal tolerable rfi level for these systems will be 0.02 k. for a typical vechannel 22 ghz to 30 ghz upwardlooking water vapor proling radiometer, 1 k of rfi in a channel near the center of the 22.235 ghz water vapor line can induce a 10 percent error in retrieved water vapor abundance in the lower and midlevel troposphere. this error is comparable to the current performance of such a proler, and the tolerable rfi level is therefore about 0.1 k. it is expected, however, that the absolute accuracy of groundbased systems will increase as the models and instruments improve, possibly attaining an absolute accuracy of 0.2 mm of precipitable water vapor (pwv). since each millimeter of pwv produces approximately 1.4 k of signal at 23.8 ghz, rfi must be less than 0.03 k, assuming a maximum tolerable interference of 10 percent of the sensitivity of the instrument. higher rfi levels of up to 1 k can be tolerated for observations of integrated liquid water in clouds and rain. wideband anticollision radars are being licensed and produced in the 2226 ghz region of the 2230 ghz wave band, which spans the radio astronomy reserved quiet band at 23.624 ghz. these active sources are difcult to discriminate from thermal noise, even with elegant and costly detection methods, and are expected to be an everincreasing problem to groundbased water vapor (humidity) proling.groundbased radiometers receiving around 89 ghz are important in that they are used to discriminate between cloud liquid water and ice. the transitions between the iceliquidvapor phases of water drive the thermodynamic energy transport cycles of the atmosphere and are therefore important for monitoring and predicting weather. knowledge of these three phases is also critical to understanding planetary albedo and planetary radiative transfer, and therefore climate change and global warming, as well. there is a protected primary radio astronomy band at 8692 ghz, but as mentioned elsewhere in this report, it is difcult to enforce against intrusions by spurious and outofband transmissions. active technologies up to 110 ghz are being developed, in part due to military interest in and funding for active radars around 94 ghz. the growing availability of these highfrequency technologies in this wave band will undoubtedly result in problems from rfi for eess observations.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.83the earth explorationsatellite servicethe strong water vapor line centered at 183 ghz is observed for water vapor proling in dry climates such as highaltitude astronomical observatories and arctic and desert regions. because of the level of technology required at these high frequencies, little interference in this region is foreseen in the near future. other concernssst measurements at cband and xband (510 ghz) of particular future concern is rfi affecting continuous allweather microwave sea surface temperature measurements in littoral regions that are critical for severe storm forecasting and weather and climate studies (see figure 2.8). these measurements rely principally on observations at 510 ghz, which are generally sensitive to surface temperature changes while being insensitive to clouds. active services using spectrum adjacent to and within the eess allocation at 10.610.7 ghz can make sst measurements difcult or impossible at this band. uwb devices that radiate in the 210 ghz range could be particularly problematic in the future. it is also important to note that 10.610.68 ghz is shared with the fixed service, and in several areas worldwide, signicant interference has been measured and continues to increase. several eess satellites have improved on tmi™s 10 ghz measurements of sst by including observations of cband microwave brightness temperatures, typically near 6.8 ghz. these measurements specically improve the accuracy of allweather sst measurements in cold regions and are less prone to being affected by heavy clouds and precipitation. however, uncontaminated measurements of environmental parameters near 6 ghz are becoming more difcult to obtain owing to the high usage of the cband spectrum and the lack of any eess allocation adequate to support sst measurements. while the problem of contamination of 510 ghz sst measurements exists over all of the global oceans, it is particularly an issue in littoral regions where severe weather is economically important and population density (including ship trafc) is high (see also §2.1).vband (5064 ghz) a number of currently operating spacebased instruments use the atmospheric oxygen absorption band (5064 ghz) to estimate proles of atmospheric temperature and moisture. these measurements are central to nwp, severe weather forecasting, and climate analysis. international frequency allocations provide a shared ﬁprimaryﬂ status to eess in the 57.059.3 ghz range, and these frequencies are currently used by several spacebased radiometers, including the advanced microwave sounding unit and the special sensor microwave imager/sounder. both of these sensors operate on multiple satellites to provide full global coverage every few hours (see table 2.2). amsu sensors operating in the 5059 ghz band may spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century84be the single most important data source enabling useful global weather forecasts up to 7 days in advance. in response to a growing interest in the active use of this part of the spectrum, eess scientists have begun analyzing the potential for future interference to remote sensing measurements at vband. the wide bandwidth available and small device sizes that can be manufactured make this potentially fertile ground for commercial interests.55 a recent fcc notice of public rule making (nprm) requested an allowance for increased power emission levels for sources operating within 5764 ghz, which includes the ituprotected 57.059.3 ghz portion used for weatherrelated sensing by many satellites and weather forecasting services.56 unfortunately, the fcc nprm included no analysis of the potential impact of these increased power levels on essential eess passive measurements from amsu or related instruments, even though it is currently envisioned that wireless systems operating near 60 ghz will become ubiquitous consumer devices for applications such as local dvd broadcasts and personal networking. while atmospheric absorption limits the range of active users™ transmissions, attenuation from the surface to the top of the atmosphere is not complete (as shown in figure 1.2). a sufciently high spatial density of lowpower emitters on the ground can affect spaceborne microwave observations. members of the eess passive community raised this issue in comments led in response to the fcc™s nprm, and the fcc™s decision is still forthcoming as of the time of this writing.57 the community is also interacting with ieee standards organizations to determine the possible impact of such wireless systems on future eess observations.58it is clear that rfi degradation of eess measurements and weather forecasting services appears to be likely if widespread unlicensed transmissions in these bands begin. consideration should be given to limiting the strength and density of transmitters in this band (see appendix c) in order to address the concerns of eess. it may well be that no practical limit exists if such devices are sold as unlicensed 55 b. bosco, ﬁemerging commercial applications using the 60 ghz band,ﬂ ieee wireless and microwave technology conference (wamicon) 2006, proceedings; b. razavi, ﬁgadgets gab at 60 ghz,ﬂ ieee spectrum, february 2008.56 in the matter of revision of the commission™s rules regarding operation in the 5764 ghz band, notice of proposed rulemaking, 22 fcc rcd 10505 (2007).57 ieee geoscience and remote sensing society, ﬁcomments to the proposed revision of the commission™s rules regarding operation in the 5764 ghz band,ﬂavailable at http://fjallfoss.fcc.gov/prod/ecfs/retrieve.cgi?nativeorpdf=pdf&iddocument=6519741794; accessed june 9, 2009.58 it is noted that while considerable resources are often available to be applied toward legal lings by active users of the spectrum, the nongovernmental scientic community has had little or no nancial support for pursuing such legal matters. virtually all responses from the nongovernmental eess and ras communities to nprms are the result of either voluntary efforts (in the case of university personnel) or are in direct reaction to threats to the viability of the passive services (in the case of industry personnel).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.85the earth explorationsatellite serviceand thus potentially used without limit. however, there is no apparent technical reason why the wider band 59.364 ghz could not alternatively satisfy essentially all commercial requirements for ubiquitous devices since such bandwidths in a single device far exceed the capacities of most home ber and cable systems that offer hundreds of television channels and other services.high frequencies (>100 ghz) in order to improve the understanding of the chemistry associated with stratospheric ozone depletion, it is necessary to observe the global distributions of a wide array of trace gases.59 measurements are made by observing narrow spectral line emissions. the frequency requirements of those measurements are dictated by molecular quantum transitions of the gases under consideration. trace gases of particular interest include ozone, chlorine, hydrogen, bromine, and water vapor. nasa™s microwave limb sounder (mls) and associated followon instruments have been designed for trace gas observations.60 the eos version of mls operates in ve primary spectral bands near 118, 190, 240, 640, and 2500 ghz.61 the specic passbands and minimum detectable signals for mls are listed in table 2.3. rfi should be kept at or below onetenth of the minimum detectable signals levels noted in the table. while no rfi has been reported to date, it is envisioned that the bands above 100 ghz may become commercially useful to the active services in the coming decades. in the near term, the submillimeter infrared radiometer ice cloud experiment (sirice) mission is being designed to measure cloud ice water path using passive channels above 100 ghz. sirice is currently in prephase a development at nasa. design studies have identied three channels (including frequencies, bandwidths, and rms measurement errors) for sirice required to retrieve iwp with the necessary accuracy and precision. the spectral requirements are summarized in table 2.4. rfi contamination of sirice observations should be at or below onetenth of the net levels noted in the table if the scientic integrity of the iwp retrievals is to be maintained.59 s. solomon, ﬁstratospheric ozone depletion: a review of concepts and history,ﬂ reviews of geophysics, 37(3): 275œ316 (1999).60 j.w. waters, w.g. read, l. froidevaux, and r.f jarnot, ﬁthe uars and eos microwave limb sounder (mls) experiments,ﬂ journal of atmospheric science, 56: 194217 (1999).61 j.w. waters et al., ﬁthe earth observing system microwave limb sounder (eos mls) on the aura satellite,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(5): 10751092 (2006).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century86table 2.3 eos microwave limb sounder instrument spectral coverage and sensitivity for measurement of trace gases in the upper atmospherepassband (ghz)minimum detectable signal (k)115.3122.00.1177.2206.20.03221.4240.50.1606.7657.50.12481.92506.00.1source: j. waters, r.e. cofield, m.j. filipiak, d.a. flower, n.j. livesey, g.l. manney, h.c. pumphrey, m.l. santee, p.h. siegel, and d.l. wu, ﬁan overview of the eos mls experiment,ﬂ nasa eos mls drl 601 (part 1), atbdmls01, jpl d15745/cl#042323, ver. 2.0, january 7, 2005.table 2.4 submillimeter infrared radiometer ice cloud experiment (sirice) instrument spectral coverage and sensitivity requirements for measurement of ice water pathcenter frequency ± double sideband offset (ghz)bandwidth (ghz)net (k)polarization183.31±1.51.40.7vertical183.31±3.52.00.6vertical183.31±7.03.00.5vertical325.15±1.51.61.8vertical325.15±3.52.41.4vertical325.15±9.53.01.3vertical448.00±1.41.22.3vertical448.00±3.02.01.8vertical448.00±7.23.01.5vertical642.90±6.72.81.9vertical642.90±6.72.81.9horizontal874.40±4.56.01.9vertical2.6 summary of the importance of and risks to continued contributions of the earth explorationsatellite service in the futurethe earth explorationsatellite service (eess) provides critical and unique measurements that support (1) daytoday weather and other environmental operations, (2) climate research, and (3) model development and other scientic advances in earth observation. eess measurements are currently impacted by rfi at all key frequencies up to 19 ghz, and likely at 24 ghz and higher frequencies soon. there is also potential for signicant future interference to eess systems operating at 5060 ghz. this interference occurs whether the band of concern is assigned to the passive services exclusively, shared with other services, or not assigned to eess but spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.87the earth explorationsatellite servicehas unique physical properties that demand observation when interference is absent. unless these issues are addressed in a timely manner, the effectiveness and utility of eess will likely be increasingly compromised, particularly as wireless services and unlicensed devices proliferate. most problematic are future ubiquitous unlicensed ultrawideband consumer devices that can proliferate without limit.box 2.3 illustrates a sporadic record of achievement in appropriately allocating spectrum and/or coordinating technology development between eess and competing active services. a technology advisory body, incorporating members from all relevant services, could help mitigate such failures. such an entity would link eess and other relevant active and passive communities in an early identication of issues and opportunities regarding competing spectral needs and shared standards development. such a holistic body would supplement the more adversarial and segmented bodies that currently provide most such advice.box 2.3 illustrative examples of successes and failures in frequency coordination that affect the earth explorationsatellite service (eess)successeseuropean and japanese transition to 77 ghz band for automobile radar, avoiding 2324 ghz.the development of airborne subbandbased radio frequency interference (rfi) mitigation methods that delete single strong interference signals, although not weak or diffuse interference.the international telecommunication union tradeoff of allocations to obtain stronger protection at more important bands at 5057 ghz.the migration of new instrument specications toward protected bands (advanced technology microwave sounder, special sensor microwave/imager, special sensor microwave/imager sounder, conical microwave imager sounder, and microwave imager/sounder).failuresthe lack of engagement between the auto radar community, earth explorationsatellite service (eess), and regulators during the technology™s early development.the lack of accepted remedies when unlicensed devices producing limited eess interference multiply in numbers so as to collectively damage eess and other services.the lack of global exclusive eess allocations at 18.7 and 10.65 ghz; critical bands experiencing rfi.no allocation of a protected band at cband.the difculty in effectively employing lowerfrequency bands (e.g., 14001427 mhz) owing to rfi; apparent inadequate protection for eess operation in the exclusively passive 14001427 mhz band.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.883the radio astronomy serviceover the past 75 years, astronomical observations at radio frequencies have transformed the understanding of the universe. they have allowed fundamental scientic issues to be addressedšthese include the creation and ultimate fate of the universe, the distribution of matter and primordial energy in the universe, and the environment and manner in which stars and planets form. many astronomical discoveries that have captured the imagination of astronomers and the public alike were made accidentally with radio telescopes; a list of such discoveries would include that of the primordial cosmic microwave background (cmb), celestial masers, and pulsarsšthe latter being the dense, fastrotating, radioemitting remnants of massive stars. with powerful new facilities such as the atacama large millimeter array (alma), the potential for unexpected discoveries will grow substantially. as was ttingly said in this context years ago by two famous radio astronomy pioneers, ﬁwe cannot discuss plans to discover the unsuspected . . . ,ﬂ1 but the parade of new, unexpected discoveries has been continuous since the beginning of radio astronomy in the 1930s. with the unprecedented regimes of sensitivity that will arrive with new and planned instruments, one can expect that further remarkable discoveries will be made. astronomical discoveries have been made possible by the steady and enormous improvement in sensitivity that is shown in figure 3.1. in this graph the ordinate represents sensitivity and is on a logarithmic scale; there has been an improvement 1 pawsey and bracewell, radio astronomy, oxford, united kingdom: clarendon press, 1955, p. 296.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.89the radio astronomy servicefigure 31r01628uneditable bitmapped imagevlbievlalog sensitivity (jy)yearfigure 3.1 the minimum detected or detectable signal in ux density versus the year of measurement. the sensitivity is proportional to the temperature of the receiver system and inversely proportional to the collecting area and the square root of both bandwidth and integration time. for measurements after year 1990, an integration time of 12 hours is assumed. the rapid improvement over time is due to system improvements, including the decrease in system temperature (solidstate technology), the increase in collecting area (cost and construction ef˚ciency), and the increase in bandwidth and integration time (electronic and digital technology). the improvement from 1933 to 1983 is about 10 orders of magnitude, a halving time of less than 2 years: a performance improvement similar to that described by moore™s law. acronyms in the ˚gure are de˚ned in appendix f. figure adapted and updated from j.m. moran, ﬁpeter mezger and the development of radio astronomy in the u.s. and germany, and the discovery of radio recombination lines,ﬂ pp. 475488 in the nuclei of normal galaxies, lessons from the galactic center, proceedings of the nato advanced research workshop, nato advanced science institutes series c, vol. 445, a. harris and r. genzel, eds., kluwer, dordrecht (1994).of 10 billion in 70 years, and there will be another improvement by a factor of 1,000 from the very large array (vla) to the square kilometer array (ska) when it is built. (see table 3.1 in §3.2, ﬁradio observatories and radio telescopes,ﬂ for the characteristics of the newer instruments.) the current scientic questions that are motivating the construction of these new telescopes are no less exciting than those that were resolved in the past. obvious spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century90examples include the exploration of planetary systems in formation around other stars, measurements of neutral hydrogen in the early universe, and the study of star formation in distant galaxies. furthermore, it is through radio observations that the discovery of lifeindicating molecules in other planetary systems might be made. the scientic and technical advances of radio astronomy have been internationally recognized, as listed in box 3.1. the nobel prize in physics has been awarded to eight radio astronomers in the past 40 years. 3.1 the scientific impact of radio astronomywhat follows is a summary of the scientic advances made possible in a few areas by radio astronomy. a discussion of some advances expected in the near future is also provided. origin of planets and the solar systemspeculations concerning the origin of the solar system stretch far back in the science and philosophy of humans. during the coming decade, the capability of understanding the origins and evolution of other planetary systems and thereby coming to understand the origin of our own planetary system will exist: alma and the expanded very large array (evla), both coming online in a few years, box 3.1 nobel prizes in physics for developments and discoveries in radio astronomyradio astronomy has been internationally recognized for its fundamental contributions to knowledge. the nobel prize in physics has been awarded to eight radio astronomers. the names of the scientists who led the teams to these discoveries, the year of award, and a brief description of the prizewinning science, are listed below.sir martin ryle, 1974, for the development of aperture synthesis, and antony hewish, 1974, for the discovery of pulsars; arno a. penzias and robert w. wilson, 1978, for the discovery of the cosmic microwave background radiation; russell a. hulse and joseph h. taylor, jr., 1993, for establishing the emission of gravitational waves by close binary pulsar systems, as predicted by general relativity; and john c. mather and george f. smoot, 2006, for demonstrating that the cosmic microwave background radiation has a blackbody spectrum and for discovering spatial ˚uctuations in the radiation. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.91the radio astronomy servicewill make it possible to detect planets in formation around other stars. alma and evla will enable the study of the structure, dynamics, and temperature of the material from which planets are forming. the planned square kilometer array will enable detailed studies of such disks. the key strengths of radio measurements that will enable these studies are their ability to trace the distribution of gas and dust throughout the disk, to study the dynamics and temperature of the material involved in planet formation, and to follow the accretion of material as it develops from the tiny, submicron dust particles characteristic of the interstellar medium to centimetersized clumps, the rst critical step in the formation of terrestrial planets. these radio capabilities are unique in enabling scientists to learn about the physical and dynamical processes that govern the planetformation process and its outcomeša planetary system. they will be able to ﬁseeﬂ the formation of giant planets through the gravitational and thermal in˚uence of these planets on the surrounding gas. scientists will see disks with gaps and inner clearing zones that are caused by planets. they will be able to follow the orbits of the planets by how they sculpt the disk and to study characteristics of the planets by probing their interaction with the disk material.at present, search techniques for extrasolar planets, or exoplanets, are strongly biased toward nding large planets close to their host star; and correspondingly, the 358 planetary systems known as of november 2009 are very different from our own solar system.2 they typically contain one or more jupiterlike giant planets in orbits closer than that of earth, and with eccentricities exceeding those of any planet in our solar system. there is no wellaccepted theory for how such planets form or why they should be common. prior to the discovery of exoplanets, our solar system was thought to be typical, and a template for all planetary systems. this is now known not to be true, and our understanding of the diverse outcomes of formation is signicantly incomplete. so that this formation problem can be properly addressed, observations of many young stars are needed. these observations will lay the groundwork for an understanding of the many possible outcomes of the planetformation process and how terrestrial planets t into the general picture. the new knowledge of the existence of other planetary systems gives rise to many intriguing questions. does life exist elsewhere, or is it unique to the solar system? could there be a common starting point for life? the abundant and complex chemistry of the interstellar medium and of protoplanetary systems possibly provides an answer. more than 140 molecules have been discovered in the interstellar medium. those with more than four atoms are dominated by carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen. the 31 molecules with seven atoms or more are nearly all organic molecules. they include glycoaldehyde (a simple sugar), and urea and glycine (the latter being a simple amino acid common to life) may have 2 data from http://exoplanets.org/, accessed november 24, 2009.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century92been detected. clearly, the carbonnitrogenoxygen chemistry that dominates life on earth also dominates the complex chemistry of space. the radio spectrum is the place to pursue a connection between astrochemistry and prebiotic terrestrial chemistry because it gives access to the wealth of spectral lines. with the sensitivity and resolution of the coming generation of radio telescopes, it will be possible to search for sugars and amino acids and to follow the ˚ow of chemistry from molecular clouds into protoplanetary systems. is there a strong interstellar heritage to the chemical compounds that comets and other bodies delivered to early earth? what is the dominant chemistry of a protoplanetary nebula and how does that change the chemical composition of the planet? was life on earth seeded by interstellar molecules?in addition to these questions, others arise because the molecular composition of interstellar and protoplanetary material is strongly impacted by the physical processes that act on the gas. selected molecules can act as tracers to follow specic physical processes. for example, silicon monoxide (sio) is commonly used as a tracer for strong shock waves associated with out˚ow activity, because silicon is heavily depleted onto dust grains, which are readily destroyed by shocks. that destruction liberates silicon into the gas phase, and this silicon is quickly incorporated into sio. methanol is a similar tracer for weak shocks, which evaporate ices. these tracers, and others presumably yet to be discovered, will provide important insights into the processes that shaped our solar system and that shape other planetary systems. now that many planetary systems are being discovered, the search for signs of extraterrestrial life is becoming more compelling. the many planets that will be discovered in the ﬁhabitable zoneﬂ in the coming years are obvious targets. searching in the radio band is thought to be the optimum strategy, and some limited searches have already been made with the telescope at the arecibo observatory and with other smaller telescopes, but no results have yet been achieved. the allen telescope array (ata), a dedicated instrument for searching for extraterrestrial signals, is completing its rst stage of construction as of this writing and will begin work soon. it will be a multibeam telescope, able to look at many stars simultaneously. this search for an extraterrestrial civilization, while a ﬁlong shot,ﬂ is seeking an answer to a basic and profound question: are we alone in the galaxy? origin and evolution of the universein the past few decades, cosmology, the study of the origin and evolution of the universe, has been revolutionized. whereas 30 years ago only a few broad facts in this eld were known, today cosmology is a quantitative science with specic, testable hypotheses. this revolution stemmed from advances in astronomical techniques that broadened astronomy from its origin in the optical wave band to the entire electromagnetic spectrum. this expansion across the spectrum was spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.93the radio astronomy servicepioneered by radio astronomy, which has been essential to the study of cosmology because radio astronomy alone can detect the bulk of the coldest matter in the universe, and can detect it at enormous distances and early times (see box 3.2). we now know that the observable universe has expanded from its origin in a big bang some 14 billion years ago. it cooled as it expanded, and nuclei of hydrogen and helium were formed in dense opaque plasma. with further cooling, nuclei and electrons combined into atoms, and the universe became transparent but now dark, since as yet there were no stars. in subsequent evolution, the higherdensity regions were able to collapse under their own gravity, giving rise to the rst stars and galaxies (see figure 3.2).fifty years ago the space density of bright radio galaxies was found to increase with distance faster than expected from the expansion, demonstrating the evolution of the universe and revealing a remarkable epoch of galaxy formation some 10 billion years ago. it was through this simple observation that radio astronomy ruled out the rival, steadystate theory of a nonevolving universe and favored evolutionary models in which the universe has expanded from a compact, hot origin.radio astronomy also provides the strongest evidence for the big bang through the discovery of the cosmic microwave background (cmb) radiation in 1965. this background radiation lls space and has an accurately measured blackbody spectrum with a temperature of 2.725 k and a broad peak at about 100 ghz. this radiation was emitted some 400,000 years after the big bang, at a time when the universe had a temperature of about 3000 k and was becoming transparent. since that time, the radiation has been stretched by a factor of about 1,000 through the expansion of the universe, and the temperature has decreased by the same factor. because this radiation is so weak and so highly isotropic, it is difcult to distinguish from local sources of noise. only very careful observations have been able to demonstrate its existence. the cmb has proved to be a gold mine of information about the early universe. the radiation comes from early times when the universe was nearly homogeneous, box 3.2  redshiftthe continual expansion of the universe stretches electromagnetic waves so that they are received on earth at a frequency lower than the frequency that they had when emitted. this effect is known as redshift, because light is shifted toward the red end of the spectrum as the distance is increased. also, because the velocity of light is nite, moredistant galaxies are seen as they had been at earlier times. looking at distant galaxies, one sees the universe at an early epoch.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century94figure 32r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 3.2 artist™s conception of the history of the universe. time runs from left to right. the universe was born in an explosion popularly called the ﬁbig bang,ﬂ which perhaps came from a ﬁquantum uctuation,ﬂ a phenomenon well known in physics. after a period of hyperexpansion (ﬁinationﬂ), the universe settled to a nearly steady expansion rate. as the plasma became neutral, the afterglow died out, and the universe became dark. after hundreds of millions of years, gravitational contraction of the material in the original density uctuations produced the ˚rst stars, which gave off light, and so the ﬁdark agesﬂ ended. further generations of stars formed, and galaxies and black holes coalesced from the stars. the universe became more complex and now is evolving rapidly, with many varieties of stars and galaxies and exotic objects, including a planet containing sentient beings who are able to contemplate this vast universe. results from the wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe (wmap) satellite (shown in the ˚gure) were used to make the afterglow pattern. image courtesy of nasa/wmap science team.but even then there were small density and temperature ˚uctuations that became the seeds of stars and galaxies. after extensive searches, the cosmic background explorer (cobe) satellite found these ˚uctuations in 1992, at a level of 1 part in 100,000 of the background temperature. the ˚uctuations appear to be random on the sky, but they have a characteristic angular scale of approximately 1 degree, which reveals properties of the plasma from which they were emitted. measurements of the angular power spectrum of the ˚uctuations have xed the conditions of the universe at the emission time, when the plasma changed to a neutral spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.95the radio astronomy servicegas of hydrogen and helium. along with observations in other wave bands, radio observations of the cmb have revealed that most of the material in the universe cannot be ﬁnormal matterﬂ; it must be something that does not emit or absorb electromagnetic radiation: ﬁdark matter.ﬂ in addition, 70 percent of the density is made up of ﬁdark energy,ﬂ which has a repulsive antigravity effect, causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate.3the ˚uctuations of the cmb have immense cosmological signicance, and they are being studied with many instruments. the emission is broadband but peaks at a few hundred gigahertz, where atmospheric emission is a serious contaminant. hence, the instruments are located on high mountain sites, on balloons, or on satellites. very wide bandwidths are needed to detect the tiny signals. the cmb ˚uctuations are linearly polarized at about the 10 percent level, and this provides further insights into the early universe. cmb studies provide a testing ground for theories of fundamental physics and theories on the nature of space and matter, at energies that cannot be reached by experiments on earth. between the epoch of recombination, when the universe became transparent and the cmb was emitted, and the epoch of galaxy formation, when stars rst began to light up the universe, lies the ﬁdark agesﬂ of the universe (see figure 3.2). this period cannot be studied by optical astronomy, but radio provides a window by way of emission from neutral hydrogen. over the next decade this study will be one of the major thrusts in radio astronomy. the emission, redshifted from 1.4 ghz, will be detected at much lower frequencies, 200 mhz and below. it will be very faint, and radio interference will be a serious concern. such observations will have to be made from remote sites and will require careful attention to the mitigation of radio frequency interference (rfi).pulsars and general relativitypulsars are ultradense collapsed cores of heavy stars in the form of neutron stars that have completed their nuclear burning and exploded. pulsars have a very strong magnetic eld and generate a radio beam that, because the neutron star is spinning, produces radio ˚ashes in the same manner that a lighthouse generates optical ˚ashes. in some cases, the pulsar, remarkably, is spinning at about a thousand times a second, leading to the term millisecond pulsars. because a pulsar is ultradense, its gravity is ultrastrong, and it provides a natural laboratory for the testing of einstein™s theory of general relativity (gr). one predic3 d.n. spergel, l. verde, h.v. peiris, e. komatsu, m.r. nolta, c.l. bennett, m. halpern, g. hinshaw, n. jarosik, a. kogut, m. limon, s.s. meyer, l. page, g.s. tucker, j.l. weiland, e. wollack, and e.l. wright, ﬁfirst year wilkinson microwave anisotropy probe (wmap) observations: determination of cosmological parameters,ﬂ astrophysical journal supplement, 148: 175194 (2003).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century96tion of gr is that the orbit of a pulsar in a binary stellar system slowly decays due to the emission of gravitational waves (figure 3.3). the measurements accurately t the prediction and prove that gravitational waves do exist. for this demonstration, hulse and taylor were awarded the nobel prize in physics in 1993 (see box 3.1).however, this orbital decay is a ﬁweakeldﬂ effect, and gr has not yet been tested in the ﬁstrongeldﬂ case. this leaves a fundamental question in physics: is einstein™s theory the nal word in our understanding of gravity? important questions are unanswered: can gr correctly describe the ultrastrong eld? are its predictions for black holes correct? is the cosmos lled with a stochastic  gravitationalwave background? radio observations of pulsars now approach these questions, and the largest radio telescopes, including the green bank telescope (gbt) and the arecibo observatory, and especially the ska, should give some answers. these telescopes offer the possibility of probing the strongeld realm of gravitational physics by nding and timing many pulsars. the ultimate goal is to obtain extremely tight limits on deviations from gr, to a level a thousand times better than present solarsystem limits. in the coming years, radio observations will identify hundreds of millisecond pulsars across the sky. timed to high precision (~100 ns, the time that it takes light to travel 100 feet), these pulsars will act as multiple arms of a cosmic gravitationalwave detector. this ﬁtelescopeﬂ will be sensitive to gravity waves at frequencies of nanohertz and will complement the much higher frequencies accessible to direct gravitationalwave detectors such as the advanced laser interferometer gravitational wave observatory (ligo, ~100 hz) and the laser interferometer space antenna (lisa, 1 mhz). the largest radio telescopes will be crucial for these observations. galactic nuclei and black holesthe rst stars and galaxies formed out of the ˚uctuations in the early universe. a detailed understanding of how these processes unfolded will probably be one of the major achievements of astronomy in the coming decades. astronomers have concluded that most galaxies have a giant black hole in their nuclei, with mass between a million and a billion times the mass of the sun (see box 3.3). it is not known whether the black holes formed rst and galaxies of stars formed around them or the galaxies formed rst and the black holes later condensed from the inner core. a remarkable correlation, however, has been found between the mass of black holes in galaxies and the mass of the halo of stars that surrounds them.4 this relation implies the existence of some regulatory or feedback process linking the black hole and its halo of stars. over cosmic time, a galaxy grows through mergers 4 l. ferrarese and d. merritt, ﬁa fundamental relation between supermassive black holes and their host galaxies,ﬂ astrophysical journal, 539(1): l9l12 (2000).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.97the radio astronomy servicefigure 33 alternater01628editable vector imagegeneral relativity prediction25151050353020197519801985199520001990yearcumulative time shift of periastron (s)figure 3.3 the results of 30 years of observations at the arecibo observatory of the radioemitting pulsar b1913+16. the pulsar is in orbit around a companion neutron star. general relativity (gr) predicts that the orbits of the two stars will shrink as orbital energy is lost to gravitational radiation. this ˚gure shows the ˚rst detection of this effect: measurements of the orbital phase (the data points) exactly match the prediction (solid line) calculated with gr. source: j.m. weisberg and j.h. taylor, ﬁthe relativistic binary pulsar b1913+16: thirty years of observations and analysis,ﬂ astronomical society of the paci˚c conference series, vol. 328, f.a. rasio and i.h. stairs, eds., 2005.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century98box 3.3 black holeseinstein™s theory of gravity (general relativity) predicts that when matter is compressed sufciently, it contracts into a region of space where gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light waves, can escape. hence, this ultimate compression forms a dark region that is called a black hole. however, matter falling into a black hole must release some of its energy before it goes ﬁinside.ﬂ thus there can be a bright region near the black hole. further, the mass of the black hole still produces a gravitational effect. radiation from infalling material and gravitational  effects on the motions of nearby bodies can reveal the presence of a black hole and can give a measure of the mass that the black hole contains. in this way, black holes have been found with masses from a few times to a billion times the mass of the sun. it has been shown that the center of the milky way contains a black hole with a mass of about 4 million solar masses.11a.m. ghez, s. salim, s.d. hornstein, a. tanner, m. morris, e.e. becklin, and g. duchene, ﬁstellarorbitsﬁstellar orbits around the galactic center black hole,ﬂ astrophysical journal,, 620: 744757 (2005).with nearby galaxies, and the disruptive forces of these events trigger episodes of star formation. meanwhile, the central black hole grows episodically by accreting material from the inner parts of the galaxy. the accretion disk that forms during such periods can sometimes produce more radiant energy than all the billions of stars in the galaxy combinedšthe black hole and disk in this condition is called an active galactic nucleus, or agn.an early result from radio astronomy was the realization that most of the bright sources of radio radiation lie outside our own galaxy, the milky way, and have high redshifts, so they must be at ﬁcosmologicalﬂ distances. these objects lie in the nuclei of galaxies and are created as material swirls into giant black holes at the centers of the galaxies. much of the radiation is emitted anisotropically in two narrow jets along the rotation axis of the black hole (figure 3.4). the brightest objectsšquasarsšare those in which the jets are pointed almost directly toward earth. the discovery and study of these powerful ﬁradio galaxiesﬂ in the 1960s provided the rst evidence for the existence of supermassive black holesševidence that was based on the energy conversion required. a major discovery from radio astronomy, made by the technique of very long baseline interferometry (vlbi), was that the jets are ˚owing at relativistic speedsšclose to the speed of lightšand that the radiation is beamed by the effects of special relativity. the beststudied supermassive black hole is the one in the center of the milky way; it has a mass of about 4 million times the mass of the sun. attention was rst drawn to it as an important astronomical object in 1974, when radio emission from its envelope was seen. this radiation comes from relativistically excited gas that is spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.99the radio astronomy servicefigure 34r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 3.4 the remarkable nucleus, jets, and outer lobes of the radio galaxy cygnus a. the nucleus contains a massive black hole that is accreting gas and dust, and some of the gravitational energy that is released is channeled into opposing jets. the jets contain a ow of relativistic plasma that, when stopped by the extragalactic material far outside the galaxy, generates the huge lobes. this image was made with the very large array at a frequency of 5 ghz and with an angular resolution of 0.5 arcsecond. image courtesy of nrao/aui/nsf.spiraling into the black hole. it cannot be seen with an optical telescope because the central region is so dusty, but the radio waves readily penetrate dust. the rate at which the black hole at the center of the milky way is growing has been measured by radio techniques. it currently is in a quiescent period, undergoing low accretion. in more active galaxies, the central black holes are accreting mass thousands of times faster. spectral line emission from water vapor at 22 ghz has turned out to be an  unexpectedly important probe of the environments of supermassive black holes in the nuclei of galaxies. water vapor appears as a trace constituent in the accretion disks that surround these black holes, and it emits radiation by the maser (microwave amplication by stimulated emission of radiation) process. this causes the emitting condensations, called spots, to appear as spectacularly bright but very compact sources of radiation whose positions and velocities can be measured precisely with a continentalscale radio telescope, called a vlbi array. in a stunning series of measurements, the orbital motions in the disk of one such galaxy, ngc4258, have been traced in detail (figure 3.5). from these observations the mass of the black hole can be determined from kepler™s laws of motion, and also the distance of the black hole from earth can be determined by the comparison of the angular and linear velocities of the maser spots. the measurement of distance by this direct trigonospectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century100figure 35r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 3.5 the galaxy ngc4258, shown in the top panel, is a relatively normal looking spiral galaxy, lying about 23,500 lightyears from earth. however, observations of the water line at 22 ghz show bright maser emission, as seen in the lower plot, whose scale is enlarged by a factor of 10,000 with respect to the upper plot. each "spot" in the lower portion represents a separate maser whose velocity, derived from the doppler shift, is colorcoded: red = œ500 km/s; blue = 1,500 km/s. the thin curved distribution of masers with the observed velocity distribution traces a thin disk of material in orbit around an unseen black hole with a mass of about 40 millions times that of our sun. (note: 1 pc 3.3 lightyears.) adapted from t. yang, b. li, a.s. wilson, and c.s. reynolds, ﬁspatially resolved xray spectra of ngc4258,ﬂ astrophysical journal, 660: 1106 (2007); and a.l. argon, l.j. greenhill, m.j. reid, j.m. moran, and e.m.l. humphreys, ﬁtowards a new geometric distance to the active galaxy ngc4258: i. vlbi monitoring of water maser emission,ﬂ astrophysical journal, 659: 1040 (2007).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.101the radio astronomy servicemetric technique has important implications for establishing the ﬁcosmic distance scale,ﬂ that is, calibrating the relation between redshift and distance.5as interesting as the active black holes themselves are the kinds of galaxies that give rise to such activity. studies of the ﬁhost galaxiesﬂ in which active black holes reside have been made over the past few decades. radio telescopes have been and will continue to be a major contributor to such studies, through their ability to detect starforming gas and feedback from supernovae in host galaxies and other objects (see the subsection on ﬁgalaxies,ﬂ below). both alma and evla, with their high resolution and sensitivity, will push the studies of star formation in host galaxies closer to the nuclear region in which the active black hole resides, thus allowing for the interplay between the black hole and nuclear star formation to be assessed.galaxiesthe study of star formation in our galaxy and in others is one of the primary areas of science done at millimeter wavelengths (68115 ghz). stars form in giant molecular clouds composed primarily of diatomic hydrogen (h2); however, h2 is particularly difcult to detect because it has no permanent dipole moment. as a result, astronomers use carbon monoxide (co) as a proxy for h2. co is collisionally excited by h2, and the resultant emission from co is observable at radio wavelengths. hence the properties of starforming gas are commonly measured with radio telescopes. an example of co emission from a nearby galaxy is shown in figure 3.6.co emission has been detected in many varieties of galaxies, including some with redshifts up to 6.4, so that the photons now observed were emitted when the universe was only a few percent of its present age. with radio telescopes, it is thus possible to study the properties of star formation in normal galaxies such as our own, in exotic galaxies with vigorous star formation accompanied by accretion onto black holes (e.g., radio galaxies and quasar host), and in distant galaxies likely undergoing their rst burst of star formation. an important fact about these observations is that, owing to the motions of nearby galaxies and the redshifts of more distant ones, co emission is rarely observed at or even near the rest frequency. the 115 ghz line is observed in ﬁlocalﬂ galaxies (redshift <0.3) down to frequencies of 88 ghz. observations at high redshift (z > 2) are becoming routine; this requires either looking at higherlevel transitions of co redshifted into the 3 mm (68115 ghz) window or observing the groundstate (115 ghz) transition at much lower frequencies (2250 ghz). 5 j.r. herrnstein, j.m. moran, l.j. greenhill, p.j. diamond, m. inoue, n. nakai, m. miyoshi, c. henkel, and a. riess, ﬁa geometric distance to the galaxy ngc4258 from orbital motions in a nuclear gas disk,ﬂ nature, 400: 539 (1999).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century102figure 36r01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 3.6 (left) an aperture synthesis map at 115 ghz of carbon monoxide (co) spectral line emission from the spiral galaxy messier 51 (the ﬁwhirlpoolﬂ galaxy). the co, which is tracing starforming molecular gas, is observed to follow the spiral arms shown in the hubble space telescope optical image of the galaxy (right). the image is approximately 40,000 lightyears across. the co image was made by combining 200 hours of observations at the combined array for research in millimeterwave astronomy with 40 hours of observations at the nobeyama radio telescope in japan. image courtesy of space telescope science institute.solar physics and space weatherthe nearby sun is the only star that there is a chance of studying in detail. knowledge of the sun illuminates the understanding of other stars and generally helps place the sun and its attendant suite of planets into the context of stellar physics and the evolution of stars and planets. in addition, the sun™s atmosphere is a remarkably active, even violent region, and it regularly impacts earth with disturbances that can have technical and economic consequences. there currently is a proposal to build a powerful new instrument, the frequency agile solar radiotelescope (fasr), that would greatly increase the capability of measuring the solar atmosphere over a wide frequency range, at high time and angular resolution. the sun™s atmosphere emits strongly at all radio frequencies by a variety of emission mechanisms, allowing observers to probe the physical processes that are active on the sun. flares on the surface are explosions connected with the  disappearance or reconnection of magnetic elds (figure 3.7). strong bursts of spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.103the radio astronomy servicefigure 3.7 a large eruptive prominence above a solar are, seen in the ultraviolet light of ionized helium, with the solar and heliospheric observatory (soho) satellite, july 24, 1999. for size comparison, earth is shown as the small blue circle. the are started with an eruption of twisted magnetic ˚eld through the surface. the magnetic ˚eld loop is rising rapidly through the corona and will separate from the sun to form a coronal mass ejection (cme). this particular cme did not hit earth, however, as it started in a direction perpendicular to earth. the inset shows other active regions on the face of the sun. image courtesy of soho (esa and nasa).figure 37r01628uneditable bitmapped imagespectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century104radio noise are often associated with a ˚are, and indeed on december 6, 2006, the radio bursts were so intense that for 10 minutes they disrupted the global positioning system (gps) reception on essentially the entire sunlit side of earth.6 an associated phenomenon, coronal mass ejections (cmes), involves the eruption of mass and magnetic ˚ux from the sun into interplanetary space. these can strongly disturb the nearearth environment. there is general agreement that ˚ares and cmes are magnetic phenomena, but the details are unclear. space weather refers to the highly variable condition of the plasma that surrounds earth and extends from the sun throughout the solar system. the solar wind is a continuous stream of plasma that blows out from the sun, and it controls the shape of the outer regions of earth™s magnetic eld. flares sometimes produce energetic particles that propagate to earth in a matter of minutes.7 similarly, a cme can also produce energetic particles. these energetic particles can be a danger to the personnel and equipment in space vehicles. the cme itself takes 1 or 2 days to travel to 1 au (astronomical unit; the sunearth distance). if it hits earth, it can cause serious communication disturbances and adversely affect satellites and longdistance highvoltage transmission lines.8 because of these disruptive consequences, it is important that as much as possible be learned about ˚ares and cmes and that the capability of predicting them be developed. much of this study must be done at radio wavelengths, although the radio information is supplemented with data from other wave bandsšfor example, xrays measured from a satellite. serendipity and the transient universe throughout astronomy, in optical and other bands as well as radio, we are entering an era of intense surveillance, variously called transient source astronomy, time domain astronomy, and, more broadly, a new frontier in high energy astrophysics. the objective is to capture transient phenomena, which currently are enjoying wide attention. longknown transient phenomena include novae and supernovae, pulses from pulsars, and motions in quasars and galactic nuclei, in addition to solar system phenomena such as eclipses and solar ˚ares. new radio telescopes, such as the ata, will be used in a repetitive survey mode to search for transient and variable events. these phenomena are of broad signicance and will contribute to the understanding of the life and death cycle of stars; the nature of exotic compact objects such as neutron stars, white dwarfs, 6 r. cowen, ﬁbig broadcast,ﬂ science news, 171(23): 360 (june 9, 2007).7 see http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/hq05132solarreworks.html, accessed may 21, 2008; r.a. mewaldt, ﬁsolar energetic particle composition, energy spectra and space weather,ﬂ space science reviews, 124: 303316 (2006).8 see http://ds9.ssl.berkeley.edu/solarweek/wednesday/spaceweather.html; accessed may 21, 2008.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.105the radio astronomy serviceand black holes; and the physics of magnetized, relativistic plasmas. transient and variable phenomena are typically broadband, occurring at all radio frequencies and on timescales from nanoseconds to years. multifrequency, repetitive observations are necessary to characterize the physics of these targets.among the projected science targets are phenomena connected with explosions of massive stars, which might produce short bursts of powerful radio emission. the discovery of such events could conrm the fundamental picture of what is called the gammaray burst phenomenon and provide an independent method for the discovery of distant starforming galaxies. radio studies of the propagation effects that these waves encounter will probe the very tenuous intergalactic medium that constitutes a signicant fraction of the baryonic content of the universe. neutron stars that emit sporadic pulses have been found very recently, and estimates have been made that such stars are abundant in the galaxy. these objects are likely providing new insights into physical conditions in neutron star magnetospheres.magnetic activity on the surfaces of stellar and compact objects belongs to a continuum of activity that includes solar ˚ares. a comprehensive census of this activity and the detection of true solarlike events on other stars will provide important insights into the physics of solar ˚ares as well as identifying conditions suitable for life on extrasolar planets. repetitive surveying at high time and frequency resolution is a new regime in astronomical phase spacešthat is, the parameter space representing all possible observations. in the past, opening such a new regime generally has led to dramatic new, often unexpected, discoveries. scientists cannot predict what will be found, but on the basis of past experience, they do expect to see new phenomena. the ability to distinguish between transients of cosmic origin and sporadic radio frequency interference will be a challenging enterprise.summaryradio astronomy has provided astronomers a unique way to observe and analyze cosmological objects of interest, from earth™s sun, to galaxies, to the very beginning of the universe itself. the eld has thus been responsible for some of the most important astronomical ndings to date. as capabilities increase and new observatories come online, radio astronomy is poised to allow scientists to understand the universe in unprecedented ways. finding: radio astronomy has great potential for further fundamental discoveries, including the origins and evolution of the universe, the nature of matter, and life in other solar systems, which will have an enormous impact on our understanding of fundamental physics and the place of humanity in the universe.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century1063.2 radio observatories and radio telescopesradio observatories contain a diverse group of scientic instruments carefully designed and built to observe with the highest sensitivity selected aspects of the radio emission from the many varieties of objects in the universe. no single instrument, observatory, or even observing technique can encompass the broad frequency range (tens of mhz to hundreds of ghz), the wide range of angular scales (tens of microarcseconds to degrees), and the broad range of temporal variations (nanoseconds to many years) that are seen in the emission. hence, radio observatories have a variety of telescopes and instruments with unique technical capabilities. box 3.4 describes several current and future radio astronomy observatories (three are in operation and one is under construction).at the lowest frequencies, telescopes consist of dipoles (simple lengths of wire or metal) or arrays of dipoles linked together. these structures are simple, cheap, and efcient. above 100 mhz, telescopes take on the classic parabolic shape but can be surfaced with wire mesh. the mesh saves money and weight in the telescope; the radiation is efciently collected because the wavelength is much larger than the holes in the mesh. at about 1 ghz and higher, the telescopes need highly precise solid surfaces and stable guiding structures. two telescope systems currently being designedšfasr and skašare examples of the design being matched to the  frequency. the plan for both fasr and ska is to use dipole arrays to cover frequencies below 300 mhz, lowprecision parabolic re˚ectors to cover from 300 mhz to 3 ghz, and highprecision parabolic re˚ectors from 3 to 30 ghz. techniques are different at the highest frequencies, 301,000 ghz, where quasioptical techniques are often used: that is, signals are directed through mirrors to the detectors rather than through waveguides. at the extreme high frequency end, the required surface accuracy of re˚ectors is about 15 microns, onefth the diameter of a human hair. angular resolution, the ability to image ne structure, is a second factor driving telescope design. the resolution is determined by the ratio of the wavelength of observation to the diameter of the telescope. depending on the science objectives, it may be desirable to have arcminute or even submilliarcsecond resolution; however, getting very high resolution by building an extremely large dish is impractical. for example, the arecibo telescope, at 305 meters in diameter, is the largest dishtype telescope in the world (see figure 3.4.3 in box 3.4). its highest operating frequency is 10 ghz, where it has a resolution of about 30 arcseconds. getting more resolution at this frequency by building a larger dish would be much more expensive than building a linked array of smaller telescopes in which the resolution is controlled by the overall size of the array. the vla in new mexico has 27 telescopes that can form a baseline up to 35 kilometers, giving the vla a resolution of 0.3 arcsecond at 10 ghz (see figure 3.4.4 in box 3.4). the very long spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.107the radio astronomy servicebox 3.4 radio astronomy observatoriesfigure 341r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 3.4.1 the robert c. byrd green bank telescope (gbt) at the national radio astronomy observatory in green bank, west virginia. with a diameter of 100 meters, the gbt is the world˛s largest fully steerable telescope. it operates from 300 mhz to 90 ghz and is predominantly used for radio spectroscopy and for studies of pulsars. it has an offset feed support system to eliminate radio shadows on the dish, which can be troublesome when sensitive measurements are being made. the gbt and green bank, west virginia, are in the national radio quiet zone (nrqz); see §3.6 in this report. image courtesy of nrao/aui/nsf.continuedspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century108box 3.4 continuedfigure 342r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 3.4.2 artist™s conception of the atacama large millimeter array (alma) now being built in the atacama desert in northern chile. when completed, alma will have up to 80 antennas, operating from 30 ghz to 960 ghz. alma is at an altitude of 5,000 meters, where the atmospheric water vapor is low enough that these high frequencies are useable. this project is a collaboration of the united states, canada, the european southern observatory, and japan. note in this ˚gure that the individual telescopes are not identical: the one on the left has a european design, and that on the right has an american design. image courtesy of nrao/aui and computer graphics by eso.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.109the radio astronomy servicefigure 343r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 3.4.3 the 305 meter arecibo telescope at arecibo observatory in puerto rico. built in 1963 and operated by the national astronomy and ionosphere center (naic), the arecibo telescope still has the largest collecting area of any radio telescope in the world. it has undergone several major renovations, including the installation of a complex secondary feed system (inside the white enclosure) that corrects for the fact that the primary reector is a section of a sphere, not a paraboloid. it operates from 300 mhz to 10 ghz, with continuous frequency coverage above 1.1 ghz. the large foreground building is the angel ramos visitor center, which receives more than 100,000 visitors per year. image courtesy of the naicarecibo observatory, a facility of the nsf.continuedspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century110box 3.4 continuedfigure 344r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 3.4.4 the very large array (vla) near socorro, new mexico, consists of 27 antennas, each 25 meters in diameter, connected as an interferometer to produce radio images at frequencies from 70 mhz to 43 ghz. the antennas are in a ﬁyﬂ pattern and can be repositioned to different con˚gurations, with a maximum baseline of 35 kilometers, to produce images of various angular resolutions. it currently is being upgraded to have more  sensitivity and better image quality. in its new state, the expanded very large array, it will have continuous frequency coverage from 1 to 50 ghz. image courtesy of nrao/aui/nsf.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.111the radio astronomy servicebaseline array (vlba), with maximum baselines of 6,000 to 8,000 km, has an angular resolution of roughly 0.1 milliarcsecond at 43 ghz. in practice, angular resolution, operating frequency, and total collecting area are considered jointly in optimizing the design of a telescope. different possible solutions to the structure usually exist, and one is chosen according to the primary science goals for the observatory. increasing the angular resolution can assist in reducing the potential for interference. however, the design process is quite complex if the angular resolution is to be maximized while the sidelobes that capture interfering signals are to be minimized. another key factor in optimizing the capability of an observatory is its location, and the broad spread of the radio spectrum results in a number of factors that can be important. at frequencies below 30 ghz, radio frequency interference (rfi) is an important cause of noise and signal degradation. the national radio quiet zone in west virginia, where the gbt is located, is important because there is a legal and effective means of minimizing rfi there (see figure 3.4.1 in box 3.4). at high frequencies, water vapor in the atmosphere is an important source of noise and attenuation. alma and other telescopes are being built at an elevation of 5,000 m in the atacama desert in chile to optimize their performance up to 1000 ghz (see figure 3.4.2 in box 3.4).a highly sensitive receiver, or radiometer, is coupled to the radio telescope. at frequencies below about 50 ghz this is a lownoise amplier, usually containing a cooled transistor. transistor technology continues to improve, however, and the upper frequency limit for transistors™ use has been rising steadily. above 50 ghz, more complicated devices are used, including superconductorinsulator superconductor (sis) junctions. in addition, above 100 ghz, bolometers are commonly used, especially for broadband continuum measurements. focal plane arrays, both of bolometers and coherent devices, are coming into regular use. an array of detectors is essentially a radio camera, with from a few pixels to hundreds of pixelsšfar fewer than a modern digital camera has but still, such a radio camera will operate 100 times faster than a conventional system with a single point feed. an interferometer system is automatically such an array, and its ability to form an image with many pixels is limited only by its computing power (and the primary beam of the antenna elements). the signal that comes from the radiometer can be used in various ways. it can be directly detected as a broadband signal to maximize sensitivity to thermal or synchrotron emission. it can be closely sampled in time to search for pulses from neutron stars or used to construct a spectrum for the study of molecular or atomic spectral lines. the astronomy signals are almost always a very small fraction of the internal noise in the receiver and can only be measured by using a long integration time, sometimes of many hours (see §3.4).table 3.1 highlights selected major radio observatories currently operating, spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century112table 3.1 selected major u.s. radio observatories around the world:  operating, under construction, being plannedobservatorylocationfrequency (ghz)collecting areaa(m2)selected operating facilitiesallen telescope array (42 dishes)hat creek, california0.511.21,230arecibo observatoryarecibo, puerto rico0.31073,000arizona radio observatorytucson, arizona6850078 and 113batacama cosmology telescopechile15027028caltech submillimeter observatorymauna kea, hawaii20095085combined array for research in millimeterwave astronomyowens valley, california70260770green bank telescopegreen bank, west virginia0.31007,850large millimeter telescopemexico852751,960south pole telescopesouth pole9527578submillimeter arraymauna kea, hawaii180900226very large arraysocorro, new mexico0.075013,250very long baseline array10 sites in united states0.3904,900selected facilities under constructionallen telescope array (350 dishes)hat creek, california0.511.210,220atacama large millimeter arraychile309606,000long wavelength array 1+new mexico0.0150.0920,000 @ 15 mhzmurchison widefield arraymurchison, australia0.080.38,000selected facilities in planningcornell caltech atacama telescopechile200900490square kilometer arrayto be determinedto be determined1,000,000 a the collecting area listed in column 4 is the geometric area of the aperture for the dishtype telescopes.  b two telescopes of 10 and 12 m diameter.facilities under construction, and facilities being planned within the u.s. community. the operating observatories represent an investment of roughly $1 billion. some of the newest observatories will be built in collaboration with other countries, a trend that will increase in the future. alma, a $1 billion observatory under construction in northern chile, is a collaboration among institutions in north america, europe, east asia, and chile. the square kilometer array, a project currently being designed and prototype tested, is a world collaboration that is also expected to cost more than $1 billion to build.note that a third of the facilities listed in table 3.1 are not located in the united states, although they are supported and operated in part or completely by u.s. public and private institutions. the atacama cosmology telescope (act), large millimeter telescope (lmt), submillimeter array (sma), south pole telescope spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.113the radio astronomy service(spt), alma, and cornell caltech atacama telescope (ccat) are at high altitude to minimize the difculties produced by atmospheric water vapor. the murchison wideeld array (mwa) is in western australia, where currently the rfi is exceptionally low. the australian and south african governments have established a level of protection against rfi for the ska in the event that it is built in their respective countries. the chilean government has done this for alma, which is now under construction. finding: scientic advances have required increasing measurement precision by passive radio and microwave facilities in order to obtain more accurate and thus more useful data sets. this need for precision will continue to increase.finding: large investments have been made in satellite sensors and sensor networks and in major radio observatories. new facilities costing billions of dollars are under construction or are being designed. 3.3 spectrum requirements and usethe spectral windows used to observe cosmic objects of interest are determined by the physics of the objects and the atmosphere through which the incoming radiation must pass. using current spectrum allocations as well as many windows of opportunity, radio astronomers are able to learn fascinating information about the cosmos in which we live.continuum and line observationsmost radio astronomy observations fall into one of two categories: continuum observations and line observations. with respect to continuum observations, continuous spectrum from a radio source covers a wide frequency range, often a factor of about 1,000 in frequency, and the intensity commonly changes slowly with frequency. the spectrum often shows a maximum in some band, but some sources show a steady change, either increasing or decreasing, with frequency, over the entire available radio range. the sensitivity of continuum observations is proportional to the square root of the receiver™s bandwidth (see §3.4), so often the bandwidth is made as wide as is practical, limited by the technology of the receiver and by external interference. as an example of technologylimited bandwidth, consider very long baseline interferometry. in this case, signals from multiple, separated antennas are recorded for later processing. in 1967 the rst vlbi system used a 330 khz band because that was all that was available with computer tape drives. the bandwidth steadily increased as better recording systems became available, and now recordings at more than 1 ghz are made, on hard disks, at frequencies spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century114above 10 ghz. the objective has been increased sensitivity. increased sensitivity translates into a larger portion of the universe that can be studied, because of the squared (r2) distance effect. improving the sensitivity will be a strong driver for radio astronomy equipment for a long time to come. modern continuum observations cannot be restricted to the bands allocated to the radio astronomy service (ras); wider bands are needed for sensitivity. meeting this need has another effect, however; it increases the exposure to rfi. this problem will worsen with time as transmissions increase and the sensitivity of radio systems continues to be improved.line observations refer to the radiation in spectral lines from quantum transitions of atoms or molecules. different transitions give different linewidths, but they are well under 1 percent of the frequency. hence specialized, narrowband receivers are used. the observations, however, must be made at the transition frequency regardless of what rfi is present there. the most famous spectral line, arguably the most important one for radio astronomy, is the atomic hydrogen line at 1420 mhz. this line is protected, with the 14001427 mhz band allocated to the ras on an exclusive primary basis. even so, rfi has been seen in this band. at high frequencies, especially above 100 ghz, broad bandwidths are often used in this application to encompass many spectral lines simultaneously.while broad bandwidths are often used at millimeterwave frequencies to encompass many spectral lines simultaneously, recently there has also been renewed interest in making widebandwidth spectral scans at lower frequencies.9 most of the frequency spectrum observed in these surveys has no protection against rfi. of course, observations of spectral lines in external galaxies rarely fall in protected bands due to the redshift of the target, even when the rest frequency of the line is protected.pulsar observations are in a different category because they emit short pulses that can only be seen with a short integration time. these short pulses can be coadded with appropriate time shifts, like radar pulses, to enhance sensitivity. in addition, the pulses drift in frequency owing to intervening dispersive plasma. multichannel observations are required to limit dispersive smearing, and voltagebased signal processing is implemented to remove dispersion effects. 9 for example, the prebiotic interstellar molecule survey, a largescale search for new organic  molecules from the sagittarius b2 region using the gbt between 300 mhz and 50 ghz; also, spectral scans with almost complete coverage from 1 to 10 ghz have been made on both galactic and extragalactic targets from arecibo (c.j. salter, t. ghosh, b. catinella, m. lebron, m.s. lerner, r. minchin, and e. momjian, ﬁthe arecibo arp 220 spectral census i: discovery of the prebiotic molecule methanimine and new cmwavelength transitions of other molecules,ﬂ astronomical journal, 136(1): 389399 (2008)).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.115the radio astronomy serviceatmospheric windows and absorption featuresthe allocation of spectral bands for radio astronomy is based partly on the available atmospheric transmission windows, as shown in figure 1.3 in chapter 1. groundbased telescopes can observe only in bands where the atmosphere does not absorb the radiation. starting at the ionospheric cutoff near 15 mhz and extending to about 50 ghz is a relatively clear band. above 50 ghz, radio windows occur approximately at 65115 ghz, 125180 ghz, and 200300 ghz. at still higher frequencies the windows are less distinct, but they do exist at 330370 ghz, 460500 ghz, 600700 ghz, and 800900 ghz, as well as in other, narrower windows. current radio astronomy service allocationsfigure 3.8 shows the frequency bands that currently are allocated to the ras. the u.s. and international spectrum allocation table and footnotes are available in the national telecommunications and information administration™s (ntia™s) manual of regulations and procedures for federal radio frequency management (redbook)10 and in the federal communications commission™s (fcc™s) frequency allocation table.11ras has a narrow band approximately every octave across the radio spectrum, which allows the investigation of both the broadband and the spectral line emissions of celestial sources. band allocations start at 13.4 mhz and extend to 275 ghz, as shown in figure 3.8. spectrum usethe following subsections discuss the spectrum divided into ve broad ranges: below 100 mhz, 1001420 mhz, 1.430 ghz, 30275 ghz, and 2753000 ghz. a brief description of some of the current major scientic investigations in each range is presented, and new uses expected in the coming decade are mentioned. below 100 mhz in general, continuum sources will come under study in the spectrum range below 100 mhz. these sources include the sun and jupiter, as well as other stars and, possibly, jupiterlike planets around other stars. many extragalactic 10 available at http://www.ntia.doc.gov/osmhome/redbook/redbook.html; accessed january 13, 2010. 11 available at http://www.fcc.gov/oet/spectrum/table/; accessed january 13, 2010.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century116sio, hcncoh2oco3 mhz30 mhz30 mhz300 mhz300 mhz3 ghz3 ghz30 ghz30 ghz300 ghzexclusive passive primaryshared primarysecondaryfootnoteradio astronomy frequency allocations in the united stateshiohnh3figure 38r01628editable vectorsfigure 3.8 spectrum allocations to the radio astronomy service (ras) covering the range 3 mhz to 300 ghz. exclusive primary bands are in green, and shared primary bands are in yellow. the spectral region above 75 ghz is widely used by the passive services but little used by the active services for lack of suitable technology. that will change in the future. some of the bands at lower frequencies are more threatened by radio frequency interference than others. for example, the band 23.624.0 ghz, along with several bands between 22.0 and 23.6 ghz (not shown), are used by the ras and the earth explorationsatellite service because they contain the important water vapor and ammonia spectral lines. automotive collisionavoidance radar, which will come into wide use in the next few years, will be in the band 2227 ghz. the potential for interference is high. image courtesy of andrew clegg, national science foundation.sources have steep synchrotron spectra such that they are most powerful at low frequencies. a new radio telescope, the long wavelength array (lwa), is now under construction in new mexico. lwa observations will complement those at higher frequencies. the observatory is planned to consist ultimately of 53 stations spread over 400 km; each station will contain 256 broadband dipoles operating from 10 to 88 mhz. the angular resolution of the lwa will be a few seconds of arc, and the instantaneous eld of view will be a few degrees. the highresolution, spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.117the radio astronomy servicelowfrequency possibilities that these capabilities open up represent a new regime in radio astronomy. some plasma regions, including pulsar atmospheres, radiate coherently at low frequencies, and discovering these or other transient objects may give the most signicant results from the early use of this instrument.interference is particularly severe at frequencies below 100 mhz, where there are many commercial and government services, both xed and mobile. although the beamforming nature of the system will automatically reject some interfering signals, there remains the strong potential for rfi. the lwa design will implement a variety of rfi mitigation procedures.1001420 mhz studies of hydrogen, the most abundant element in the universe, are particularly important in the 1001420 mhz range. pioneering efforts are underway using the 1420 mhz spectral line of hydrogen, to detect material that is heated by the rst generation of stars in the early universe. that radiation now must be observed at much lower frequencies, owing to the large redshift. the radiation will be spread over a very broad band, and the signals will be particularly weak. months of integration at remote sites, such as western australia and/or the back side of the moon, will be required for reliable detections. a major instrument, the mwa, is now under construction in western australia for this purpose.the hydrogen line at 1420 mhz is used to study the motions and dynamics in the milky way and in external galaxies out to great distances. ﬁdark galaxiesﬂ with much hydrogen but few stars are also expected to exist. they will form a new frontier for observation, at frequencies from 1420 mhz down to about 300 mhz. the heavy isotope of hydrogen, deuterium, has an analog of the 1420 mhz line at 327 mhz. this line, rst detected only a few years ago, will be an important subject of study in the coming decade. it will provide information related to the origin of the universe and the cosmological synthesis of the elements. one of the most interesting and signicant discoveries in radio astronomy was the detection of pulsars. their huge magnetic, electric, and gravitational elds, impossible to reproduce in laboratories on earth, allow observations of matter and radiation under extreme conditions. pulsars generally emit most strongly at frequencies in the range from 50 to 600 mhz, but they are often observed up to a few gigahertz and, for a few objects, to 100 ghz. 1.430 ghzthe study of the nuclei of galaxies, including that of the milky way, is an important and fundamental topic in astronomy; it is done to a large extent between 1.4 and 30 ghz. problems that can be studied in this range include the properties spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century118of massive black holes, explosive activities and the production of intense double radio sources from galactic nuclei, the collimation and acceleration of relativistic jets of plasma, the in˚uence of galactic nuclei on the morphological structure of galaxies, and the formation of galaxies and quasars.the study of hydroxyl (oh) with primary bands at 1.61.7 ghz and also at 4.7 ghz, 6.0 ghz, and other frequencies is of interest for investigating phenomena associated with the formation of protostars and the initial stages of star formation. oh is often seen in the form of masers in the atmospheres around stars. exceedingly strong emission from oh ﬁmegamasersﬂ is seen in some galaxies. it can be a million or more times stronger than the emission from masers in the milky way and so can be seen to great distances. these observations give information on magnetic elds in other galaxies and on their evolution over cosmic time. 30275 ghz the spectral region above 30 ghz is crucial for the identication and study of interstellar molecules. some astronomers and biologists think that interstellar chemistry may have supplied earth with prebiotic compounds essential for terrestrial life. consequently, establishing the inventory of molecules in interstellar gas is central to astrobiology and astrochemistry. in addition, molecules in the 30275 ghz frequency range provide essential diagnostics for star formation.the band from 65 to 115 ghz has relatively little absorption from the atmosphere and is one of the best for both continuum and spectral observations. more than 100 molecules, as well as 25 different isotopic species, have been detected here. these include complex molecules such as ch3 ch2 oh and ch3 och3. some molecules have several isotopic species in this range, so that isotopic abundance ratios can be studied. as an example, the basic molecule hcn has the isotopic species h12 c14 n, h14 cn, and h12 c15 n in the 8692 ghz range, and all have been observed in the interstellar gas. the most important transitions in this frequency range, however, are generated by the co molecule at 115 and 230 ghz. emission from these lines is pervasive throughout our entire galaxy and in other galaxies. indeed, the bulk of the literature here is based on co observations. co™s millimeter transitions are widely used to trace starforming molecular gas, and this is crucial for assessing star formation in the milky way and other galaxies. as the sensitivity of telescopes continues to improve, studies of star formation using the weaker lines of hcn and hco+ are also becoming important. the band near 43 ghz is regularly used to study quasars and galactic nuclei with the vlba. at this high frequency, extreme angular resolution is obtained, 0.1 milliarcsecond. this corresponds to a footprint on the moon, as seen from earth. the frequency band 217231 ghz provides a window near the peak of the cmb spectrum. because of its low intensity and the strong variable contaminating spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.119the radio astronomy serviceemission from the atmosphere, accurate measurement of the cmb must be made in extreme environments, with highaltitude radio telescopes, at the south pole, or with highaltitude aircraft, balloons, and spacecraft. this region of the spectrum has become increasingly important in the past two decades, and the emphasis placed on this band will continue to increase as new telescopes and new instrumentation proliferate.2753000 ghzexploration of the electromagnetic spectrum between 275 and 3000 ghz has only begun in earnest in the past decade, as a consequence of the great strides made in the development of quantum heterodyne mixers and highprecision largeaperture antennas and the ability to make large arrays from them. because the water vapor in the atmosphere is only partially transparent in selected portions of this band (see figure 1.3), observations must be done at extraordinarily dry sites, most of which are at elevations greater than 4,000 m. the peak of the entire electromagnetic spectrum of the universe occurs in the middle of this band, at about 1 thz. extraordinary opportunities exist to study the universe in the early stages of its development, especially around redshifts of about 610 when the rst stars  reionized the universe at the end of the socalled dark ages. an important concept is that the intensity of thermal radiation from galaxies, which follows the rayleighjeans law, is proportional to the square of the frequency, so that galaxies™ measured ˚ux densities are essentially independent of distance, because the increasing redshift of the radiation due to the expansion of the universe exactly compensates for the inversesquare law loss suffered in propagation. the rst deep images from the alma array (see table 3.1), now under construction, are expected to be dominated by galaxies at great redshift that are not seen at all in the deep eld images of the hubble space telescope at optical wavelengths. the 2753000 ghz band will be very important in the eld of astrochemistry, which seeks to understand how various molecules form and build up in complexity in regions of the interstellar medium where dense molecular clouds form and spawn new generations of stars. the importance of this band is due to the fact that the intrinsic strength of spectral lines from molecules and atoms increases as the fourth power of frequency. hence the spectrum in this region is almost a ﬁforestﬂ of spectral lines in the direction of starforming molecular clouds. instruments such as alma will be able to image these regions with high angular resolution that will only be surpassed by infrared arrays in space, which are many decades from feasibility. a critical astronomical problem of our age is the question of how planets form from the debris disks left over after a star forms from it host molecular cloud. the spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century120emission strength of the dust in such disks increases as the square of the frequency and is most readily imaged at the highest radio frequencies, which are afforded in the 2753000 ghz band. in addition, the radio source associated with the supermassive black hole in the center of the milky way has a peak in its emission spectrum at about 600 ghz. this source is obscured by plasma scattering at frequencies below 200 ghz, and it can only be studied directly at higher frequencies. the size of the source has recently been determined to be 37 microarcseconds from vlbi observations.12 observations at higher frequencies with larger vlbi arrays will provide images that show how light is bent in the strong gravity regime close to the event horizon of a black hole, thereby providing greater understanding of the general theory of relativity and the behavior of matter in this environment. finding: radio wave bands (10 mhz to 3 thz) are indispensable for collecting information associated with specic astronomical phenomena. often the same bands are similarly indispensable for passive earth remote sensing, and the passive nature of both services enables them to productively share the spectrum.3.4 sensitivity requirementsjust as do earth remote sensing researchers (see chapter 2), radio astronomers use microwave radiometers to measure the total noise power received when an ras telescope is pointed in a particular direction. the power received from an astronomical source is usually much less than that generated in the ampliers and electronics or than stray radiation picked up from the ground (which emits at about 300 k). radiometers and telescopes are carefully designed to minimize this contaminating signal and to keep it stable so that it can be subtracted to nd the signal of interest. radiometers may be broadband (with bandwidths from 10s of megahertz to several gigahertz) to maximize sensitivity to continuum sources, or they may be optimized for spectralline observations, using a spectrometer that divides the radiation received over a broadband into many thousands of narrow channels. radiometers may also be designed to be sensitive to the linear or circular polarization of the received radiation, which carries additional important information such as the direction of the magnetic eld in a synchrotronemitting plasma: radio astronomy is a very versatile and powerful probe of astronomical magnetic elds. the power radiated by an extended source at frequency f is usually expressed as a ﬁbrightness temperatureﬂ tb, which is the temperature of a blackbody that would emit the same amount of radiation, at that frequency. brightness tempera12 s.s. doeleman et al., ﬁeventhorizonscale structure in the supermassive black hole candidate at the galactic centre,ﬂ nature, 455: 7880 (september 2008).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.121the radio astronomy servicetures range from 2.7 k for the cmb to more than 1012 k for energetic nonthermal sources (pulsars, masers, and quasars). astronomers, however, are often interested in much smaller differences of brightness temperature: for example, the tiny variations in the cmb temperature from one direction to another, which are only a few microkelvin. the radio power incident on the antenna is called the ˚ux density and is usually denoted by sf; it is also called the spectral power ˚ux density or spectral pfd. flux density is measured in janskys (jy, named after the pioneer radio astronomer karl jansky), where 1 jy = 10˛26 w m˛2 hzœ1. to bring the small magnitude of a jansky ﬁdown to earth,ﬂ consider that a garagedoor opener on the moon would produce about 5 jy on earth. a television transmitter on the planet jupiter, more than 600 million kilometers away, would produce about 1 jy on earth. as another example, the sun is a nearly ideal blackbody with temperature t  5,800 k. on earth, its ˚ux density at 10 ghz is about 1.2  106 jy. by the inversesquare law, ˚ux density decreases with distance as r œ2. currently, the weakest detectable cosmic radio sources have ˚ux densities about 1 microjansky, so a star like the sun could be detected out to a million au, or about onetenth of a lightyear. this is substantially less than the distance to the nearest star. although the thermal radio emission from stars like the sun cannot be detected at great distances, the thermal radio emission from other types of stars can be detected. more importantly, the more luminous sources in the universe, including quasars and gammaray bursts, can be detected at redshifts of 5 or more, corresponding to 90 percent of the way across the universe, or to the time when galaxies were rst condensing from the primordial universe. the signaltonoise ratio (snr) with which a source can be detected is approximately given bysnr = sf aeff (b  )1/2/2k tsyswhere k is boltzmann™s constant (1.38  10œ23 w hzœ1 kœ1), b is the bandwidth of the radiometer,  is the integration time, and tsys is the system temperature, a measure of the radiometer noise. the snr generally must be 3 or greater for a positive detection, but a statistically sound result usually requires snr = 5 or more.the system temperature tsys expresses the total unwanted noise power entering the receiver or generated in it as an equivalent temperature and is measured in degrees kelvin; it includes contributions from the sky (including the cmb and emission from the milky way), from the atmosphere, from the ground around the telescope, from interference (rfi), and from the telescope and ampliers. the relative strength of these components and their absolute magnitude vary widely with frequency. except for solar bursts, the signal from the source under study is usually much smaller than the system noise. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century122sensitivity limitsradio astronomers maximize the snr in their studies by using antennas with large collecting areas, such as the 100 m green bank telescope or the 305 m arecibo dish. they now have a project, the square kilometer array, that will have a collecting area of about 1 km2, or 106 m2. the ska is in the study and prototype phase; an optimum location for it should be selected within a few years™ time.using the widest possible bandwidth also maximizes the snr for a continuum source. some modern radiometers have fractional bandwidths as wide as f /f = 20% or more. broadband observations are essential for detecting the most distant known galaxies and the tiny ˚uctuations in the brightness of the cmb. the usable bandwidth is often limited by rfi.radio astronomers generally use very long integration times (hours or days) to maximize the snr, but for some observations (pulsars and other transients), the integration time is limited by the duration of the signal itself. this can be a millisecond or less. the snr can also be increased by reducing the system temperature, but current technology is close to the minimum possible tsys for frequencies less than 100 ghz. the sensitivity of existing and proposed telescopes is shown in figure 3.9.a simple example will illustrate these ideas. let the gbt look at a 10 microjansky source. then the received spectral power is 4  10œ28 watts per hertz, or, in common engineering units, œ244 dbm hzœ1. if the receiver has a system temperature of 30 k, then the noise spectral power is 4  10œ22 w hzœ1, or œ184 dbm hzœ1, a million times larger than the signal power. to make a positive detection by smoothing the receiver output to snr = 3 requires that the product b be 1012. this could be obtained, for example, with b = 100 mhz and  = 104 seconds. if a measurement of the ˚ux density to 10 percent accuracy is wanted on this source, then the product b must be increased by a factor of 100, requiring a bandwidth of 1,000 mhz and an integration time of 105 seconds, longer than a day.observations like this are already being done at gigahertz frequencies, and they will become more common as new broadband instrumentation spreads throughout the radio community (figure 3.9). such observations are passive and cause no interference, but they use much more spectrum than is allocated to the ras. the ras bands, however, still are important for many narrowband observations that also are routinely donešfor example, on spectral linesšand they are vital for the eess. note, however, that some extremely important astrophysical problems, such as studying redshifted hi with the 1420 mhz spectral line of hi, will need the entire range from 1420 mhz down to about 100 mhz. this broadband passive use by the ras means that rfi outside the protected bands is of serious concern. it drives the observatory locations to remote sites such as western australia and will force consideration of the back side of the moon as a possible radio observatory spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.123the radio astronomy servicefigure 313r01628uneditable bitmapped imagelog sensitivity (jy)log frequency (hz)evlafigure 3.9 the rootmeansquare sensitivity of various highangularresolution arrays in radio  astronomy as a function of frequency. the discrete symbols refer to instruments that are in operation now. they are generally tunable by about +/20 percent of their indicated frequencies. the solid lines refer to instruments that are under construction and will be operational by 2012. note that the instruments under construction are between one and three orders of magnitude more sensitive than the existing ones. the sensitivity is proportional to the system temperature of the receivers and inversely proportional to the collecting area and the square root of the bandwidth and integration time, which in all cases is taken as 12 hours. the sensitivities were calculated from the array speci˚cations on the web sites of each instrument. lofar = low frequency array (netherlands); gmrt = giant metrewave radio telescope (india); evla = expanded very large array (new mexico); vla = very large array (new mexico); alma = atacama large millimeter array (chile); carma = combined array for research in millimeterwave astronomy (california); sma = submillimeter array (hawaii). see table 3.1 in this chapter for more information. image courtesy of james moran, harvardsmithsonian center for astrophysics.site. this rfi is also a strong driver for the development of mitigation studies and technologies within the ras community. 3.5 interference and its mitigationradio astronomy deals with exceedingly weak signals. as described in §3.4, they can be a million times smaller than the internal receiver noise, and their measurespectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century124ment, or even just their detection, can require bandwidths of many gigahertz and integration times of a day or more. this requirement puts a premium on operating in a very low noise environment. it should be emphasized that serious interference can result from weak transmitters even when they are situated in the sidelobes of a radio astronomy antenna. this state of affairs has been recognized by the international telecommunication union (itu) internationally and by the fcc in the united states, and various spectral bands have been allocated to the ras for ﬁexclusiveﬂ or ﬁsharedﬂ use of these bands. however, ﬁexclusiveﬂ does not mean that there must be zero emission in the protected bands. it is a fundamental fact that any informationcarrying signal must contain outofband emission, which spreads across a wide radio spectrum. the regulation of this necessary outofband emission from a licensed transmitter involves controlling the intensity of the emission, and the fcc denition leads to an allowable level that, unfortunately, can cause serious interference with radio astronomy observations. it is likely that this situation will become worse in the future, as the ras requirements become stricter with the study of weaker sources, and at the same time the active services are proliferating.itur recommendation ra.769 discusses interference protection criteria for the radio astronomy service and denes threshold levels of emissions that cause interference detrimental to radio astronomy. however, for modern measurements these levels are unrealistic, because they are not based on the current state of the art. the levels are calculated as 10 percent of the noise ˚uctuations, but the noise is calculated with a bandwidth of the allocated channel. however, bandwidths hundreds of times wider than this are routinely used. in fact, much of radio astronomy would no longer be possible if observations were restricted to the allocated channels. the other factor in the noise calculation, the integration time, is assumed to be 2,000 seconds, whereas in modern practice the integration times often are 10 or 50 times longer. again, if observations were limited to 2,000 seconds, much of radio astronomy, especially the new realms projected for the coming decade, would be impossible. hence, the limits set by itur recommendation ra.769 are inadequate today, and they will become more so in the future. this means that unwanted emissions that are legal can be damaging to the ras measurements.another facet of the interference problem comes from emissions that essentially are unregulated. cordless telephones, garagedoor openers, and other unlicensed devices are allowed to have some low level of emissions, and at radio observatories an attempt is made to restrict the use of such consumer devices. but in fact they are powerful by ras standards, as seen by the example of the garagedoor opener on the moon in §3.4, and will cause serious rfi if they are in the near sidelobes of a large antenna, even if they are far away. this problem also is worsening with the availability of new devices and their more widespread use. the incipient widespread use of automotive anticollision radar, operating at kband, is a cause for concern in this regard.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.125the radio astronomy servicea further cause of harmful rfi comes from transmitters that are operating illegally, either by producing excessive spurious or outofband transmissions or by operating at an unassigned frequency. the 14001427 mhz band is allocated to the ras on an exclusive primary basis, but strong rfi has been seen in this band at many radio observatories around the world. better monitoring of the radio spectrum and allocations would provide a better understanding of actual interference levels.radio observatories are located in remote sites, often behind mountains, to reduce humanmade noise, which is roughly proportional to the local population density. but the problem is particularly severe with aircraft and satellite transmissions, from which there is no escape. observations of transient phenomena are especially vulnerable to rfi because of the highly variable nature of both the phenomenon and the rfi. finding: the rules for outofband and spurious emissions in the primary allocated radio astronomy service (ras) bands (e.g., 14001427 mhz) do not provide adequate interference protection for ras purposes.the fcc rules that pertain to the above nding are given in appendix d.finding: geographical separation of radio telescopes from transmitters (e.g., through the establishment of radio quiet zones and the remote siting of observatories) is currently effective in avoiding much radio frequency interference, but the proliferation of airborne and satellite transmissions and the widespread deployment of mobile, lowpower personal devices threaten even the most remote sites.examples of interference in a protected bandfigure 3.10 shows interference in the band 1610.61613.8 mhz, which is allocated to the ras on a shared primary basisšthe interference was received in a 12 m antenna when an iridium satellite passed through the beam. the satellite operates in the mobile satellite service (mss) band 1618.251626.5 mhz and, as seen in the gure, emits spurious radiation at 1612 mhz. during the measurement for figure 3.10, careful attention was paid to ensure that the radiation was from the iridium satellite itself and not from a glonass satellite, and that the rfi was not due to intermodulation in the receiver. figure 3.11 shows the effect of similar satellite interference on an image made with the vla in the same protected band, 1610.61613.8 mhz. the image made in the presence of the rfi is useless.the 1610.61613.8 mhz band is most commonly used by radio astronomers for studying the oh radical that exists in stellar atmospheres and in clouds in the milky way; the studies are conducted in a spectroscopic mode in which many spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century126figure 310r01628uneditable bitmapped imagesfigure 3.10 showing radio frequency interference due to spurious emission from an iridium satellite in the band 1610.61613.8 mhz, which is allocated to the radio astronomy service on a primary basis. this measurement was made in leeheim, germany, in november 2006, with a 12 meter parabolic antenna. careful attention was paid to eliminating the possibility of unwanted interference from intermodulation products in the receiver. time runs down in the graph, over a total of 14 minutes, and frequency is horizontal. the motion of the satellite can be seen in the changing doppler shift of the signals as the satellite passes through the beam of the antenna. the peak is about œ85 dbm, substantially higher than the value recommended by the international telecommunication union, when it is converted to the standard model using an isotropic antenna. when converted to standard radio astronomy units, the ux density during the short bursts is about 2,500 jy. image courtesy of cept and bnetza.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.127the radio astronomy servicearc secarc sec1510505101515105051015arc secarc sec1510505101515105051015figure 311r01628editable vectortaken from figure 41 in r00897figure 3.11 the effect of radio frequency interference (rfi) on an astronomical image made at the very large array. (left) image of a faint ﬁoh/ir starﬂ made in a narrow band at 1612.22 mhz, within the band 1610.61613.8 mhz that is allocated to the radio astronomy service on a primary basis. (right) the same ˚eld of observation of the image made when an iridium satellite was 22 degrees from the star. this image is made useless by the rfi. images courtesy of g.b. taylor, university of new mexico. narrow bands are measured simultaneously. the rfi depicted in figure 3.10 could adversely affect oh observations made when the satellite is well outside the main beam of the antenna, even for a large antenna like the gbt that has a forward gain of 63 dbi at 1612 mhz. the potential for harmful rfi is high, especially considering that the iridium constellation contains 66 satellites. mitigationﬁunwantedﬂ emission is of two kinds: ﬁoutofbandﬂ and ﬁspurious.ﬂ outofband emission is unwanted emission on a frequency or frequencies immediately outside the transmitter™s necessary bandwidth; it results from the modulation process. this type of emission is different from spurious emission, which results from harmonics or intermodulation products generated in the transmitter. when considering the regulation of signals that may spill into science service bands, account should be taken of how such signals will affect the scientic instruments in question. simple excision techniques, in both time and frequency, have long been used to mitigate the effects of interference. more sophisticated procedures using statistical methods are currently under investigation, as described in chapter 4. the present period is one of increasing sensitivity in the radio astronomy systems and increasspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century128ing use of the spectrum by other users, particularly the lowpower wireless applications. these needs are con˚icting, and the interference problem will undoubtedly increase. focusing more attention on mitigation possibilities is important. at the same time, the radio astronomy enterprise must be protected by increased vigilance over its protected bands. the approach to reducing the impact of rfi at radio observatories occurs at several different levels, depending on the resources at each observatory. these approaches are brie˚y described in the following subsections. see chapter 4 for additional discussion on this topic.regulatory and international meetingsonly the largest observatories (e.g., the national astronomy and ionosphere center [naic] and the national radio astronomy observatory [nrao]) are normally able to provide continuous staff attendance at international meetings, such as regular itu working party 7d (wp7d) meetings and the world radiocommunication conference (wrc). however, smaller, university observatories are kept informed of events in the international arena by regular teleconferences among the observatories, and by attendance at the u.s. wp7d teleconferences. the nrao has a spectrum manager, an astronomer who pursues his own astronomical research but who spends a signicant fraction of his time on spectrum management activities, including responding to the fcc on nrao™s behalf and contributing to and attending international itu meetings. quiet zones around observatoriesonly two observatories on u.s. soil benet from quiet zone protection: nrao (green bank, west virginia) and naic (arecibo, puerto rico). in addition, the united states is a major partner in the alma project being built in northern chile. the chilean authorities, through the subsecretaría de telecomunicaciones (subtel), have agreed to a considerable level of protection from interference from other services around the alma site. the administration of these quiet zones requires resources. for example, in the case of the national radio quiet zone (nrqz) at green bank, west virginia, all applications for xed transmitters within the nrqz are examined by nrao staff, who make comments to the fcc on the basis of a technical analysis, usually including propagation predictions over the specic path. often, some compromise as to power, frequency, and, in particular, precise location of the new transmitter, is agreed to between the parties concerned. the administration of an nrqz by a radio observatory requires a signicant, continuing effort. however, this effort is usually very well rewarded. for example, spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.129the radio astronomy serviceat the green bank observatory in west virginia during 2007, 538 requests for  coordination within the quiet zone were processed. they involved 850 sites within the quiet zone and 872 transmission frequencies. in 13 cases, a site inspection was carried out. for about a dozen of the requests, a power restriction was eventually placed on the applicant™s fcc transmitter license. however, in a far greater number of cases, a solution agreeable to both parties, one that did not necessarily restrict the transmitter power, was negotiated. the negotiations usually resulted in alternative transmitter sites and/or directional antennas pointed away from the observatory, with a compromise in capability for the transmitter operator, while still providing adequate protection for the observatory.local radio frequency interference the nrao engineering staff at green bank includes a team that tracks down instances of rfi that appear at the observatory. the team™s equipment includes a portable interference system, which can trace interference originating within a few miles of the observatory. if it is possible technically to suppress the interfering source, by simple technical means or perhaps by negotiation with the relevant party, this is done. in very rare cases, where the aforementioned methods fail, the fcc may be called on to intercede. local engineeringthe observatories themselves take all practical engineering precautions in the design and construction of equipment in order to provide adequate ltering and dynamic range so as to make equipment as immune as possible to interference from outofband signals. special techniques are sometimes used, such as a dedicated antenna to monitor a particular source of interference; the data gathered by such monitoring can then be subtracted from the astronomical data by some means. this is more a research than an operational area at present, with few such systems currently in use. nrao, for example, is investigating several mitigation possibilities, including active rfi cancellation, ways of extending dynamic range, and highperformance ltering using the latest technology. data processing rfi mitigation using software processing techniques is in routine use at most observatories. this approach includes data excision based on time or frequency; it is often carried out automatically, with some manual input. other techniques are active research areas at a number of observatories, as described elsewhere in this report. see chapter 4, in particular. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century130finding: while unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.finding: important scientic inquiry and applications enabled by the radio astronomy service (ras) are signicantly impeded or precluded by radio frequency interference (rfi). such rfi has reduced the societal and scientic return of ras observatories and necessitates costly interference mitigation, which is often insufcient to prevent rfi damage.3.6 importance of radio astronomy to the nationthe science of radio astronomy started in 1932, with the accidental discovery of radio waves from the milky way by karl jansky. little happened in this eld during the 1930s, but during world war ii the united states mobilized a huge development effort in radar technology. the instrumentation and techniques resulting from this work fueled modern research in radio astronomy.13 since then radio astronomy has continuously beneted from new technological developments; many of these have come from government and commercial sources, but some have been forthcoming from the development laboratories within radio astronomy itself. this section outlines some of the important benets to the nation provided by radio astronomy.radio interferometrythe development of interferometry has had widespread applications in elds in addition to radio astronomy and provides attendant benets to society. the underlying principle of interferometry is the measurement of the relative time of arrival of signals from a radio source, among a group of antennas called an array. triangulation then gives the direction of arrival of the radiation, meaning that the angular position of the radio source can be measured precisely. furthermore, comparison of the arriving signals provides a method of imaging the sourcešthat is, of determining the angular structure of the emission, which reveals the structure and dynamics of the source. these two applicationsšprecise positioning and imagingšare important, as noted above, in elds beyond radio astronomy. for example, the radio technique of combining observations from different congurations of an array of antennas has formed the underlying principle of back projections, which is mathematically very closely related to all the techniques of medical imaging, such at computed axial tomography (cat) and magnetic reso13 r. buderi, ﬁthe invention that changed the world: how a small group of radar pioneers won the second world war and launched a technological revolution,ﬂ touchstone (march 1998).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.131the radio astronomy servicenance imaging (mri). there has been much crossfertilization in the development of these techniques.14 the highest angular precision by radio interferometers has been achieved through the use of networks of telescopes distributed around the world and linked through a technique called very long baseline interferometry. to provide the timeofarrival information, receiving stations must be equipped with precise clocks. the best technology for this purpose is the hydrogen maser frequency standard, developed originally at harvard university and since perfected primarily for vlbi, radar astronomy, and space tracking needs. the positions of a set of very distant radio sources have been determined with vlbi networks, providing a stable, precise reference frame for a wide variety of applications. for example, with this established reference frame the relative motions of antennas on earth can be tracked to an accuracy of a few millimeters per year. this capability led to the rst measurement of the contemporary motions of tectonic plates. fluctuations in the rotation rate of earth and the orientation of its spin axis are continuously monitored this way and provide information useful to the understanding of the composition and motions of earth™s molten core and the annual changes in polarice loading. these techniques of radio surveying based on triangulation formed the intellectual and technical basis for the development of the gps and other terrestrial navigation systems. in the radio astronomy case, a distant radio source acts as a transmitter whose signal is received by a number of antennas, so that its position can be determined by relative timeofarrival methods. in the gps case, a user at an unknown location on earth receives signals from an array of satellites, from which the user nds his or her position through triangulation based on a similar timeofarrival analysis. gps thus is highly analogous to the earlier vlbi, even to their both using atomic frequency standards as clocks. communications disruptionsenergetic particles from the sun, released in bursts called coronal mass ejections, arrive at earth and can cause a disruption in radio communications, interference with gps operation, surges on power grids, damage to earthorbiting satellites, and hazards to astronauts. the prediction of such events is important so that measures can be taken to ameliorate their effects. amelioration, for example, might be achieved by shifting communications to lessaffected frequencies and by placing satellites in standby mode. hence the advance knowledge of the onset of these disruptive events is benecial, just as the prediction of the arrival of meteorological events is important to the reduction of property damage and loss of life. 14 national research council, the decade of discovery in astronomy and astrophysics, washington, d.c.: national academy press, 1991, pp. 129130.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century132coronal mass ejections originate from disturbances on the sun, generally in the form of prominences and ˚ares. because cmes consist of charged particles, they continuously emit radio emission as they travel outward from the sun, and they can be tracked by radio telescopes, allowing 1 to 2 days of warning. flares often are associated with huge bursts of radio emission, which have been known to seriously interfere with gps operations, as described in §3.1. one of the goals of solar physics is to make longterm predictions of ˚ares and cmes by studying the emissions from the sun (see figure 3.7).fundamental physicsthe recent discovery, based on astronomical observations, that normal matter (baryonic matter) constitutes only 4 percent of the mass of the universe, while the rest is in the form of dark matter and dark energy, is transforming the understanding of physics. radio astronomical observations of the rotation of galaxies have proved to be an excellent way to trace the distribution of dark matter. meanwhile, laboratory experiments are underway in an attempt to identify the particle nature of dark matter. this combined effort in astronomy and laboratory physics can be expected to lead to a major step forward in the understanding of the universe. the measurement by radio astronomers of the timing of the rotations of pulsars in tight binary orbits about companion neutron stars, with exquisite precision, has been providing physicists with the strongest afrmative answer yet to the centurylong question, ﬁwas einstein right?ﬂ (see figure 3.3).technology developmentradio astronomy has advanced the limits of technology as it has opened up spectral bands at progressively higher frequencies. for example, the best technology for lownoise receivers at frequencies above 100 ghz and into the terahertz range is based on quantum devices known as superconductorinsulatorsuperconductor (sis) mixers. these devices were rst developed by radio astronomers at the university of california in the 1980s and independently at at&t bell laboratories. they have now been perfected, primarily for use in radio astronomy, to operate with noise levels at a few times the quantum limit. as military and telecommunications applications move into this band, they will undoubtedly make use of this technology. precision antennasthe need for high sensitivity has led radio astronomers to develop the technology of building highly efcient, large, parabolic antennas, which have extensive spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.133the radio astronomy serviceapplication in the telecommunications and military communities. radio astronomers rst developed the theory of how to design large, fully steerable antennas that maintain high surface accuracy in the presence of gravitational deformations. they invented an electronic surveying technique, known colloquially as radio holography, which enables re˚ector surfaces to be set to an accuracy of a few microns. methods that they developed for measuring antenna efciency from observations of standard radio sources and solar system bodies are in wide use.distributed network computingthe search for extraterrestrial intelligence (seti) project, a search carried out in radio bands, was faced with an enormous computational problem in analyzing its voluminous data to nd nonrandom signals that might be of extraterrestrial origin. the computing resources needed to sort through the collected data were far beyond those available to the seti researchers. the solution was to enlist the aid of interested people, who would download an analysis program and a section of data and would do the analysis in their computer™s background. more than 5 million people in 226 countries responded and are part of the seti@home project. the seti@home researchers went on to develop the berkeley open infrastructure for network computing (boinc). boinc™s opensource volunteer computing platform currently engages the public in 42 scientic supercomputing projects, including climate modeling and global warming studies (climateprediction.net); drug research for hiv, malaria and cancer, and protein folding (predictor@home); gravity waves (einstein@home); particle physics (lhc@home); as well as seti@home. boinc volunteers provide about 2 peta˚ops of computing power to the various projects, more than the world™s most powerful supercomputer.education and public outreachradio astronomy requires a broad spectrum of technically trained people, from theorists and observers with doctoral degrees to technicians with much less education, perhaps even trained primarily on the job. theory, observations, and analysis are usually done by small teams consisting of one person or several senior people along with junior people, students, and postdoctoral researchers. only a small fraction of the people trained for this eld actually stay in radio astronomy; the majority go into other elds, usually still in a technical capacity. they form a valuable pool of people with a wide range of skills who readily nd technical jobs in industry or government laboratories. the general public is greatly interested in astronomy, perhaps more than in other sciences. there is a steady stream of astronomy stories and images in the press. at the nation™s colleges and universities, it is the most common subject taken spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century134as a science requirement, with thousands of students per year in elementary astronomy classes at the larger universities. all the major radio observatories have wellattended visitor programs, with the arecibo observatory in puerto rico drawing 120,000 visitors annually, of whom 30 percent are children. this interest translates into an appreciation of science and technology, and draws students into technical subjects, helping to provide the personnel resources needed in today™s world. finding: in addition to the intellectual benets that they provide, radio astronomy studies provide many technological benets to american society. finding: radio astronomy provides a diverse and valuable set of educational opportunities.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1354technology and opportunities for the mitigation of  radio frequency interferencethe capacity to address interference issues is a key element in any system using the radio frequency (rf) spectrum. this is especially true for passive sensing systemsšthose that do not transmit but only receive naturally occurring  emissionsšdue to the level of sensitivity required for these systems to extract useful environmental and scientic data. interference can be caused by a variety of sources: other valid users of the rf spectrum, improperly functioning consumer and commercial equipment, and improper or disallowed use of the spectrum. as the use of the rf spectrum for commercial, industrial, government, and scientic uses continues to increase, the number of potentially interfering sources will increase as well. mitigation techniques are a limited but critical element in efforts aimed at extracting scientic value from an increasingly difcult rf environment.the earth explorationsatellite service (eess) and radio astronomy service (ras) have classically limited the impact of interference by using mitigation techniques. however, there are physical limits to the capacity of the ﬁunilateralﬂ techniques that typically have been used, and they often do not provide adequate protection from interference. recently, new techniques have been suggested, in which the active and passive users of the rf spectrum collaborate in order to share the spectrum. these ﬁcooperativeﬂ mitigation techniques may provide a potential for meeting the expanding spectral needs of the passivesensing community.this chapter is divided into ve sections: §4.1 addresses the expected trends in rf spectrum use that may call for increasing mitigation; §4.2, the drivers of spectrum use; §4.3, the capacity for unilateral mitigation technology; §4.4, the potential for mitigation through cooperative use; and §4.5, the costs of mitigation.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century1364.1 trends in active spectrum usageone of the primary concerns for passive sensing systems is the explosive growth in industrial, commercial, and consumer devices. this growth is fueled by user demand, investment capital, and the reallocation of underutilized spectral bands. the need for mitigation and the appropriate mitigation technique will vary depending on the type of equipment that will be permitted by the regulatory agencies, the technology being deployed, the time line for the deployment of systems, and the intensity of spectrum usage. this section and the next present a review of current spectrum usage and of the drivers for future spectrum usage, which provides the requisite basis for the development of the appropriate technical and regulatory mitigation strategies. current allocationsaccess to spectrum in the united states is assigned by the federal communications commission (fcc) and the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia). the process is described in useful detail in chapter 1 of the national research council™s 2007 report handbook of frequency allocations and spectrum protection for scientic uses.1 to summarize, spectrum is typically assigned to services (classes of users) on a primary basis or a secondary basis, and allocations include details on permitted transmission power levels and operation times. the difference between a primary allocation and a secondary allocation is essentially that the users of a secondary allocation must accept interference from the users of a primary allocation and conversely must not interfere with the users of the primary service. the international telecommunication union (itu), an agency of the united nations, periodically updates its allocation table to coordinate international spectrum usage and prevent problems due to interference. the itu radio regulations (iturr) are not binding on the united states in totošthe real treaty obligation of the u.s. government is that it will not assign transmitter licenses in such a way that will cause interference to stations licensed by other governments that are in accordance with the iturr. within this framework, national governments create and enforce additional regulations, typically to include additional details and to elaborate on permitted uses of the spectrum. in the united states, federal use of spectrum is managed by the ntia, whereas nonfederal (i.e., commercial, amateur, and passive scientic) use of spectrum is managed by the fcc. the authority of the fcc and ntia are parallel in this respect. fcc regulations 1 national research council, handbook of frequency allocations and spectrum protection for scientic uses, washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2007.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.137technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceconcerning the use of the spectrum are codied in title 47 of the code of federal regulations (47 c.f.r.). the radio astronomy community is represented in this process as the ﬁradio astronomy service,ﬂ and the earth remote sensing community is represented in this process as the ﬁearth explorationsatellite service.ﬂ a useful synopsis of 47 c.f.r. in terms relevant to the ras and eess, including tables of relevant spectral allocations, is given in the handbook.2 for example, this reference text shows that 2.07 percent of the spectrum below 3 ghz is allocated to the ras and eess on a primary basis and that 4.08 percent is allocated on a secondary basis (measured in hertz).from a regulatory perspective, the ras and eess are comparable to all other services, despite the fact that that they do not transmit. thus, the allocation of  spectrum to the ras and eess on a primary basis results nominally (but not  actuallyšsee below) in clear spectrum. the allocation of spectrum to the ras and eess on a secondary basis is useful mainly in the sense that it offers these services a legal basis for providing input into the use of these allocations. it should also be noted that the allocation of a frequency band to the ras and/or eess does not prevent interference even if the allocation is on a primary basis. this is because the effective bandwidth of any transmission is essentially unlimited when observed with a sufciently sensitive instrument. so, for example, the far outofband (sideband) emission of a transmission whose center frequency is properly in a band in which it has a primary allocation may, at some level, appear in nearby bands in which the ras and/or eess has a primary allocation. this has historically been a severe problem, particularly with respect to interference from services transmitting from satellites in lband. (see §3.5 for a discussion of radio frequency interference [rfi] from iridium satellites.) in contrast to active uses of the spectrum, the work of ras and eess users can be severely affected when the interference power level is far below the internal noise power level of the detection device, since long integration times are usually used in ras and eess measurements to reduce the rootmeansquare ˚uctuations in the internal noise. thus, this issue affects the ras and eess in a way that is fundamentally different from the way that it affects active users of the radio spectrum.the spectrum in which the ras and/or eess has a primary or secondary allocation is relatively small (see table 4.1). the spectrum in which the ras and/or eess has a secondary allocation has diminished usefulness, since there is no protection from the primary users of these bands. as noted in chapters 2 and 3, the spectrum requirements of the radio astronomy and earth exploration radio science community currently far exceed the spectrum available to the ras and eess on 2 national research council, handbook of frequency allocations and spectrum protection for scientic uses, washington, d.c.: the national academies press, 2007.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century138table 4.1 total spectrum allocated to the radio astronomy service (ras) and the earth explorationsatellite service (eess) within 9 khz to 3 ghztotal bandwidth allocation (mhz)percent of bandwidth allocated (%)eess only (9 khz3 ghz) primary37 1.23 secondary122 4.07 ras only (9 khz3 ghz) primary62.12 2.07 secondary35.5 1.18ras + eess (9 khz3 ghz) primary62.12 2.07 secondary122.5 4.08note: the percentage and bandwidth allocated to the ras and eess between 9 khz and 3 ghz as of this writing is given in the table above. note that ﬁras + eessﬂ is much less than the sum of ras and eess, particularly in primary bands, showing that the two services are able to share spectrum efficiently.either a primary or a secondary basis. for this reason, these users must routinely observe in bands in which the ras and/or eess has neither primary nor secondary allocations. this is authorized since passive (receiveonly) scientic use of the radio spectrum is not prohibited in any part of the electromagnetic spectrum. this is also often technically possible because some parts of the spectrum are sparsely utilized, and services that transmit typically do so with poor spectral efciency in both frequency and time (although current trends are in the direction of increased usage and improved spectral efciency; see §4.2). finding: owing to their receiveonly nature, the passive earth explorationsatellite service and radio astronomy service, operating from 10 mhz to 3 thz, are  incapable of interfering with other services.finding: currently, 2.07 percent of the spectrum below 3 ghz is allocated to the ras and eess on a primary basis, and 4.08 percent is allocated on a secondary basis (measured in hertz).current utilization studiesthe allocation of spectrum to a service does not necessarily imply that the allocated spectrum is always used for transmission; neither does it imply that the allocated spectrum cannot be used by others for passive scientic observations. in fact, there are a number of ways in which allocated spectrum might remain free of detectable spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.139technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencetransmissions and available for passive scientic observations. for example, in rural areas with low population density, some services may not be used to any detectable degree; that is, transmissions associated with the active services are typically fewer and weaker in these areas (see further discussion later in this section). if the area is remote enough, transmissions may be sufciently weak so as not to interfere with radio science observations (although such remote areas are reached by satellite and airborne radio sources). more often, however, the situation is intermediate in the sense that signicant interference is observed but can sometimes be managed through a combination of interference mitigation techniques (see §4.3 and §4.4). the ﬁchannelizationﬂ of frequencies within a given allocation, typically specied either in 47 c.f.r. or as the result of the adoption of an industry standard (e.g., ieee 802.11), is inherently inefcient. for example, a typical user of the land mobile radio service might use only a small number of widely spaced channels within the allocated band and may transmit on them only a tiny fraction of the time. thus even if an active user is received with sufcient strength to prevent the scientic use of some section of the spectrum while that user is transmitting, it is sometimes possible to exploit the sparse ﬁtimefrequencyﬂ utilization of spectrum by means of the techniques described in §4.3 and §4.4 to observe effectively when the active user is not transmitting. given the existing trend toward more efcient channelization and increased utilization, however, interference mitigation methods that rely on this property are in danger of becoming less effective over time.the modulation employed by a transmitter may be inherently inefcient, in the sense that it requires a large swath of spectrum but unevenly distributes the power over the channel. an example is the use of the national television system committee (ntsc) standard for analog television (tv), which requires a 6 mhz channel but places the vast majority of the transmitted power into just two carriers constituting only a few hundred kilohertz of bandwidth within this channel (see figure 4.1). radio astronomers have been able to observe within active ntsc channels in areas where ntsc transmissions are relatively weak (e.g., deep in the national radio quiet zone [nrqz]) by observing only within those portions of the channel where relatively little power is present and ltering out those parts of the channel where most of the power is located. however, the introduction of the new digital tv broadcast standard, known as atsc, makes this technique impossible. this is because the advanced television systems committee (atsc) lls the entire 6 mhz channel with a uniform distribution of power, leaving no ﬁholeﬂ through which to observe (see figure 4.1). the preceding comments can be summarized as follows: (1) the ﬁallocationﬂ of spectrum historically has not implied the ﬁutilizationﬂ of spectrum, which has beneted the passive scientic users of the radio spectrum. (2) technology trends are moving toward more efcient utilization of allocations, in both time and frequency, which is beginning to severely impact the ability to use some bands spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century140figure 41r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 4.1 a comparison of the digital (channel 10) and analog (channel 11) television signals. the digital signal is essentially uniform in power across the entire channel, whereas the analog signal transmits most of its information in two narrow bands, leaving holes through which radio astronomers can sometimes observe relatively strong natural sources. image courtesy of andrew clegg, national science foundation.for scientic uses, despite the importance of these uses. as explained later in this chapter, this is true even when taking into account the capabilities of existing and emerging techniques for the mitigation of interference.for these reasons, passivesensing scientic users of the radio spectrum are greatly concerned with the utilization of spectrum both within the bands allocated to the ras and eess and in all other bands accessible to current and planned instruments. furthermore, radio astronomers are concerned not only with spectral occupancy at frequencies at which they wish to observe, but they also monitor transmissions in nearby bands that have the potential to create interference through receiver compressionša condition in which an instrument is desensitized because a signal in a nearby band is present with such great strength that the receiver goes nonlinear. in this case the ability to mitigate the interference through ltering, while spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.141technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceretaining sensitivity, is beyond existing technology. the reason for this is that lters must be placed before the saturable active components, and because lters have losses, the system sensitivity is thereby reduced.the largest radio observatories routinely monitor the rf spectrum and typically maintain continuous monitoring programs of some sort. the results of monitoring campaigns are usually freely available for inspection onlinešfor example, at the interferencemonitoring web sites maintained by the nrao™s very large array (vla),3 by nrao at the green bank telescope,4 and by the national atmosphere and ionosphere center (naic) at arecibo observatory.5 unfortunately, these efforts are technically difcult and expensive to maintain and thus often have limited sensitivity and/or restricted timefrequency coverage. as a result, interference that is strong enough to be harmful to radio astronomy may escape detection by existing monitors. with regard to the eess community, the monitoring of spectral utilization is made even more difcult by the limitations of operations aboard aircraft and satellites and by the coarse spectral resolution of total power radiometers. however, some anecdotal results have been published (see figures 2.13 through 2.21, 3.10, and 4.2).6the actual utilization of the radio frequency spectrum has recently become a topic of increasing interest to active users of the spectrum as well. this has resulted in a number of studies reporting measurements of the utilization of the spectrum.7 typically, the results of such studies report results in terms of spectral occupancy, 3 see ﬁvla radio frequency interferenceﬂ at http://www.vla.nrao.edu/cgibin/r.cgi; accessed january 13, 2009.4 see ﬁgreen bank interference protection groupﬂ at http://www.gb.nrao.edu/ipg/; accessed january 13, 2009.5 see national atmosphere and ionosphere center, arecibo rfi web site, at http://www.naic.edu/~ruser/; accessed january 13, 2009.6 s.w. ellingson, g.a. hampson, and j.t. johnson, ﬁcharacterization of lband rfi and implications for mitigation techniques,ﬂ proc. ieee geoscience and remote sensing symp. (igarss 2003), vol. 3, pp. 17451747, july 2125, 2003.7 federal communications commission spectrum policy task force, report of the spectrum efciency working group, november 2002, available at http://www.fcc.gov/sptf/reports.html, accessed january 14, 2010; frank h. sanders and vince s. lawrence, broadband spectrum survey at denver, colorado, ntia report 95321, september 1995; frank h. sanders, bradley j. ramsey, and vincent s. lawrence, broadband spectrum survey at san francisco, ca, ntia report 99367, mayjune 1999; s.w. ellingson, ﬁspectral occupancy at vhf: implications for frequencyagile cognitive radios,ﬂ proc. ieee vehicular technology conf. 2005 fallšdallas, vol. 2, pp. 13791382 (september 2005); a.e.e. rogers, j.e. salah, d.l. smythe, p. pratap, j.c. carter, and m. derome, ﬁinterference temperature measurements from 70 to 1500 mhz in suburban and rural environments of the northeast,ﬂ proc. first int™l symp. on new frontiers in dynamic spectrum access networks (dyspan 2005), november 811, 2005, pp. 119123; mark a. mchenry and dan mccloskey, ﬁmultiband, multilocation spectrum occupancy measurements,ﬂ proc. 2006 isart conference, boulder, colorado (march 2006), available at http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov/pub/ntiarpt/06438, accessed january 14, 2010.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century142which can be dened as the fraction of time that a transmission can be detected at a given frequency, for a given sensitivity and a given timefrequency resolution.however, the perception of what constitutes occupancy can be different depending on the measurement and the interests of the person interpreting the results. for example, a recent study performed by the shared spectrum corporation reported 13.1 percent occupancy for new york city and 1 percent at green bank, west virginia, inside the nrqz.8 by contrast, a study of occupancies in terms somewhat more relevant to radio astronomy applications nds occupancy greater than 30 percent even in the relatively rural areas of westford, massachusetts, and hancock, new hampshire.9 both studies are probably internally consistent but cannot be compared because of their different assumptions about the appropriate timefrequency resolutions, thresholds of detection, and tolerable levels of outofband (oob) interference. measurements are also being made that attempt to bridge this gap by reporting results in terms of cumulative distribution functions (cdfs), which resolve ﬁoccupancyﬂ as a function of threshold of detection, and by also quantifying the fragmentation of unoccupied bandwidth. this activity is important, because often in both active and passive uses of the spectrum a minimum bandwidth must be available for the channel to be useful.10while the various efforts of the active and passive user communities have been useful in conrming the sparse timefrequency utilization of the spectrum, most existing studies are of limited help in understanding in detail the potential for interference and for cooperative spectrum use as described later in this chapter. this is due to limited sensitivity (i.e., the inability to detect weak signals that still are sufciently strong to constitute ﬁoccupancyﬂ to a typical user of that band), time resolution that is too coarse to be useful (for example, monitoring a frequency for only a few milliseconds every few seconds, thereby potentially missing strong signals), and frequency resolution that is too coarse to be useful (for example, monitoring bandwidths on the order of hundreds of kilohertz when the signals themselves have bandwidths on the order of kilohertz, thereby desensitizing the measurements) (see figure 4.2). this is essentially the same problem experienced by the monitoring programs of radio observatories, as mentioned above. thus, 8 mark a. mchenry and dan mccloskey, ﬁmultiband, multilocation spectrum occupancy measurements,ﬂ proc. 2006 isart conference, boulder, colorado (march 2006), available at http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov/pub/ntiarpt/06438/; accessed january 14, 2010.9 a.e.e. rogers, j.e. salah, d.l. smythe, p. pratap, j.c. carter, and m. derome, ﬁinterference temperature measurements from 70 to 1500 mhz in suburban and rural environments of the northeast,ﬂ proc. first int™l symp. on new frontiers in dynamic spectrum access networks (dyspan 2005), november 811, 2005, pp. 119123.10 s.w. ellingson, ﬁspectral occupancy at vhf: implications for frequencyagile cognitive radios,ﬂ proceedings of the ieee vehicular technology conference 2005 fallšdallas, vol. 2, pp. 13791382 (september 2005).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.143technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencefigure 42r01628uneditable bitmapped imagefigure 4.2 an example of radio frequency interference measurements made at the arecibo radio observatory in puerto rico on may 26, 2008. the scan from a single location and a single instance in time is from a few megahertz to 1.45 ghz indicating the large number of commercial, government, and consumer uses of the spectrum. detailed, realtime characterization of the spectrum uses provides an opportunity to prevent unauthorized uses of the spectrum from potentially causing catastrophic interference, as well as the capacity for opportunistically using unused spectrum for enhancing measurements. the arecibo observatory is part of the national astronomy and ionosphere center, which is operated by cornell university under a cooperative agreement with the national science foundation.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century144the passive and active user communities have a common interest in improving the ability to measure the utilization of the radio frequency spectrum. a time resolution of 1 ms would be able to resolve and potentially classify transmit bursts in most mobile radio communications systems using timedivision multiplexing (tdm) duplexing or channelization. such systems use bursts/packets/frames in lengths of 10 ms to 40 ms due to a tradeoff between accuracy in tracking propagation channels and throughput efciency (payload/header ratio).11 however, a 1 millisecond time resolution would not resolve radar pulses, as these pulses are typically in the 2 to 400 microseconds range.12 furthermore, if pulses cannot be resolved, it would be more difcult to positively identify the source as radar, as opposed to intermodulation from other things that just happen to be emitting into that frequency. if the pulses are resolved, however, it becomes very easy to identify the source and also to determine whether the sources are ﬁsplattering,ﬂ ﬁjabbering,ﬂ or exhibiting other illicit behaviors. for the purposes of the ras and eess, and conceivably for many other applications as well, the activity of these radar pulses is of great interest. even the multipath from these radars can be problematic to sensitive systems.13 to resolve these radar pulses, a time resolution on the order of 1 microsecond would be needed, which would not be technologically difcult to achieve.the bandwidth resolution needed for such a spectrum survey could reasonably be 1 khz; 1 khz is roughly an order of magnitude less than the minimum standard bandwidth for any communications system above 30 mhz. a bandwidth resolution of 1 khz would also resolve most communications below 30 mhz. also, since much rfi comes in the form of unmodulated carriers (e.g., spurious products from transmitters, stuck microphones, etc.), the bandwidth is lowerbounded only by transmitter phase noise and so can be very narrow. a higher bandwidth resolution of, say, 10 khz, would be too coarse, since most land mobile radio systems (twoway radios below 1 ghz) are migrating to 6.25 khz channelization over the next decade.spatial resolution is the hardest parameter of the space to ﬁsaturateﬂ with a monitoring system. modern cellular systems use cell sizes ranging from building size to tens of kilometers. satellite and hapbased cell systems can have cells hundreds of kilometers in extent. for terrestrial systems, this is highly frequency, 11 t.s. rappaport, wireless communications: principles and practice, 2nd ed., prentice hall, 2002.12 frank h. sanders, ﬁdetection and measurement of radar signals: a tutorial,ﬂ 7th annual international symposium on advanced radio technologies, march 1, 2005; s.w. ellingson and g.a. hampson, ﬁmitigation of radar interference in lband radio astronomy,ﬂ astrophysical journal supplement series, 147: 167176 (july 2003); g. miaris, t. kaifas, z. zaharis, d. babas, e. vaadis, t. samaras, and j.n. sahalos, ﬁdesign of radiationemission measurements of an airtrafc surveillance radar,ﬂ ieee antennas and propagation magazine, vol. 45, no. 4 (august 2003).13 s.w. ellingson and g.a. hampson, ﬁmitigation of radar interference in lband radio astronomy,ﬂ astrophysical journal supplement series, 147: 167176 (july 2003).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.145technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceterrain, and protocoldependent: different systems have different transmitter densities and different typical transmitting powers. any justiable angular resolution requirement would be frequencydependent, such that the survey would achieve lower resolution at lower frequencies and higher resolution at higher frequencies. this relationship has to do with the nature of multipath scattering versus frequency as well as with fundamental limitations in angular resolutionšresolution improves with increasing aperture in wavelengths. the ability to locate emitters with sufcient accuracy to facilitate the identication of sources would be the goal of the survey, and given the dependencies mentioned above, the necessary spatial resolution would depend on the frequency and on what can be afforded. finding: greater efforts to collect and analyze radio emission data are needed to support the enforcement of existing allocations and to support the discussion and planning of spectrum use.finding: better utilization of the spectrum and reduced rfi for scientic as well as commercial applications are possible with better knowledge of actual spectrum usage. progress toward these goals would be made by gathering more information through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. this would be benecial to both the commercial and the scientic communities.4.2 major drivers of spectrum usecurrent measurements of spectral utilization and its impact on passive systems may not be indicative of future spectral use. the drivers for additional spectral bands for intensive use, the allocation of additional bands, and the development of ﬁsmartﬂ ˚exible radio technology will have a profound impact on future use. the following assessment for the time period 20082015 is based on wellestablished drivers, currently allocated spectral bands, and technology that is under development. this assessment has a hightomoderate level of condence. that said, the impact from regulatory changes can be profoundšfor example, increases in power levels or emission levels permitted outside the primary transmission band could create an rf environment much less useful for passive systems.assessment of trends in spectrum use for 20082015the current trend toward more intensive use of the rf spectrum will continue unabated for both commercial and government uses. within the united states, the continued desire for higher levels of access to the internet (figure 4.3), coupled with the increased desire for mobility, will incite the development of new commercial systems. technology is also a major driver for more intensive use. new mobile spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century146 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 20002001200220032004200520062007yearunited states broadband use(millions of highspeed lines)figure 43r01628editable vectorsfigure 4.3 broadband services usage in the united states from 2000 through 2007, as indicated by the number of highspeed lines (or wireless channels) over 200 kbps in at least one direction. source: federal communications commission, highspeed services for internet access report, march 2008, p. 6, available at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocspublic/attachmatch/doc280906a1.pdf.devices can integrate the use of multiple modes and bands within a single handset, and they use everwiderband rf components that allow for higher data rates. such devices will drive the continued desire for more spectrum for commercial activities. the combination of mobility and integration has a strongly deleterious effect with respect to passive systems, because it will create a more pervasive use of the spectrum not only in spectral extent but in geographic extent as well.the greater impact on the eess community from more intensive use of the spectrum will come from what is occurring in developing nations. fixedline infrastructure including copper and ber is available in highly developed countries except in lowpopulationdensity regions. this infrastructure is not available in developing nations, but unused radio spectrum is readily available. therefore, most commercial deployments, including backhaul, are made entirely out of wireless systems. economic development in these nations will produce a much higher reliance on wireless systems and will see a much higher growth rate in the use of wireless transmission systems. one example is that in 2006, china had more new cellular subscribers than the total number of u.s. subscribers (see figure 4.4). the spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.147technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interference050100150200250300350400200220032004200520062007mobile subscribers in china(millions)figure 44r01628editable vectorsfigure 4.4 the number of cellular subscribers in china grew by more than 250 million between 2002 and 2007. source: china mobile ltd. annual reports.itu has indicated that the number of mobile cellular users worldwide at the end of 2007 was in excess of 3.3 billion.14lastly, the mechanism by which spectrum licenses are obtained has a large impact on what is optimized for system deployment. for example, in 2006 the fcc auctioned 90 mhz of spectrum for advanced wireless services (aws; also known as third generation cellular). the auction netted the u.s. treasury $13.7 billion, which is equivalent to $0.50 mhzpop.15 this cost is usually called the opportunity cost for the spectrum. high opportunity costs motivate the licensee to use the spectrum quite efciently to leverage the alreadyﬁsunk costs.ﬂ this is why cellular operators are very conscious of their spectral efciency and thus exploit spectral 14 ﬁglobal mobile phone users top 3.3 billion by end2007šstudy,ﬂ cellular news, may 24, 2008, available at http://www.cellularnews.com/story/31352.php; accessed january 14, 2010.15 the gure ﬁ$0.50 per mhzpopﬂ indicates that the licenses, if amortized across the entire u.s. population, would be worth $0.50 for every megahertz of bandwidth (it would be somewhat higher if one takes into account the effective population of subscribers). however, with 200 million subscribers and a maximum market penetration of approximately 30 percent, it would yield a value of $2.53 per megahertz per active subscriber.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century148reuse techniques by using the same frequency bands at each tower. however, access to spectrum without any opportunity costs tends to motivate the use very differently. for example, the spectrum for publicsafety users is provided as a direct grant. these users usually deploy highsite, highpower transmitters to reduce the cost of the infrastructure. the publicsafety services are less efcient spectrum users than are the cellular telephone services, since the technology of the former lacks any spectral reuse. thirdgeneration and fourthgeneration systemsthe 20082015 period will see the deployment of new cellularbased services in bands that were allocated in the 20022007 period: the 700 mhz band, the aws bands, and the broadband radio service and educational broadband service (brs/ebs) bands. these bands were reallocated by the fcc in recognition of the rapid growth in demand made by mobile data services.700 mhzthe digital tv transition that took place in june 2009 recaptured the spectrum now allocated as channels 5269 (698806 mhz). the propagation characteristics of these bands, as well as the lack of incumbents within the band, make this piece of the spectrum highly prized. the band has allocations for public safety (763775 mhz and 793805 mhz), moderatepower16 cellular operations (746763 mhz and 776793 mhz), and highpower17 operations (698743 mhz). much of the band was yet to be licensed as of december 2008. in march 2008, an auction took place in which $19.6 billion was bid for the licenses within this band. however, licenses that do not meet the buildout requirements to provide coverage to a required percentage of the u.s. population will be remanded to the fcc, leading to expectations that these bands will be intensively used.advanced wireless services 1, 2, and 3the advanced wireless services (aws) bands include 17101755 mhz, 19151920 mhz, 19952000 mhz, 20202025 mhz, and 21102180 mhz. in september 2006, the fcc auctioned the 17101755 mhz band paired with the 21102155 mhz band and denoted it the aws1 block. the aws band is generally called the ﬁ3gﬂ (third generation) band and is denoted for mobile voice and data services. the buildout requirements for aws1 are not as cumbersome as those 16 up to 2,000 w/mhz in rural deployments.17 up to 50 kw for cellular broadcast deployments.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.149technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencefor the 700 mhz band. additional auctions have been proposed for the aws2 and aws3 bands.2.5 ghz: broadband radio service and educational broadband servicethe multipoint distribution system (mds); multichannel, multipoint distribution system (mmds); and instructional television fixed service (itfs) bands that formerly occupied the 2.1 ghz spectrum were reallocated to the 24952690 mhz band. the transition also included a name change to the brs and ebs. wireless internet access is the primary use of these bands, which have rules that permit technical ˚exibility to deploy any technology that meets the emission rules. however, wimax (also known as ieee 802.16) technology is generally the technology that is deployed. unlicensed uses of the radio frequency spectrumthere has been a phenomenal proliferation of unlicensed devices over the past decade, to the great benet of society.18 over the past 5 years there have also been signicant additions to the types of unlicensed devices and spectral bands available for unlicensed uses. the ultrawideband types of unlicensed devices, the expansion of unlicensed use in the unlicensed national information infrastructure (unii) band, and the allocation for 70, 80, and 90 ghz bands are noteworthy. unlicensed devices operate at a low enough power to be deemed not harmful to the primary licensee in the band. unlicensed devices can also operate on a coprimary basis in certain bands. the 900 mhz, 2.4 ghz, and 5.8 ghz bands are three such bands. the 900 mhz band has been popularly used by babymonitoring device and wireless phone manufacturers. the 2.4 ghz band is the most popular one and is heavily used by wireless localarea networks (also known as wifi), cordless telephones, security systems, and personalarea networks (also known as bluetooth) manufacturers. indeed, unlicensed devices have many societal and commercial benets.ultrawidebandultrawideband (uwb) is a technology for transmitting information using a large bandwidth (>500 mhz), which can cross many spectrumallocation boundaries. uwb was originally accepted as pulse radio, but the fcc and ituradio (itur) now dene uwb in terms of a transmission from an antenna for which 18 unlicensed devices are those that are allowed to operate without a specic license for a particular spectral band. they are also sometimes called licensefree devices. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century150the emitted signal bandwidth exceeds the lesser of 500 mhz or 20 percent of the center frequency. the fcc authorizes the unlicensed use of uwb in the 3.110.6 ghz band, and the fcc power spectral density emission limit for uwb emitters operating in the uwb band is œ41.3 dbm/mhz. these emission limits are consistent with those granted by the fcc for personal computer emissions and intentional emissions for unlicensed devices.unlicensed national information infrastructure at 5 ghzthe fcc established a schedule for new unlicensed devices that are dynamic frequency selection (dfs)compliant in the 5.255.35 ghz (unii2) band and in a new spectral region between 5.470 and 5.725 ghz (unii3). 19 the new dfs rule is required in order to allow the coexistence of unlicensed devices with existing military and weather radar systems in the 5 ghz band. the new fcc rule requires that unlicensed devices must comply with dfs to prevent the devices from interfering with incumbent military and weather radar systems. the dfs system must continuously monitor the selected frequency channel during use and if a radar signal is detected, the dfs system must stop and jump to another available channel that has gone through the same selection process.millimeter wave: 70, 80, 90 ghzin october 2003, the fcc opened 13 ghz of previously unused spectrum at 7176 ghz, 8186 ghz, and 9295 ghz, for highdensity xed wireless.20 although not explicitly used for unlicensed devices, millimeterwave communications have many of the characteristics of unlicensed use: many of the requirements in obtaining licenses are minor and would essentially allow a great deal of proliferation of those devices. the fcc will issue an unlimited number of nonexclusive nationwide licenses to nonfederal government entities for the 13 ghz of spectrum allocated for commercial use. these licenses will serve as a prerequisite for registering individual pointtopoint links. the 7195 ghz bands are allocated on a shared basis with federal government users. therefore, a licensee will not be authorized to operate a link under its nonexclusive nationwide license until the link is coordinated with the ntia with respect to federal government operations and is registered as an approved link with a thirdparty database manager.19 see, 47 c.f.r. sec. 15.407. see also, in the matter of revision of parts 2 and 15 of the commission™s rules to permit unlicensed national information infrastructure (unii) devices in the 5 ghz band, memorandum opinion and order, 21 fcc rcd 7672 (2006).20 in the matter of allocations and service rules for the 7176 ghz, 8186 ghz and 9295 ghz bands; loea communications corporation petition for rulemaking, report and order, 18 fcc rcd 23318 (2003).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.151technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceregulatory changes that impact useas previously described, the regulatory agencies (ntia, fcc) determine the appropriate technical parameters for operation in each spectral band. these rules are in constant ˚ux in order to keep current with technological changes and national needs. since 2005, the regulatory agencies have been moving away from explicit emissions parameters. this change is in recognition of the fact that it is not power but power spectral density and power ˚ux density that better represent proper operating parameters:power spectral density: in 2007, the fcc changed emission rules for aws and 700 mhz from 1640 w equivalent isotropically radiated power (eirp) to 1640 w/mhz eirp. this change was in response to the penalty to broadband systems.21 the transmitter power of broadband systems was regulated regardless of bandwidth, so these systems would be afforded a lower transmitter power spectral density than that for narrowband systems.power ˚ux density: the fcc has begun to use power ˚ux density (e.g., wmœ2) as the key emission parameter. this is in response to the previous lack of incentive for using elevation beam shaping to control the interference at ground level and to allow higher power emission limits for more costeffective commercial deployments. the technical rules for the 700 mhz spectral band allow a transmission power up to 50 kw in portions of the band, but the power ˚ux density must be less than 3,000 microwatts per square meter on the ground.22these rule changes represent an opportunity to use more sophisticated interference metrics for interference control. the recent changes increased sophistication with both spectral and spatial characterization. it may also be possible to extend regulations to include temporal characterizations that will be useful for developing new interference mitigation techniques.the regulatory environment has investigated but has yet to address three additional means for interference mitigation:interference metrics: metrics have been investigated to clarify what is considered to be harmful interference. currently the regulators primarily quantify transmitter characteristics in lieu of explicit interference control. one proposal, called interference temperature, was closely related to noise 21 using a poweronly metric versus a power spectral density metric essentially allowed smaller bands (e.g., 5 mhz wide) to have twice the power of a 10mhzwide band.22 47 c.f.r., vol. 2, sec. 27.55 (b).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century152temperature, which is used extensively by the ras community.23 an engineeringbased metric would provide clarity for system developers and for policy makers in determining the relative value of systems. the metric could be different for different bands and applications. regulatory enforcement: current means of enforcement are primarily by licensee selfenforcement or by the fcc™s use of a limited number of mobile interferencemonitoring laboratories (seven in the united states). the proliferation of mobile wireless transmitters within consumer, commercial, and government systems requires new monitoring and enforcement technologies. inclusion of passive systems in regulatory databases: current fcc databases include all transmission equipment for sitespecic licenses but do not include passive systems such as those used in the eess and ras. these databases are used by licensees to determine the potential for interference between systems and to communicate with other licensees on a casebycase basis. since the passive systems are not included in the fcc databases, they are not considered in these discussions. knowledge of the location and operational characteristics of the passive systems would be very useful to licensees for determining impact and possible mutual interference mitigation techniques.the new techniques for interference control have been investigated by regulators but have not been acted on. these techniques include interference metrics (e.g., interference temperature), improving enforcement technology to provide new 23 (1) federal communications commission (fcc), ﬁspectrum policy task force,ﬂ 2002; fcc, docket 03237, notice of inquiry and notice of proposed rulemaking on the establishment of an interference temperature metric to quantify and manage interference and to expand available unlicensed operation in certain fixed, mobile, and satellite frequency bands; (2) p.j. kolodzy, ﬁinterference temperature: a metric for dynamic spectrum utilization,ﬂ int. j. netw. manag., 16(2): 103113 (2006); (3) t.c. clancy, ﬁachievable capacity under the interference temperature model,ﬂ infocom 2007 26th ieee international conference on computer communications, may 612, 2007; (4) joe bater, hweepink tan, kenneth n. brown, and linda doyle, ﬂmaximising access to a spectrum commons using interference temperature constraints,ﬂ cognitive radio oriented wireless networks and communications 2007, 2nd international conference, pp. 441447, aug. 13, 2007; (5) yiping xing, c.n. mathur, m.a. haleem, r. chandramouli, and k.p. subbalakshmi, ﬁpriority based dynamic spectrum access with qos and interference temperature constraints,ﬂ ieee international conference on communications, 10: 44204425 (june 2006); (6) j.a. stine, ﬁspectrum management: the killer application of ad hoc and mesh networking,ﬂ first ieee international symposium on new frontiers in dynamic spectrum access networks, pp.184193 (november 811, 2005); (7) a.e.e. rogers, j.e. salah, d.l. smythe, p. pratap, j.c. carter, and m. derome, ﬂinterference temperature measurements from 70 to 1500 mhz in suburban and rural environments of the northeast,ﬂ first ieee international symposium on new frontiers in dynamic spectrum access networks, pp. 119123, (november 811, 2005).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.153technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencetools for the regulators to ensure compliance with emission rules (e.g., commercial devices used for enforcement measurements, additional mobile measurement systems, etc), and the inclusion of passive systems in regulators™ databases (e.g., the fcc™s universal licensing system).finding: current regulatory structure and support infrastructure (such as databases, etc.) are transmittercentric. methodologies to incorporate passive systems need to be developed. technology changes that impact usesoftwaredened radios and cognitive radiosthe development of wideband power ampliers, synthesizers, and analog/digital (a/d) converters is providing for a new class of communication radios dened by software: the softwaredened radio (sdr) and cognitive radio (cr). although at the early stages of development, this new class of radio ushers in new possibilities as well as possible pitfalls for technology policy. the ˚exibility provided by the cr class of radio allows for more dynamics within radio operations. the technology also makes possible dynamic collaboration between cr and science users. the same ˚exibility poses challenges for certication and the associated liability through potential misuse.sdr provides software control of a variety of modulation techniques, wideband and narrowband operation, communications security functions (such as hopping), and waveform requirements. in essence, components can be under digital control and thus dened by software. the advantage of an sdr is that a single system can operate under multiple congurations, providing interoperability, bridging, and tailoring of the waveforms to meet the localized requirements. sdr technology and systems have been developed for the military. the digital modular radio (dmr) system was one of the rst sdr systems. recently the defense advanced research projects agency developed the small unit operations situational awareness systems, a portable sdr operating from 20 mhz to 2.5 ghz. the success of these programs has led to the joint tactical radio system initiative to develop and procure sdr systems throughout the u.s. military.sdrs exhibit software control over a variety of modulation techniques and waveforms. software radios can specically implement the signal processing in software and use digitaltoanalog converters to translate from the digital domain to the rf domain. this additional capability essentially has the radio being constructed with an rf front end, a downconverter to an intermediate frequency or baseband, an a/d converter, and a processor. the processing capacity limits the complexity of the waveforms that can be accommodated. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century154a cognitive radio adds both a sensing and an adaptation element to the software dened radios and software radios. four new capabilities embodied in cognitive radios will help enable dynamic use of the spectrum: ˚exibility, agility, rf sensing, and networking.24 flexibility is the ability to change the waveform and the conguration of a device; agility is the ability to change the spectral band in which a device will operate;sensing is the ability to observe the state of the system, which includes both the radio unit and more importantly, the rf environment; andnetworking is the ability to communicate between multiple nodes and thus facilitate the combining of the sensing and control capacity of those nodes. these new technologies and radio classes, albeit in their nascent stages of development, are providing many new tools to the system developer while allowing for more intensive use of the spectrum. however, an important characteristic of each of these technologies is the ability to change conguration to meet new requirements. this capacity to react to system dynamics will forever change how new uses of the rf spectrum are addressed.microelectromechanical systems filtersmicroelectromechanical systems (mems) involve the integration of mechanical elements, sensors, actuators, and electronics on a common silicon substrate through microfabrication technology. recent technology developments have demonstrated the potential to create highperformance mems acoustic resonators. other mems lter technologies under development include tunable resonators and multipole tunable lters, the integration of lter arrays with switch arrays to create large lter banks, and the integration of lter banks with active rf devices to form complete rf front ends. memsbased mechanical resonators and lters have shown promising characteristics in achieving highq values and good stability.digital modulation and highefciency modulation schemesthe signals received by radio astronomy and passive earth remote sensing are random. the signals follow gaussian statistics within a given bandwidth and 24 international telecommunication union, ﬁtechniques for mitigation of radio frequency interference in radio astronomy,ﬂ document 7d/142e, january 23, 2007.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.155technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceusually have a ˚at, featureless spectrum. until recently, these characteristics distinguished natural signals from humanmade signals, and this fact could be used as a tool to distinguish between the wanted natural signals and interference from humanmade emissions.the move to digital modulation, and in particular to highefciency digital modulation schemes, has the effect of making the humanmade signals indistinguishable from the wanted natural signals. the statistical ˚uctuations with time, and the ˚at, featureless power spectrum displayed by such signals are nearly the same as the characteristics of the wanted natural signals that are the subject of the research. this situation has two detrimental effects:one of the distinguishing characteristics of humanmade interference, the presence of distinct and discrete carrier waves, has disappeared. the mitigation of interference is now made more difcult.the higher spectral efciency of modern modulation schemes is generally a very good thing. however, passive usebased research has often taken advantage of the inefcient modulation schemes by, for example, making use of small gaps between carriers in spectrum used by the active services. the greater efciency of current spectrum use by the active services as enabled by higherorder digital modulations has unfortunately made passive use difcult or impossible. finding: the emergence of practices for the dynamic use of the spectrum will result in more devices with greater variability in active spectrum usage, and the eess and ras communities could be impacted with more unintentional radio interfering devices.finding: new cooperative spectrum management techniques that could be benecial for enhanced interference management and increased spectral utilization have been investigated by regulators but have not been implemented.summarythe ras and eess have current spectrum allocations between 9 khz and 3 ghz of approximately 62.12 mhz on a primary basis and 122.5 mhz on a secondary basis. however, the spectrum that the radio astronomy and earth exploration radio science community currently use far exceeds these allocations. the use of new techniques requiring other spectral bands or additional spectrum is driven by the scientic requirements and made possible by continual technical developments, as discussed in chapters 2 and 3. since the ras and eess are passive services, they operate outside their allocations on a noninterference basis when the rfi is weak enough.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century156the strong increase in the number of devices and systems deployed for consumer, commercial, and industrial uses has fueled an interest in learning how the radio spectrum is actually used. while the various efforts of the active and passive user communities have been useful in conrming the sparse timefrequency utilization of the spectrum, most existing studies are of limited usefulness because of their limited sensitivity, time resolution, and frequency resolution. useful spectral monitoring for ras applications requires continuous timefrequency resolution on the order of 1 khz and 1 microsecond, with sensitivity sufcient to detect signals approaching the levels already known to be potentially harmful to radio astronomy as determined in itur recommendation ra.769. for air and spaceborne eess applications, an adequate spatial resolution would be critical, as discussed in §4.1. the major drivers for more intensive spectral use will come from newly deployed 3g and 4g cellular systems, new technologies for unlicensed devices (wifi, etc.), changes to the regulations, and the availability of advanced technologies such as cognitive radios. it should be expected that the use of the 700 mhz, 17101755 mhz, 21102180 mhz, and 24952690 mhz spectral bands will be greatly increased due to 3g and 4g cellular deployments. unlicensed devices will continue to proliferate in the 5 ghz, 7090 ghz, and 3.110.6 ghz (ultrawideband) spectral bands. the onset of agile, frequencyhopping radio technology will create challenges: the prediction of open spectral bands will become more difcult. regulatory agencies determine the appropriate technical parameters for operation in each spectral band, but these rules are in constant ˚ux. the agencies need to enhance their role with respect to the passive services to include interference metrics, an extension of enforcement technology, and the inclusion of passive systems in their databases (e.g., the fcc™s universal licensing system).4.3 unilateral mitigation techniquesa variety of techniques have been developed to reduce the impact of rfi on eess and ras observations. this section presents a review of unilateral methods. these methods apply to situations in which the eess or ras operator has no ability to in˚uence the behavior of the sources producing the interference. this is the most common situation, but at present the performance achieved by the majority of the unilateral methods has been documented only anecdotally and so remains to be completely quantied.25 following the review of specic unilateral mitigation 25 international telecommunication union, ﬁtechniques for mitigation of radio frequency interference in radio astronomy,ﬂ document 7d/142e, january 23, 2007; a.j. boonstra, ﬁradio frequency interference mitigation in radio astronomy,ﬂ phd thesis, delft university of technology, dept. eemcs, june 2005, isbn 9080543438. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.157technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencetechnologies is a summary (in table 4.2) of the successes that have been achieved as well as the inherent limitations of particular approaches. before proceeding further, it is important to distinguish among the various rfi environments and observational situations encountered by eess and ras systems. both services are subject to variations in the rfi environment caused by changes in rfi source behaviors as well as by changes in the position of these sources (including the orbital motions of spaceborne rfi sources). however, eess use is both ground and spacebased and needs access to areas on a global basis. spacebased radiometers operate in a conically scanning conguration in which the portion of earth™s surface observed (and associated rfi sources) varies within the timescale of a few millisecondsšthe duty factor for a given area observed. in contrast, ras antennas typically operate at a xed position on the ground and in a viewing conguration that is stable over timescales of several minutes to many hours in order to receive extremely weak signals. the ﬁdownlookingﬂ nature of eess measurements makes the probability of groundbased rfi sources being within the main beam of the antenna a common occurrence, while the primary concern for mainbeam corruption in ras applications is spaceborne sources, which are encountered less frequently. the ﬁuplookingﬂ ras systems are inherently more sensitive to rfi, owing both to the cold background sky (relative to the hot ground emission in eess sensing) and to the typically long integration times. mainbeam corruption of eess measurements, due to a re˚ection of spacebased sources, has also been observed.26 both systems are subject to the in˚uence of ground and spacebased sources received through antenna sidelobes. ras measurements are often interferometric, using antennas separated over distances that span continents and are millions of wavelengths in extent, whereas eess radiometers typically use only a single antenna, and even interferometric systems in eess are limited to maximum spatial separations on the order of meters (up to a few thousand wavelengths) due to the limited spatial extent available on a space or airborne platform. finally, systems operating in space are subject to restrictions on the output data rate not usually encountered by systems operating on the ground.technologies for unilateral mitigationunilateral mitigation methods involve two primary components: detection and suppression. the former involves the determination that a particular observation contains rfi, whereas the latter attempts to utilize information from the detection 26 l. li, p.w. gaiser, m.h. bettenhausen, and w. johnston, ﬁwindsat radiofrequency interference signature and its identication over land and ocean,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(3): 530539 (march 2006).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century158stage in order to correct observed data by removing rfi contributions. the study of techniques both for detecting and suppressing rfi has been a topic of heightened interest in recent years, spurred by technological advances that enable realtime signalprocessing approaches. strong rfi sources that produce excessively high observed powers tend to be easily distinguished from astronomical or geophysical signals. in those cases, the detection problem is relatively straightforward. the detection of weak rfi sources that produce power levels comparable with those associated with geophysical or astronomical variability is much more difcult. this is problematic because, if not suppressed, weak rfi can still introduce signicant errors into the scientic conclusions that are drawn from the measurements, often without warning.it is very important to note that unilateral mitigation techniques do not and cannot solve the rfi problem. however, they can serve several important purposes. they can provide a means of limiting the introduction of corrupted observations into the scientic user community. they can provide signicant relief from the laborintensive task of manually identifying the effects of rfi on science data products. and they can permit some limited scientic uses of very noisy, interferenceladen portions of the spectrum that would otherwise not be possible. but in most scientic applications, rfi mitigation techniques cannot actually remove the interference from those portions of the spectrum where it is present. thus it can be expected that as rfi becomes more prevalent, the need for interference mitigation in order to do useful science will increase, but at the same time the efcacy of mitigation efforts will decrease and the quality of the resulting science will suffer accordingly. detection techniquesvarious rfi detection techniques are available, with each typically oriented toward a particular class of rfi sources. a classical detection algorithm takes observed data as input and provides a binary ﬁyes/noﬂ output as to whether rfi is present. the input data can range from nyquist sampled received voltages to nal output powers integrated over millisecond or longer timescales. detection algorithms involve a tradeoff between the probability of detecting a specied type of rfi and the probability of obtaining a ﬁfalse alarmﬂ in which rfifree data are erroneously classied as corrupted. an excessive falsealarm rate can lead to a reduction of measurement sensitivity; this can be addressed by modifying the detector, but typically at the cost of a reduced probability of detecting true rfi. specic classes of detection techniques are described below.matched filtering for known sources the problem of detecting a specied signal in additive gaussian noise (i.e., thermal noise) is well dened and has a long history of investigation in the signalspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.159technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceprocessing literature. the best detection performance that can be achieved is obtained through a ﬁmatched lterﬂ approach, in which the detector is a lter designed to have a frequency response conjugate to that of the signal of interest. this approach is the standard method for use in communications applications, but it has limited applicability in radio science applications because the rfi sources encountered are not always known a priori.tests for gaussianity instead of attempting to detect particular rfi signals, it is possible to detect whether observed voltage appears to have originated from a thermal noise (i.e., gaussian) eld distribution. this is a classical problem in statistics, and numerous tests are available, with no particular test having been shown clearly superior for eess and ras systems. one example of this technique is a ﬁkurtosis test,ﬂ which compares the normalized fourth moment of the observed voltage to that expected for thermal noise elds. this method has been shown to provide good performance in tests using groundbased eess instruments, and the expected detection performance for pulsedsinusoidal rfi interference has been analyzed in detail.27 however, the performance of this approach for other rfi source types remains to be quantied. an analog implementation of the kurtosis detector has also been described,28 as has a kurtosis method combined with multiple frequency channels for ras applications.29 it should be expected that the modulationinsensitive nature of gaussianity tests will result in a detection performance that is at best equal to that of detection algorithms designed for a priori known rfi source types. it is often the case that the nature of the rfi is not known beforehand. in these cases, tests for gaussianity have been found to be a robust rfi detector.pulse detectors this is perhaps the oldest and bestknown strategy for the detection of rfi, whether at timescales of the nyquist sampled receiver bandwidth or at that of the nal output data product. typically, an ﬁacceptableﬂ range for the received data amplitude as a function of time is dened, and points outside this range are deemed 27 c.s. ruf, s.m. gross, s. misra, ﬁrfi detection and mitigation for microwave radiometry with an agile digital detector,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(3): 694706, (march 2006); and r.d. de roo, s. misra, c.s. ruf, ﬁsensitivity of the kurtosis statistic as a detector of pulsed sinusoidal rfi,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 45(7, part 1): 19381946 (july 2007).28 jeffrey piepmeier, priscilla mohammed, and joseph knuble, ﬁa double detector for rfi mitigation in microwave radiometers,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 46(2): 458465 (2007).29 g. nita, d.e. gary, z. liu, g. hurford, and s.m. white, ﬁradio frequency interference excision using spectral domain statistics,ﬂ publ. astron.soc.pacicastron. soc. pacic, 119: 805827 (2007).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century160as corrupted. the acceptable range can be dened in either an absolute sense (i.e., xed thresholds) or a relative sense (i.e., as a number of standard deviations around a local mean value). pulse detectors operating at high sample rates are well suited for the detection of lowdutycycle radar emissions; such sources typically transmit pulsed xedfrequency or chirped sinusoidal waveforms with pulse lengths of 2400 microseconds, 127 ms between transmitted pulses, and bandwidths on the order of 1 mhz. for lowdutycycle pulsed interferers, the sensitivity of the detector depends on the relationship between the timescales of the pulsed rfi and the input data (i.e., the sample rate). good detection performance can be achieved in cases where the individual pulses are resolved by the input data sample rate. a number of pulse detection techniques have been proposed and developed to various degrees. pulse detection is, however, not at all appropriate for rfi sources that are continuous in nature. passive receiver blanking has been attempted using a special receiver and perhaps also a special antenna directed at the source of interference. this might, for example, mitigate interference from a pulsed radar transmitter. when the pulses from the radar are received, the radio astronomy receiver electronically triggers a data masking or data ˚agging process. the limitations of this method are primarily that it requires excellent sensitivity on the unwanted transmission, and secondly that it may be hard to accommodate transmissions arriving with different delays from different directions, such as multipath propagation with multiple re˚ections from surrounding mountains.30 in this case active receiver blanking using a  beacon transmission on some carefully chosen frequency could be used at the radio astronomy site to blank the radio astronomy receiver. note that the above scheme would not be effective for eess due to the need for full global coverage.narrowband source detectors narrowband detectors are analogous to pulse detection methods but are better suited to signals that can be resolved in frequencyšthat is, searching for ﬁoutliersﬂ among data in multiple frequency channels. such approaches are designed to detect interference that is localized in frequency (i.e., narrowband), and performance is improved by matching the frequency resolution of the radiometer channels to that of expected rfi sources. narrowband detectors record data in multiple frequency channels; these frequency channels can be achieved either by analog means (through use of a tuning receiver, a lter ﬁbank,ﬂ or a spectroscopy method to create a set of channels) or digitally (using either an internal fourier transform or a set of digital lters). example algorithms for detecting narrowband interference in 30 j.r. fisher, q. zhang, y. zheng, s.g. wilson, and r.f. bradley, ﬁmitigation of pulsed interference to redshifted h i and oh observations between 960 and 1215 mhz,ﬂ astronomical journal, 129: 29402949 (june 2005).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.161technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencea set of channel measurements have been described31 and ﬁspectral differencingﬂ techniques have also been applied to detect rfi with the advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre)32 and windsat radiometers33 currently in orbit. if narrowband detection strategies are applied in postprocessing (i.e., not performed in real time by the radiometer), their use implies that the data rate of the radiometer is multiplied by the number of channels used; the resulting data rate can easily become prohibitive for spacebased systems. narrowband detection algorithms are best for narrowband sources of large amplitude; however, the contribution of these sources to the total observed noise power can remain small due to the small ratio of the source bandwidth to that of the total radiometer channel. performance is degraded for loweramplitude rfi sources occupying bandwidths that are appreciable compared to the total radiometer channel bandwidth. ras science requires the narrowband detection of spectral line emissions from atoms and molecules with doppler shifts owing to the relative motion of earth and object as well as doppler spreading owing to kinematics internal to the object. weak narrowband rfi can preclude, or at least corrupt, such measurements. combinations of pulse and narrowband detection strategies are also possible.34polarizationbased algorithms the polarization properties of received radio waves also provide an opportunity for rfi detection. geophysical and astronomical sources have polarization properties that, in many cases, can be predicted a priori to within a reasonable uncertainty. rfi sources that are highly polarized can create power differences among polarizations that can be recognized as anthropogenic. the success of such approaches depends on the extent to which the rfi source emissions appear polarized to the radiometer (which depends on rfi source properties, the orienta31 a.j. gasiewski, m. klein, a. yevgrafov, and v. leuski, ﬁinterference mitigation in passive microwave radiometry,ﬂ ieee geoscience and remote sensing symposium, conference proceedings, 3: 16821684 (2002); and b. guner, j.t. johnson, and n. niamswaun, ﬁtime and frequency blanking for radio frequency interference mitigation in microwave radiometry,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 45: 36723679 (2007).32 e.g. njoku, p. ashcroft, t.k. chan, and li li, ﬁglobal survey and statistics of radiofrequency interference in amsre land observations,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 43(5): 938947 (may 2005).33 li li, p.w. gaiser, m.h. bettenhausen, and w. johnston, ﬁwindsat radiofrequency interference signature and its identication over land and ocean,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(3): 530539 (march 2006); and s.w. ellingson and j.t. johnson, ﬁa polarimetric survey of radiofrequency interference in c and xbands in the continental united states using windsat radiometry,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(3): 540548 (march 2006).34 s.m. kay, fundamentals of statistical signal processing: volume ii, detection theory, upper saddle creek, new jersey: prentice hall (1998).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century162tion of both the source and receiver antennas, and the in˚uence of multipath and other propagation effects), as well as the level of natural variations in polarization signatures for the medium observed. a polarization detection strategy has been used to detect interference in data generated by the eess satellite amsre,35 but the strategy was found less sensitive to lowlevel interference than the spectral differencing method. an alternate polarizationbased detection strategy based on the polarimetric channels in the radiometer of the eess satellite windsat was found to yield improved performance, because the small, geophysically expected polarized returns are readily exceeded by rfi sources.36 however, such detection strategies remain dependent on antenna orientation and observation geometry issues, as well as on rfi source polarization properties. to date, polarizationbased methods have generally received less attention than that given to other detection strategies.multipleantenna algorithms for instruments using multiple antennas, rfi detection algorithms can be developed on the basis of the relationships among the waves received at the antennas. a useful concept in searches for astronomical transients is anticoincidence,37 in which the criterion for detection of astrophysical signals is that they appear in multiple, widely separated antennas, whereas terrestrial rfi should be relatively ﬁlocalﬂ and appear only in one or a subset of antennas. an inversion of this technique is used in an antenna with an array feed: the desired celestial signal is received in one of the many array feeds, but rfi is received in all of them. ras synthesis imaging arrays such as the vla and the very long baseline array have reduced sensitivity to rfi due to a lack of coherence of the rfi in the observed direction. however, rfi still has a deleterious effect, and strong rfi can ruin an observation even when it is received in only one of the array antennas. other detection techniques for interferometric systems use the fact that interferometric radiometer observations produce a spatial covariance matrix whose elements consist of correlation products (ﬁvisibilitiesﬂ) between all pairs of antennas in the interferometer. estimates of the number of rfi sources and their locations can, under certain conditions, 35 li li, e.g. njoku, e. im, p.s. chang, and k. st. germain, ﬁa preliminary survey of radio frequency interference over the u.s. in aqua amsre data,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 42(2): 380390 (february 2004).36 s.w. ellingson and j.t. johnson, ﬁa polarimetric survey of radiofrequency interference in c and xbands in the continental united states using windsat radiometry,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(3): 540548 (march 2006).37 c.a. katz, j.n. hewitt, b.e. corey, and c.b. moore, ﬁa survey for transient astronomical radio emission at 611 mhz,ﬂ publications of the astronomical society of the pacic, 115: 675687 (june 2003); and n.d.r. bhat, j.m. cordes, s. chatterjee, and t.j.w. lazio, ﬁradio frequency interference identication and mitigation using simultaneous dual frequency observations,ﬂ radio science, 40(5): 111 (june 2005).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.163technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencebe obtained from an eigenanalysis of this matrix. for example, strong rfi sources producing large eigenvalues can be detected in a manner analogous to the pulse detection process. weaker rfi sources can be more difcult to detect, however. interferometric detection strategies can be combined with the spatial excision suppression techniques discussed below. suppression techniquessuppression techniques can be divided into three categories: (1) filtering is the simple process of designing receiver lters so that corruption from rfi sources outside a band of interest is minimized. (2) excision is the removal of data in which rfi has been detected. a common property of all excision techniques is a partial loss of radiometry data as well as a possible distortion of nonexcised radiometry data due to artifacts of the detection and excision process. (3) cancellation is the subtraction of rfi from the radiometer output. cancellation is potentially superior to excision in the sense that the rfi is ideally removed with no impact on radiometry, providing a ﬁlook throughﬂ capability that is nominally free of the artifacts associated with the simple ﬁcutting outﬂ of data. however, as discussed below, the tradeoff with respect to excision is usually that suppression is limited. a further limitation of canceling techniques is that they tend to degrade into  excisiontype behavior when conditions are not optimalšfor example, in lowinterferencetonoiseratio scenarios.filtering while ltering is not necessarily a suppression strategy based on a detection process, its importance nevertheless motivates a brief discussion. all radiometry observations occur in a limited portion of the spectrum that is of interest for particular measurement purposes. radiometer receivers are designed to include lter components to suppress the contributions of any emission sources outside the frequency range of interest. the performance of these lters can have a signicant impact on the degree to which rfi corruption can occur. the bandpass lters used in radiometry ideally have a transfer function that is unity within the band of interest and zero outside this band, but such lters are not achievable in practice. instead, the suppression of oob power achieved by the lter ﬁtailsﬂ must be traded against other lter performance properties. strong rfi sources located outside the band of interest can make measurable contributions to radiometry measurements if lter performance is insufcient.in terms of mitigation performance, it is desirable to place banddening lter components as close to the antenna as possible, in order to reduce the tendency for strong outofband rfi to drive the receiver into nonlinear operation, resulting in compression or unacceptable intermodulation products. unfortunately, spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century164analog lters are inherently lossy, so using such a lter degrades the sensitivity of a radiometer, presenting a difcult tradeoff between basic performance and the ability to tolerate nearby outofband rfi. excision excision refers to the deletion of data that are believed to be contaminated by rfi. the use of excision implies that a data set is available from which some data are removed through a detection process and the remainder are used in estimating astronomical or geophysical information. excision algorithms that have been explored to date utilize data sets based on measurements as a function of time, frequency, or space.temporal excision is the most common process. it is based on removing detected observations from a time series of measurements (in eess applications, timedomain excision leads unavoidably to the excision of data corresponding to distinct locations as well). temporal excision can be performed in conjunction with any of the detection algorithms described previously, and at time resolutions ranging from the nyquist sample rate (i.e., nano or microseconds) to postintegration timescales of seconds or larger. temporal excision ensures that detected rfi makes no contribution to scientic analysis but at the same time reduces the amount of data available for the same analysis and potentially introduces artifacts that can compromise the value of the remaining data. the best case is that a reduction in the amount of available data merely reduces the sensitivity of the radiometer observation. thus, it is desirable to implement temporal excision at a timescale that is comparable to that of any pulsed interference sources in order to retain the maximum amount of data. temporal excision is best suited for sources that are localized in time and is often used with a pulse detection strategy. numerous examples of temporal excision exist in the literature, and recent works have demonstrated realtime onboard temporal detection and excision. the performance of temporal excision in suppressing rfi source contributions is limited solely by the performance of the associated detection algorithm, which determines the falsealarm probability and probability of detection for specic rfi types.when measurements in multiple frequency subchannels are available, rfi contributions detected in a particular subchannel can be removed by discarding data from that subchannel in computations of average powers or other averages across frequency. frequency excision is limited to narrowband rfi, but it has the advantage (with respect to temporal excision) of being effective against persistent interference. in total power radiometry (most eess observations and ﬁcontinuumﬂ ras measurements), discarding data in a particular subchannel again has the effect of decreasing the sensitivity of the radiometer measurement when total channel quantities are of interest. this method is typically not acceptable in high sensitivity spectroscopy, which is a commonly used mode in the ras, although it spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.165technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceis sometimes effective in imaging observations when the visibilities are computed on a narrowband basis. it is desirable to perform frequency excision at a frequency resolution that is comparable to that of observed rfi sources, so that a maximum portion of the noncorrupted spectrum can be retained. given the fact that numerous rfi sources exist with bandwidths of 1 mhz or less, frequency resolutions below 1 mhz are desirable, but come at the cost of a greatly increased data rate if frequency excision is performed in postprocessing. frequency excision has been demonstrated in combination with kurtosis, pulse, and narrowband detection strategies. performance again is strongly dependent on the performance of the associated detection algorithm.spatial excision refers to the use of the beamforming capabilities of compact antenna arraysšthat is, arrays with maximum baselines on the order of wavelengths. one approach is based on synthesizing directly an antenna pattern null in the direction of a known rfi source; this is believed to be effective against rfi from satellites in ras observations, although quite expensive and complex to implement. sophisticated algorithms have been developed for this process in the ras literature, and one of the key difculties identied has been to minimize the impact of spatial excision on the main antenna lobe properties so as not to confound image calibration.38 spatial excision is further limited by the degree to which the array geometry and individual antenna patterns are able to generate deep nulls, and the number of such nulls that can be formed without unacceptable mainlobe and sidelobe distortion. while this technique is used frequently in military antijamming applications, the problem is more challenging for ras observations due to the low signaltonoise ratios of the astronomical signals of interest. suppression methods other than simple excision of rficontaminated data are not widely used in the eess and ras, mainly because they are not easy to devise or implement and may require the development of extensive special hardware, software, or instrument modications that potentially degrade performance. furthermore, cancellation techniques typically lead to signicant increases in the required computing power relative to that needed in interferencefree conditions. however, recent studies have developed and demonstrated cancellation approaches for rfi mitigation in ras applications. cancellation requires a detailed knowledge of the rfi signalšfor example, a priori information about the modulation type, or a copy of the signal obtained by other meansšin order to estimate and subtract its contributions to the data. obtaining a precise description of source properties is difcult when the corrupting sources are observed at low instantaneous interferencetonoise ratios, as is the case for groundbased sources in the sidelobes of an upwardlooking ras antenna. two strategies for improving rfi 38 a.j. boonstra, ﬁradio frequency interference mitigation in radio astronomy,ﬂ phd thesis, delft university of technology, dept. eemcs, june 2005, isbn 9080543438.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century166table 4.2 successes and limitations of the unilateral mitigation methods employed to date by the earth explorationsatellite servicetype of  radio frequency interference (rfi)referencerfi detailscenter frequency (ghz)/bandwidth (mhz)detector typedetector time/ frequency resolutionmitigation typemitigation time/frequency resolutionperformance achievedcommentspulsed[1]outofband emissions from an arsr system observed at close range1.413/20kurtosis36 ms/3 mhzfrequency subchannels36 ms/  3 mhzpulsed rfi ranging between 113 k in 20 mhz detected and removed(postprocessing)pulsed[2]outofband emissions from an arsr system observed at close range1.413/20pulse detection10 ns/20 mhztime blanking40 microsec/ 20 mhzrealtime removal of pulsed rfi ranging between 120 k in 20 mhzpulsed[3]unknown source of presumably outofband pulses1.413/20analog pseudokurtosis0.5 s/20 mhztime blanking0.5 s/  20 mhzpulsed rfi ranging between 1 k and 1015 k in 20 mhz detected and removed (postprocessing)pulsed[5]airborne flight encountering many source types1.413/20kurtosis8 ms/20 mhztime blanking8 ms/ 20 mhzpulsed rfi ranging from 0.1 to 45 k detected and removed (postprocessing)narrowband[2]airborne test flight encountering many narrowbandsource types5.57.7/100crossfrequency26 ms/0.1 mhzcrossfrequency26 ms/ 0.1 mhznarrowband rfi ranging from 145 k in 100 mhz detected and removed wideband[2][4]airborne test flight encountering many wideband source types5.57.7/100crossfrequency26 ms/0.1 mhzcrossfrequency26 ms/ 0.1 mhzwideband rfi ranging from 10100 k detected and removedremoval of wideband rfi eliminates large portions of usable radiometer bandwidth; detection possible only when rfi power/mhz substantially exceeds that of noise.wideband[5]airborne test flights encountering many wideband source types6, 6.4, 6.9, 7.3/400crossfrequency26 ms/400 mhzcrossfrequency26 ms/ 400 mhzwideband rfi ranging from ~5300 k removedremoval of wideband rfi eliminates large portions of usable radiometer bandwidth; detection possible only when rfi power/mhz substantially exceeds that of noise.gaussianlikenonenonenonenonenonenonenonenot possible to detect rfi that resembles thermal noise.[1] c.s. ruf, s.m. gross, and s. misra, ﬁrfi detection and mitigation for microwave radiometry with an agile digital detector,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(3): 694706 (march 2006).[2] b. guner, j.t. johnson, and n. niamswaun, ﬁtime and frequency blanking for radio frequency interference mitigation in microwave radiometry,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 45: 36723679 (2007).[3] jeffrey piepmeier, priscilla mohammed, and joseph knuble, ﬁa double detector for rfi mitigation in microwave radiometers,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 46(2): 458465 (2007).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.167technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencetable 4.2 successes and limitations of the unilateral mitigation methods employed to date by the earth explorationsatellite servicetype of  radio frequency interference (rfi)referencerfi detailscenter frequency (ghz)/bandwidth (mhz)detector typedetector time/ frequency resolutionmitigation typemitigation time/frequency resolutionperformance achievedcommentspulsed[1]outofband emissions from an arsr system observed at close range1.413/20kurtosis36 ms/3 mhzfrequency subchannels36 ms/  3 mhzpulsed rfi ranging between 113 k in 20 mhz detected and removed(postprocessing)pulsed[2]outofband emissions from an arsr system observed at close range1.413/20pulse detection10 ns/20 mhztime blanking40 microsec/ 20 mhzrealtime removal of pulsed rfi ranging between 120 k in 20 mhzpulsed[3]unknown source of presumably outofband pulses1.413/20analog pseudokurtosis0.5 s/20 mhztime blanking0.5 s/  20 mhzpulsed rfi ranging between 1 k and 1015 k in 20 mhz detected and removed (postprocessing)pulsed[5]airborne flight encountering many source types1.413/20kurtosis8 ms/20 mhztime blanking8 ms/ 20 mhzpulsed rfi ranging from 0.1 to 45 k detected and removed (postprocessing)narrowband[2]airborne test flight encountering many narrowbandsource types5.57.7/100crossfrequency26 ms/0.1 mhzcrossfrequency26 ms/ 0.1 mhznarrowband rfi ranging from 145 k in 100 mhz detected and removed wideband[2][4]airborne test flight encountering many wideband source types5.57.7/100crossfrequency26 ms/0.1 mhzcrossfrequency26 ms/ 0.1 mhzwideband rfi ranging from 10100 k detected and removedremoval of wideband rfi eliminates large portions of usable radiometer bandwidth; detection possible only when rfi power/mhz substantially exceeds that of noise.wideband[5]airborne test flights encountering many wideband source types6, 6.4, 6.9, 7.3/400crossfrequency26 ms/400 mhzcrossfrequency26 ms/ 400 mhzwideband rfi ranging from ~5300 k removedremoval of wideband rfi eliminates large portions of usable radiometer bandwidth; detection possible only when rfi power/mhz substantially exceeds that of noise.gaussianlikenonenonenonenonenonenonenonenot possible to detect rfi that resembles thermal noise.[1] c.s. ruf, s.m. gross, and s. misra, ﬁrfi detection and mitigation for microwave radiometry with an agile digital detector,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(3): 694706 (march 2006).[2] b. guner, j.t. johnson, and n. niamswaun, ﬁtime and frequency blanking for radio frequency interference mitigation in microwave radiometry,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 45: 36723679 (2007).[3] jeffrey piepmeier, priscilla mohammed, and joseph knuble, ﬁa double detector for rfi mitigation in microwave radiometers,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 46(2): 458465 (2007).[4] j.t. johnson, a.j. gasiewski, b. guner, g.a. hampson, s.w. ellingson, r. krishnamachari, n. niamsuwan, e. mcintyre, m. klein, and v.y. leuski, ﬁairborne radiofrequency interference studies at cband using a digital receiver,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 44(7, part 2): 19741985 (july 2006). [5] a.j. gasiewski, m. klein, a.yevgrafov, and v. leuskiy, ﬁinterference mitigation in passive microwave radiometry,ﬂ proceedings of the 2002 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium, toronto, ontario, canada, june 2428, 2002.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century168source knowledge are utilized. in the rst, the upwardlooking measurements of the ras antenna are augmented with measurements from a ﬁreference antennaﬂ directed toward the source. this latter antenna observes rfi sources at a higher signaltonoise ratio, which allows better estimation of rfi source properties in the cancellation process. a second approach is utilized for rfi sources with known modulations, for which a demodulation process can increase the signaltonoise ratio. given either a demodulation or second antenna measurement, cancellation then involves an estimation and subtraction of rfi source contributions to the data. the latter can be performed either ﬁprecorrelationﬂ or ﬁpostcorrelationﬂšthat is, either before or after the spatial covariance matrix is formed in an interferometric system. cancellation performance is limited by the extent to which rfi sources can be detected and successfully estimated (a function of the signaltonoise ratio at which the rfi sources are observed) as well as by the complexity and any temporal evolution of the rfi environment in which the observations occur.unilateral mitigation successes and limitationstable 4.2 above provides a short summary of the successes and limitations of the unilateral mitigation methods that have been employed to date by the eess. finding: while unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.4.4 mitigation through cooperative spectrum usagethe unilateral mitigation techniques described in §4.3 are at best a shortterm solution to the rfi problem, which can be effective only when spectral occupancy is low and the rfi is easily distinguished from the background. this approach is otherwise inherently limited by the lack of coordination with the active services, and using only this approach, science users would perpetually be ﬁguessingﬂ how to work around rfi. this tactic will soon nd its limits given the trends described in §4.1. a far more effective and efcient approach would be bilateral, or cooperative, mitigation.cooperative mitigation techniques would coordinate the timing and regional use of the radio spectrum in a far more dynamic manner than has existed with past technologies and regulatory structures. this is a new approach by which active services cooperate with passive (science) services within shared spectral bands by brie˚y interrupting or synchronizing radio transmissions to accommodate the science measurements. such accommodations would occur only when and where those science observations are needed (e.g., during a satellite overpass), so the spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.169technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceimpact on spectrum availability for active services would be very low. the intelligence of modern devices makes this approach attractive, and there will likely be many instances where the costs of this mitigation technology would be readily accepted by users eager to gain access to large portions of the spectrum. indeed, many devices will need to possess the necessary technologies and standards to negotiate spectrum use automatically among competing users, so the extension of these standards to accommodate science users could, in principle, be accomplished with very low costs and with a very low impact on functionality.cellular telephones provide a familiar example and some insight as to how this technology could work: cell phone networks automatically coordinate spectrum use among large quantities of transmitting devices. these systems provide a very dynamic commandandcontrol authority to assign frequency, or to interrupt or deny service, or to give priority (e.g., when a user dials 911) for each device within and among cellular regions. conceivably, these systems already represent mostšif not allšof the needed infrastructure for cooperative mitigation. the only missing elements are the agreedon standards and the software that would allow these systems to momentarily relinquish assigned spectral bands in response to science requests. these could be communicated either directly from eess satellites, for example, or from a networked database.consider the following scenario for cooperative mitigation. for this example, it is assumed that 30 spaceborne microwave radiometers are engaged in earth observations for operational and researchoriented scientic purposes. this ˚eet of eess satellites passes over a specic area several times per day but for only very brief intervals during each satellite™s pass. the typical spot size of an eess observation on earth is about 30 km in diameter. fixed or mobile transmitters operating within or near a receiving band used by the eess could operate nearly full time if the transmitters were responsive to a blanking request signal or other preprogrammed transmitter timeoff period that is coordinated with the overpass of each eess sensor. due to the brief time of footprint passage, this strategy would permit eess receivers to measure microwave brightness temperatures while negligibly impacting active service performance. this would be especially helpful to eess observations in bands that are not allocated to the service.to determine the impact on active services, consider the fractional coverage of the ˚eet of eess satellites. a ﬁkeepout zoneﬂ of 10 times the footprint size, or 300 km in diameter, would generally ensure that the interfering source is well outside the nearsidelobes of the satellite instrument where it is most susceptible to interference. the total keepout area on earth for all spaceborne radiometers would then be of order 20(150)2 = 1.4 million km2, or an area of approximately 0.3 percent of earth™s total surface. if a random distribution of satellite locations is assumed, this fractional aerial coverage can, to rst order, be equated with the fractional probability of occurrence of a satellite observation being made at a spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century170particular location on earth. put another way, an active user could, on average, transmit 99.7 percent of the time within the detection band of a passive satellite sensor without causing any eess interference. another cooperative arrangement is illustrated by a hypothetical situation in which all air route surveillance radars (arsr), which operate at lband, would be synchronized to a time standard that allows them to be blanked for the approximately 20 milliseconds for several times per day that the radar transmitter is located within the moving antenna footprint of an overhead eess sensor operating in lband. the loss of information to the radar service would be minuscule, and given the ubiquity of modern global positioning system (gps)based time synchronization and internetaccessible ephemeris data, the cost of the hardware and software necessary to perform blanking would also be small. however, the value of interferencefree data to environmental monitoring and forecasting services at several critical eess bands, specically lband, would be immense. similar synchronization signals could be made available from registered transmitters (both xed and mobile) to xed ras and eess users or to other users of the spectrum who could then use them to blank their own observations or raise data quality ˚ags. blanking regions, in certain cases of strong transmitters, could need to be extended to take into account re˚ections from geographical features.the above arguments and statistics strongly suggest that better time management of the available spectrum could result in signicantly more timebandwidth product being made available to passive services without impacting active services to any appreciable degree. to simplify the implementation, cooperative strategies are best implemented in bands used by xed, registered transmittersšrather than unlicensed devicesšalthough most new internetconnected and gps, cellular, or wifi devices could readily be required to contain simple software for cooperative mitigation. cooperative mitigation techniques have been proposed over the past decade for commercial and consumer devices such as commonly used cordless telephones and devices for use in tv white spaces.39 the extension of these techniques to the passive scientic community might provide many benets. the committee anticipates that the active services could be viable partners in such an arrangement and could benet from better usage of the active bands as well as from noteworthy public relations through their support of the eess and ras. it is conceivable, given appropriate management policy, that the passive spectrum could be ﬁrentedﬂ to commercial interests when not needed, with revenues being used to support improved spectral usage studies and/or passive spectrum management needs. coordination between ras ground stations and satellites containing trans39 p. kolodzy, m. marcus, d. depardo, j.b. evans, j.a. roberts, v.r. petty, and a.m. wyglinski, ﬁquantifying the impact of unlicensed devices on digital tv receivers,ﬂ technical report ittcfy20074491001, university of kansas, january 31, 2007.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.171technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencemitters is critical for the present and future viability of the ras, but it is much more difcult than groundtoground coordination, as is discussed in the next two paragraphs. for example, the coordination process between the ras and iridium, as discussed in §3.5, shows that coordination is not always successful at reducing rfi to needed levels.as an example of successful collaboration, passive users of the spectrum and the wireless medical telemetry service (wmts) were able to nd a successful cooperative agreement in the 608614 mhz in which both services still operate. in 1999, the u.s. committee on radio frequencies (corf) supported the fcc™s proposal for ras and wmts to share this band as long as the proposal was enacted in its entirety to include ﬁservice rules on eligibility, frequency coordination with ras facilities, the necessity to protect ras observations from interference, and technical standards (including eld strength, separation distance from the radio observatory, and outofband emission limitations).ﬂ40 the proposal was enacted as supported by corf, and the agreement between the services is seen by both parties as an excellent pairing of interests and one that has beneted them both substantially.similarly, a successful arrangement was made between the arecibo observatory and a nearby military radar station. the puerto rico air national guard operates a frequencyhopping radar with channels between 1220 and 1400 mhz at punta salinas, about 75 km from the telescope. arecibo observatory staff and the authorities at punta salinas devised a coexistence arrangement that involves blanking the transmitter when it is aimed at the observatory.this is not meant to say that cooperative mitigation can replace the need for radio quiet areas or for restricted, passiveonly bands. indeed, since the development of passive techniques often occurs on unscheduled bases and in arbitrary regions, the need for emission restrictions within the small exclusively allocated spectrum and specic geographical zones remains. many airborne and groundbased eess experiments require continuous operation within a given zone and would not be able to yield effectively to active systems over time intervals exceeding even a few tens of percents. such activity requires the use of restricted spectrum. similarly, for the ras, transmissions in geographical areas around radio telescopes must be avoided, and in order to maintain existing capabilities it should still be required that the ras be given a chance to comment on all license applications for xed and mobile transmitters within prescribed geographical zones around radio telescopes. however (and for example), in a shared timeofday cooperative scheme, commercial trafc on certain shared bands of ras frequencies might be 40 national academy of sciences, ﬁcomments on docket no. et 99255, amendment of parts 2 and 95 of the commission™s rules to create a wireless medical telemetry service,ﬂ led with the federal communications commission on september 30, 1999. available at http://sites.nationalacademies.org/bpa/bpa048830; accessed january 14, 2010.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century172acceptable in exchange for cooperative active access to other bands at suitable times, thus permitting effective radio astronomical observations to take place during transmissionfree windows.finding: nascent technologies exist for cooperative spectrum usage, but the standards and protocols do not.the above nding is one of the key points of this section: the smart, inexpensive, portable, and highly networked electronics that are incorporated into many devices now have the capabilities needed for intelligent spectral sharing, but the organization of the manufacturing sector and the regulatory impetus needed to implement such sharing need to be developed jointly between the scientic and the industrial communities. it is likely that if such coordination can be developed, there will be additional spinoff benets that will further facilitate spectral sharing within the purely active community as well. 4.5 mitigation costs, limitations, and benefitsas the previous chapters and sections have illustrated, the nature of the costs of the interference problem for the eess and ras is wide ranging. the costs are manifested as impaired or even unusable data; costs are also incurred when the eess and ras programs must engineer technical or other xes to mitigate the effects of interference on their operations. few of these costs can be monetized easily. the reason is that most of the value provided by the eess and ras is embodied in public goodsšthese include the host of environmental benets and the improved ability to manage natural resources enabled by the eess, and the enhanced or wholly new science understanding brought by the ras. by denition, the societal benet derived from public goods is difcult to express in dollar values. for example, even though improved forecasts are linked to reductions in weatherrelated loss of life and property, backing out the contribution of eees data to this outcome is complex and difcult. it is even more complicated to back out from such a calculation the degradation associated with rfi. this very problem is at the heart of spectrum allocation decisions when commercial services such as cellular telephones have an easily demonstrated market value, but scientic and other public uses of spectrum do not. as is well known from the literature on the value of public goods, however, simply because these goods are hard to monetize does not lessen their importance to society. nor does this difculty reduce the burden on decision makers to accord high importance spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.173technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferenceto public uses in making resource allocation decisions such as those involving spectrum. in this chapter the committee has sought to inform these decisions by highlighting the costs of the interference problem for the eess and ras. earth explorationsatellite service (eess)the challenge to the eess below about 10 ghz is from interference arising from highspeed electronics that incidentally radiate isotropically (e.g., electronic cameras and computers), and from shortrange wireless services such as wifi, bluetooth, and cellular telephones. interference above about 10 ghz arises from poorly ltered or directed communications, radar, and related services in bands in or near passive bands, or in bands with harmonics in passive bands (see tables 2.1 and 2.2 and figure 3.10). equipment radiating above 10 ghz is mostly sold to large entities at prices well above consumer levels, and mitigating lters or other rfi suppression devices could readily be added to that equipment. one exception is automobile anticollision radar being developed for largescale consumer sales for use in the 23 ghz band, despite that band™s current worldwide exclusive itu and fcc passive allocation (see also the discussion in §§2.5, 3.5, and 4.1). a potential future problem could arise if standards for widely used consumer equipment do not preclude incidental emissions above 10 ghz, which generally can be avoided with minor design changes at little cost.radio astronomy service (ras)the ras is currently dominated by relatively few large radio observatories located in remote areas that nonetheless are beset by increasing levels of incidental interference from proliferating consumerlevel electronics such as cellular telephones, wifi and bluetooth systems, computers, and so on; from emissions from aircraft and satellites; and from overthehorizon signals arising hundreds of miles away, well outside most protected areas but re˚ected by aircraft, the troposphere, and other means. explicit expenditures for ras mitigation research and implementation are modest because mitigation for the next generation of radio telescopes will be achieved primarily by the indirect costs of locating the observatories in extremely remote locations that are therefore more expensive to develop and operate (e.g., the western australian desert or the chilean andes). ras costs are thus arguably already strongly affected by such remotesite mitigation costs, so little mitigation budget is left. nonetheless, using horizon sensors to detect rfi of terrestrial origin is being pursued. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century174nature of the costs of radio frequency interference to the eess and the rasthe discussion above illustrates that the costs of rfi to the eess and ras take several forms. one cost is the direct loss of information when rfi renders data and observations less useful or, in some cases, wholly unusable. this direct loss of information greatly reduces the societal value of the billions of dollars invested in the nation™s eess and ras physical infrastructure. another cost is that of actions that must taken to accommodate rfi, provided accommodation is even possible. as discussed in chapters 2 and 3, these actions include alterations in sensor deployment and operations, changes in scheduling, and other technical and engineering adjustments. examples of lost information content include many examples in the cases of both the eess and ras. in the case of the eess these include the following: in some cases, despite extensive quality checking of eess data, there are no good means of tracking the impact of a single observation that may be corrupted by noise. in the case of radiance assimilation for numerical weather prediction models, a single passive microwave satellite measurement that is contaminated with rfi at a level comparable to the satellite noise is unable to be distinguished from an uncorrupted measurement. the use of such a measurement can cause errors in an entire forecast. the direct measurement of water vapor and cloud water can be provided only by microwave radiometers. these measurements are commonly made in the 2224 ghz frequency range, but microwave pointtopoint communications and automobile anticollision radars operating in this spectral band are a source of signicant rfi that will increase as automotive radar becomes more common. another example is sea surface temperature, for which measurements are made at 10 ghz. microwave brightness in littoral regions is impaired by contamination from the use of xband spectrum adjacent to and within this spectrum allocation. the 10.7 ghz channels of amsre are rfi contaminated over parts of europe and japan and are not used in these locations. (on a research basis, it is still possible to use the 6.9 ghz band for soil moisture retrieval over large regions.) rfi in bands below 10 ghz can compromise or even render unusable the unique soil moisture information obtained at 1.4 and 6 ghz.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.175technology and opportunities for the mitigation of radio frequency interferencein the case of the ras, examples include the following:the detection of deuterium formed during the big bang and now found in interstellar gas was for many decades impeded by rfi. detection was possible only after extensive shielding and the use of rfi monitors. to date, efforts to detect the redshifted (into the vhfband) 1420 mhz emission of the epoch of reionization have been defeated by rfi; examples include experiments at arecibo and at the vla.41,42 1612 mhz imaging by the vla was crippled by legal emissions from the iridium satellite system until new lters were installed in the vla. see figures 3.10 and 3.11. characterizing these examples of lost information in nancial terms is extremely difcult, given the publicgood nature of the eess and ras. if a loss in the value of the information could be easily monetized, spectrum regulators would have some basis by which to compare the value of spectrum allocations to the eess and ras with allocations for consumer products that create many rfi problems. the methodological challenge posed by the comparison of public goods with consumer goods in deciding how best to allocate and manage spectrum among competing uses is well known.43 another approach to characterizing the costs of rfi involves estimating the costs of the activities undertaken to mitigate or avoid rfi damage. in the case of the ras, box 4.1 describes some examples of mitigation costs. by asking what it costs to avoid or mitigate damage, regulators could compare the cost to the eess and the ras of avoiding damages with the cost to sources of rfi of mitigating their rfi (such as using lters or other means of rfi suppression). whichever services face the least cost, either to avoid damage from rfi or to mitigate the creation of rfi, could be asked to bear the nancial burden of taking the action. this approach of comparing costs can be useful to spectrum managers. however, because it only looks at costs, and not at benets to society, of the information provided by the eess and the ras, the avoidedcostbased approach is inferior as a means of guiding spectrum management. 41 j. weintroub, p. horowitz, i.m. avruch, and b.f. burke, ﬁa transit search for highly redshifted hi,ﬂ astronomy society of the pacic conference series, vol. 156 (1999).42 greenhill, l., et al., ﬁmapping hi structures present during the epoch of reionization,ﬂ ir&d report, center for astrophysics, harvard university.43 harvey j. levin, the invisible resource: use and regulation of the radio spectrum, baltimore: resources for the future and johns hopkins university press, 1971.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century176summaryincreasing levels of incidental interference from proliferating consumer electronics and other sources threaten the eess and ras. the primary current eess problem is active services in passively allocated bands where the atmosphere is sufciently transparent that eess instruments see earth™s surface. the ras is strongly affected by emissions from aircraft, satellites, and overthehorizon signals, necessitating the siting of sensitive observatories in remote locations. all rfi poses the potential for loss of information in eess and ras observations and data, thus undermining realization of the full societal benet of earth and radio astronomy science.box 4.1 illustrations of radio astronomy actions and costs for radio frequency interference mitigationexample 1: using knowledge of the local environment. experts use patterns such as the time of day or year to identify local sources of radio frequency interference (rfi), which can range from a lawn mower to an iridiumbased aerostat used by police for surveillance. in these cases, rfi is solved by coordination. tracking down the rfi source typically uses about 1 fulltimeequivalent (fte) day to solve.example 2: sleuthing with radio direction nding equipment. this procedure requires an rfi van equipped with receivers, ampliers, a spectrum analyzer, and a directional antennašequipment that costs approximately $20,000. in these cases, which are infrequent, rfi is solved by coordination. here, tracking down rfi may require 2 to 3 fte days. example 3: tracking ambiguous external rfi. tracing rfi to a specic satellite source can be timeconsuming and difcult. it may also have legal ramications. these problems can take an fte month and require archive work, software development, and detailed knowledge of the satellite (system specications, operating parameters) that may be the source of interference.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.1775findings and recommendationsthe allocation and use of radio frequencies constitute a complex issue at the center of many different elds of inquiry, from engineering to economics. the committee was tasked to ﬁprepare a report exploring the scientic uses of the radio spectrum which will:portray the science that is currently being conducted using the radio spectrum;identify the spectrum requirements necessary to conduct research;identify the anticipated future spectrum requirements for at least the next 10 years; andadvise spectrum policymakers on the value to the nation of accommodating scientic uses of the spectrum, recognizing the need to balance multiple communities.ﬂthe committee chose to focus its efforts on the passive uses of the spectrum, primarily in earth remote sensing and radio astronomy. the committee recognizes that there are many other scientic uses of the spectrum, but it focused on the  passive uses because these activities pose unique challenges to the nation™s spectrum allocation and management policies. during the course of the study, the committee identied a number of key ndings and formulated recommendations concerning passive uses of the radio spectrum for scientic purposes over the next two decades. the ndings identify the operational and educational value of these uses to the broader society as well spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century178as describe the rapidly developing threats to the viability of some areas of this science as a result of increasing use of the spectrum by active systems. active use of the spectrum has in and of itself generated unprecedented degrees of economic prosperity, enlightenment, and security. although the pressure for active use of the spectrum cannot and should not be reduced, the committee nonetheless identied a number of measures that can be taken to help ensure the viability of the passive uses. the recommendations stemming from the committee™s study and the ndings on which they are based are presented in this chapter.1 5.1 societal value of the passive servicesin addressing the rst and fourth bulleted items in its statement of task, the committee focused on the purpose of the various passive applications within the earth explorationsatellite service (eess) and the radio astronomy service (ras), and on how these purposes align with societal needs. a wide range of passive applications exist in earth remote sensing and radio astronomy that facilitate daytoday environmental services, scientic inquiry into basic physics and environmental processes, and both formal and outreach education. the committee expects that the societal value of the passive services will grow in importance over the next two decades.passive microwave remote sensing observations provide a valuable and important set of tools that contribute to the monitoring, understanding, and predicting of the many key components of earth™s natural system and that are essential for the understanding of the interaction of these components so that weather and climate can be analyzed and predicted. passive eess measurements are increasingly used directly in numerical environmental models that help predict weather and analyze global climate change. these observations represent the only viable means by which certain key environmental parameters can be measured. they are a cornerstone of the ability of the united states to maintain its preeminence in earth science and are critical to the economic vitality and health and safety of the nation™s people. finding: passive remote sensing observations are essential for monitoring earth™s natural systems and are therefore critical to human safety, the daytoday operations of the government and the private sector, and the policymaking processes governing many sectors of the u.s. economy.while earth scientists study the natural radiation from earth and the atmosphere, radio astronomers use similar techniques to study the natural radiation 1 the committee™s ndings, as originally presented in the context of the discussion in chapters 1 through 4, are reiterated here.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.179findings and recommendationsof sources in space. radio astronomy has made fundamental contributions to the understanding of the nature, origin, and evolution of the universe, galaxies, stars, and planets.finding: radio astronomy has great potential for further fundamental discoveries, including the origins and evolution of the universe, the nature of matter, and life in other solar systems, which will have an enormous impact on our understanding of fundamental physics and the place of humanity in the universe.radio astronomers and remote sensing scientists often push the state of the art in system design, leading to new developments in advanced signal processing, lownoise receivers, and novel antenna designs, among other areas. computer algorithms developed for the ras and eess have also found routine application in medical imaging. finding: in addition to the intellectual benets that they provide, radio astronomy and passive microwave remote sensing studies provide many technological benets to american society.radio astronomers have produced many opportunities for scientic and engineering education, ranging from the k12 through graduate levels. scientic results from radio astronomy and earth remote sensing continue to capture the imagination of the public, which is excited and awed by new discoveries about the universe and concerned about extreme weather events and possible climate change. public interest is re˚ected in the large numbers of people who visit radio observatories every year and regularly follow weather and climate forecasts. the development of passive microwave sensors for both the eess and ras also provides an important training ground for the next generation of radio scientists and engineers. finding: radio astronomy and passive microwave earth remote sensing provide a diverse and valuable set of educational opportunities.the federal government has historically recognized the importance of both of these elds to the nation. one measure of that recognition is the level of resources that the nation has invested in these endeavors. fullling the scientic promise of radio astronomy and earth remote sensing has required investment in a diverse group of observatories, sensors, and instrumental capabilities. further progress in environmental modeling and forecasting, astronomy, and related areas of physics depends on continual improvements in the sensitivity of radio telescopes and passive microwave sensors on surfacebased, airborne, and spaceborne platforms.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century180finding: scientic advances have required increasing measurement precision by passive radio and microwave facilities in order to obtain more accurate and thus more useful data sets. this need for precision will continue to increase.finding: large investments have been made in satellite sensors and sensor networks and in major radio observatories. new facilities costing billions of dollars are under construction or are being designed. recommendation 1: recognizing that the national investment in passive radio astronomy and earth remote sensing is dependent on access to the radio spectrum, the committee recommends that the federal communications commission (fcc) and the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia) ensure that access to spectrum for passive radio and microwave observations of earth environmental variables and radio astronomical observations of the sky is protected in the development of future spectrum policy.5.2 characteristics of the passive spectrum servicesthe committee noted the following broad characteristics of passive eess and ras activities and applications. ras and passive eess equipment receive natural radio emissions from space or earth (respectively) and use no transmissions. accordingly, they do not cause radio frequency interference (rfi) to any other service. the signals received from cosmic or natural terrestrial sources are typically far weaker than the internal noise levels of the receivers. the required sensitivity of ras and eess systems is determined by the natural, minute level of radio emissions. spectral band needs are determined by basic physical processes, and many measurements require spectrum at specic frequencies set by the spectral lines from the quantum transitions of atoms and molecules. these characteristics of ras and eess systems are likely to remain true over the next two decades, as they are intrinsic to the conduct of these activities. however, unmet spectral allocation requirements exist. finding: effective passive microwave band allocations are necessary for the performance of environmental and radio astronomy observations.finding: owing to their receiveonly nature, the passive earth exploration satellite service and radio astronomy service, operating from 10 mhz to 3 thz, are incapable of interfering with other services.finding: radio wave bands (10 mhz to 3 thz) are indispensable for collecting information associated with specic astronomical and environmental phenomena. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.181findings and recommendationsoften the same bands are similarly indispensable for both passive earth remote sensing and radio astronomy, and the passive nature of both services enables them to share the spectrum productively.the preceding ndings have a number of important implications with respect to how radio astronomy and earth remote sensing are currently conducted. since the science requirements drive the need for additional bands and bandwidth beyond those allocated to the services, the ras and eess communities routinely use spectrum beyond these allocations on a noninterference basis, and with varying degrees of success. such opportunistic sharing is essential for certain scientic measurements; it requires the careful design of experiments to avoid rfi.whereas technological advances have rapidly increased the channel capacity of spectrum available to active users, the same cannot be said for the passive services: they cannot use their allocated spectrum more efciently. for instance, the passive services cannot use coding and compression techniques to expand the capacity of this bandwidth. passive microwave sensors rely on their entire allocated bandwidths, and often much more, to achieve required measurement precisions. finding: currently, 2.07 percent of the spectrum below 3 ghz is allocated to the ras and eess on a primary basis, and 4.08 percent is allocated on a secondary basis (measured in hertz). debilitating postlaunch rfi occurred in one major international passive environmental sensor mission at cband (advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth [amsre]), rendering soil moisture measurement impossible over several populated areas. such rfi also occurred at cband in a nonmissioncritical manner in another u.s. passive microwave military sensor (windsat). a spectral allocation at cband is currently required for observations of soil moisture and sea surface temperature, and a wider allocation at xband would be valuable for observing ocean wind direction. while, the spectral band from 10.6 to 10.8 ghz is still relatively free of rfi over the united states, growth in use of this band and cband by active applications is anticipated.finding: there is currently inadequate protected spectrum in cband and xband for operational passive microwave observations of sea surface temperature, soil moisture, and ocean surface wind speed and direction. a further characteristic of eess measurements is that they are made on a continuous and global basis. passive microwave and millimeterwave sensor beams pass approximately 20 times per day over a typical location in the united states.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century182because there is no eess allocation within cband and this portion of the spectrum is heavily utilized, measurements of brightness temperature at cband over land are currently only considered observations of opportunity. rfi in this band not only biases measurements but causes observation failure. global protection is needed due to the band™s wide application in observing sea surface temperature, soil moisture, and ocean surface wind directionšelements critical to the understanding and predicting of earth™s environment.recommendation 2: the fcc and ntia should move toward developing a passive eess reference band allocation within 68 ghz to facilitate unilateral rfi mitigation. to be effective, this band should be at least 20 mhz wide and should be established on a global basis. such a reference band allocation would benet radio astronomy as well. it would be advantageous for the ras if this band included the methanol transition line, for example, which provides strong maser emission from starforming regions in the milky way.finding: whereas most frequency regulations for active services are dened on local or regional bases, passive eess observations are global by nature. as a result, a high level of international cooperation is required to maintain and enforce passive allocations.recommendation 3: the united states should actively engage the international community on passive eess and ras frequency allocations in order to improve the availability of global measurements of environmental variables and radio astronomy observations. 5.3 threats to the eess and the ras from unintentional radio frequency interferencethe radio environment in the united states and around the globe is rapidly changing due to the proliferation of active devices. this trend is likely to continue in the foreseeable future. it threatens the ability to use the spectrum for passive scientic purposes through inadvertent radio frequency interference. the committee assessed both the current state of the occurrence of rfi to the passive services (chapters 2 and 3) and trends in spectrum usage (chapter 4). the most salient change in the use of the radio spectrum over the past 20 years has been the explosive growth in commercial use of the spectrum. active commercial use of the spectrum will continue to grow in the number of links (2 billion or more cellular telephone users plus many additional data networks), the modes spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.183findings and recommendationsof usage (including data, voice, and active sensing applications), and geographic deployment (including nearrural and rural environs). these devices will be highly mobile, will use more of the spectrum, and will extend to geographic locations previously considered to be radioquiet.finding: radio frequency interference threatens the scientic understanding of key variables in earth™s natural system, now and in the future.weak cosmic signals of fundamental importance to radio astronomy are easily masked by humanmade radio emissions. even signals far below the sensitivity of highquality receivers used by the active services can interfere with routine astronomical observations.finding: the emergence of practices for the dynamic use of the spectrum will result in more active devices with greater variability in active spectrum usage, and the eess and ras communities could be impacted with more unintentional radio interfering devices.the proliferation of wireless devices and highspeed digital radio technology around the globe diminishes the value of earth observations from remote sensing platforms, leading to an irrevocable loss of environmental data. when affected by rfi, eess observations have increased potential for introducing errors in environmental forecasts on both local and regional bases.finding: geographical separation of radio telescopes from transmitters (e.g., through the establishment of radio quiet zones and the remote siting of observatories) is currently effective in avoiding much radio frequency interference, but the proliferation of airborne and satellite transmissions and the widespread deployment of mobile, lowpower personal devices threaten even the most remote sites.unlike earth remote sensing applications, which require global coverage, radio astronomy has historically taken advantage of the benets provided by geographical separation; large observatories have been built in remote, largely radioquiet areas. finding: important scientic inquiry and applications enabled by the earth  explorationsatellite service (eess) and the radio astronomy service (ras) are signicantly impeded or precluded by radio frequency interference (rfi). such rfi has reduced the societal and scientic return of eess and ras observatories and necessitates costly interference mitigation, which is often insufcient to prevent rfi damage.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century184despite these ndings, the current knowledge of actual spectrum usage is  inadequate to address rfi threats to the eess and ras. the federal government collects more information about many other economic variables than it does for the current usage of the radio spectrum. a monitoring capability would aid in both mitigation and instrument design and in the identication of dynamic sharing opportunities. this information would also aid in enhancing current passive radio science as well as aiding the expansion of current eess and ras capabilities.finding: greater efforts to collect and analyze radio emission data are needed to support the enforcement of existing allocations and to support the discussion and planning of spectrum use.finding: better utilization of the spectrum and reduced rfi for scientic as well as commercial applications are possible with better knowledge of actual spectrum usage. progress toward these goals would be made by gathering more information through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. this would be benecial to both the commercial and the scientic communities.recommendation 4: the department of commerce/national telecommunications and information administration (ntia), in collaboration with the national science foundation (nsf), nasa, and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa), should spearhead the development of a national spectrum assessment system that measures the radio frequency (rf) environment with appropriately high resolution in time, space, and frequency for purposes of spectrum development and management, based on the spectral and spatial density of emitters.the assessment of spectrum usage needs to occur at time, space, and frequency scales commensurate with actual usage. to this end, 1 microsecond (µs) would resolve many pulsed radar applications, and 1 khz would be sufcient to separate and identify almost all individual signals in bands above and below 30 mhz for both voice and data. spatial and angular resolution requirements are more difcult to identify. the necessary angular resolution would be frequencydependent, such that the survey would achieve lower resolution at lower frequencies and higher resolution at higher frequencies. since different communications systems use a very wide variety of spatial scales, nding a single spatial resolution necessary to conduct a useful survey is impossible; it comes down to what can be afforded. crucially, however, all of these measurements should be of sufcient resolution to determine the adverse impact of most radio transmissions on the ras and eess. spectrum monitoring with these guidelines would provide both statistical and operational information for the ras and eess, as well as providing spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.185findings and recommendationsmany ancillary benets to other scientic, commercial, and government applications and services. 5.4 technology for mitigation of  radio frequency interferencegiven the increasing threat to the passive uses of the spectrum posed by humanmade transmissions, the ras and eess communities have studied the potential for the mitigation of unintentional rfi on both unilateral and cooperative bases. bilateral mitigation technologies could potentially lead to effective spectral sharing between the active and passive services and could be particularly valuable for facilitating passive observations in nonallocated bands. the following ndings and recommendations pertain to the current and projected future status of unilateral and cooperative rfi mitigation strategies suitable for maintaining the ability to use the spectrum for passive scientic purposes. finding: while unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.techniques for the excision or subtraction of rfi continue to be developed, but they are only partially successful. for example, unilateral rfi mitigation techniques for passive eess systems have been and continue to be explored. only limited reports of success are available, however, especially with regard to levels of rfi comparable to the system sensitivity. radio astronomy currently makes use of bands allocated to other services but sometimes is faced with the need for rfi mitigation. no set of universally effective techniques has been identied. unilateral rfi mitigation could be facilitated by improved a priori information (e.g., timespacefrequencyangle structure) on spectrum usage, as recommended in recommendation 4 in the preceding section. recommendation 5: the national telecommunications and information administration (ntia) and the appropriate national science foundation (nsf) and nasa units should promote the development of inexpensive outofband interference mitigation technology and testing capabilities (e.g., lters, modulation techniques, etc.) that could be added to and required for typeapproved consumer devices for the protection of eess and ras bands. as these technologies become affordable, the technical regulatory rules should re˚ect these new capabilities. supporting the development of mitigation technology for application to the appropriate future radiating devices could preempt much interference to the passpectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century186sive services. as the technology matures and cost falls, the efcacy and availability of the technology should be re˚ected in regulations moderating spectrum use.recommendation 6: investment in the development of mitigation technology should be increased so that it is commensurate with the costs of data denial that result from the use of systems without mitigation. to this end, nsf and nasa should support research and development for unilateral2 rfi mitigation technology in both eess and ras systems. nasa, noaa, and the department of defense should require that appropriate rfi analyses and tests and practical rfi mitigation techniques be applied to all future satellite systems carrying passive microwave sensors.a secondary benet of such research would be to quantify the qualitative and limited documentation of unilateral rfi mitigation capabilities and their ultimate utility, as well as to help quantify spectrum usage. the committee believes that an effort of several million dollars per year over 5 years could yield substantial results in this area. finding: nascent technologies exist for cooperative spectrum usage, but the standards and protocols do not. cooperative spectrum usage is potentially more useful than is unilateral rfi mitigation, but the requisite ability to assign spectrum usage dynamically is currently undeveloped. anticipating that the commercial, military, and scientic uses of the spectrum will continue to grow, there will be a commensurately growing need to cooperate on the usage of spectrum. spectrum is underutilized over time, space, frequency, and angle, and cooperative spectrum usage offers a means of taking advantage of this underutilization.one example of cooperative spectrum usage is timedomain multiplexing of spectrum over broad bandwidths. in such a scheme, the eess or ras would have exclusive use of spectrum for certain intervals, while tolerating transmissions from active services during the remaining time. this technique would be one way in which the anticipated evolution of spectrum utilization and management could result in a mutually successful scenario for both passive and active services, albeit with some increase in the complexity of equipment. the anticipated technical requirement is similar to proven existing technology that facilitates the timedivisionmultiplexed use of spectrum in cellular telephone systems such as the global system for mobile communications (gsm). however, since ras experiments usually require a xed integration time to achieve statistical accuracy, a timedomain multiplexing sys2 as discussed in chapter 4.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.187findings and recommendationstem would increase the actual time per experiment and further strain the heavy demands on all of the world™s large radio telescopes.recommendation 7: the nsf, nasa, and ntia should jointly support research and development for cooperative rfi mitigation techniques and the associated forums and outreach necessary to enable the development of standards for greater spectral utilization and interference avoidance.the committee believes that an effort of several million dollars per year over 3 years would be sufcient to demonstrate core technologies and to develop an implementation roadmap for these technologies. one end goal of these efforts would be to enable dynamic spectrumsharing technology that would facilitate the observation of astrophysical phenomena which require measurements over large fractional bandwidths, such as observation of the redshifted 21 cm emission from the universe™s dark ages and the epoch of reionization, pulsars, single pulses hypothesized to be associated with prompt emission from gammaray bursts and other extreme astrophysical phenomena. such measurements are extremely difcult to make at this time and would provide effective benchmarks for the success of cooperative spectrumsharing techniques. a moderate portion of this investment should justiably be spent on informing the public and the relevant scientic and technical communities about eess and ras requirements, mitigation needs, and capabilities, and on the development of standards. recommendation 8: as cooperative spectrumsharing techniques come into use, nsf and nasa spectrum managers should work with the regulatory agencies to enable observations that require an extremely wide spectral range. such observations would provide a useful metric for the effectiveness of spectrumsharing techniques for the passive services.5.5 protection of the eess and the ras the committee discussed at length actions that should be undertaken by u.s. agencies to ensure the continued benets to the public of the passive services. some of these actions can be undertaken solely within the united states and others would require international collaboration. the committee considered the costs and complexity versus expected benets to the passive services carefully. in some cases, the committee identied existing ambiguities in rulemaking that could lead to an eventual loss of utility of the primary passive bands, thus warranting a clarication of existing regulations. in other cases, more complex regulatory measures must be undertaken to ensure the viability of the passive services. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century188one example of such an ambiguity involves the differences between the international telecommunication union (itu) and the federal communications commission (fcc) regulations in outofband and spurious emissions. in some cases, emissions that create harmful levels of interference are currently permitted in eess and ras primary bands, although the itu regulations state that ﬁall emissions are prohibited.ﬂ the fcc regulations do not allow any primary emission, but outofband and/or spurious emissions from other bands are permissible. thus, a device can meet the specic emission requirements and emit into the protected eess and ras primary bands. in order to protect primary eess and ras bands adequately, it should be required that outofband and spurious emissions be signicantly attenuated when they fall within eess or ras primary bands. this may require the reconsideration of many of the emission limits of bands that are spectrally close to the eess and ras primary bands, for modication of the permitted oob and spurious emission levels.finding: the rules for outofband and spurious emissions in the primary allocated earth explorationsatellite service (eess) and radio astronomy service (ras) bands (e.g., 14001427 mhz) do not provide adequate interference protection for eess and ras purposes.the rules that pertain to the above nding are given in appendix d.recommendation 9: the ntia and fcc, with the support of the nasa and nsf spectrum managers, should study rulemaking changes that require aggregate emission protection and outofband and spurious noise protection in primary eess and ras bands. more complex methods of understanding and managing spectrum usage may also be required to enable more efcient spectrum usage.finding: current regulatory structure and support infrastructure (such as databases, etc.) are transmittercentric. methodologies to incorporate passive systems need to be developed. finding: new cooperative spectrum management techniques that could be benecial for enhanced interference management and increased spectral utilization have been investigated by regulators but have not been implemented.the current regulatory structure inhibits the distribution of critical information on how active systems can impact passive systems, and it also limits promotion spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.189findings and recommendationsof the communications needed between active and passive users to enhance channel capabilities and limit inadvertent rfi.benecial cooperative spectrum management techniques include the use of interference metrics (e.g., interference temperature), the extension of enforcement technology (e.g., the development of commercial devices used for enforcement measurements and additional mobile measurement systems), and the inclusion of passive systems in regulators™ databases (e.g., the fcc™s universal licensing system).recommendation 10: fcc and ntia regulators should actively dene interference metrics, expand enforcement technology, and include descriptions of passive eess and ras systems in regulators™ databases. however, many of the current gaps in the regulatory system stem from a lack of communication betweenšor even withinšthe various user communities. for example, there is currently no forum in the united states for identifying eess frequency allocation needs and vetting the merits of alternative allocations within the context of all competing services (both public and private). to engender the requisite communication, the committee makes the following recommendations.recommendation 11: the eess and ras communities should be provided additional support through nsf, nasa, and noaa to increase their participation in spectrum management forums within the international telecommunication union (itu), fcc, ntia, and other organizations. the goal of such participation is to foster outreach, advance the understanding of interference and regulation issues, and initiate mutual cooperation in interference mitigation.for example, nasa and the national oceanic and atmospheric administration (noaa) could jointly sponsor a workshop to explore alternative means of addressing rfi, seeking participation from the fcc, ntia, industry, vendors, and the university community. this workshop could focus on the development of satellite and aircraft payloads and groundbased systems that characterize spectrum use. such an endeavor would help determine the need for modied and/or tightened regulations and would increase the general level of understanding about interference. the planning of this workshop could be facilitated by professional societies already engaged in similar activities. recommendation 12: the ofce of science and technology policy should create a new, permanent, representative technology advisory body to identify technical and regulatory opportunities for improving spectrum sharing among all active and passive users, both government and nongovernment.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century190the advisory body recommended here should include representatives from all user and regulatory sectors. in a common forum, these representatives could bring to bear the technical and regulatory creativity, breadth, and depth necessary to identify and ensure that new opportunities for improving spectrum sharing and utilization are brought in a timely way to the attention of the many existing, relevant, government and private bodies that now separately address more limited and immediate spectrum issues.in addition to expanding communication, it is important to adjust the regulatory process in such a manner as to discourage new instances of unintentional rfi from arising in the future.recommendation 13: the fcc and ntia should require active service users to use their allocated portions of the spectrum more effectively. spectral efciency requirements should be built into fcc and ntia licensing policies for future spectral assignments. although outofband emissions restrictions apply to individual devices and these restrictions generally preclude rfi by an individual device, there is currently no way to ensure that when such devices are sold, the aggregate emissions from a large number of them will not cause harmful rfi. limitations on aggregate emissions may be difcult to enforce, but the likelihood of rfi can be minimized prior to the sale of devices by considering assessments of realistic market penetration and usage concentration when emissions standards are being developed.recommendation 14: nasa, noaa, nsf, and other agencies with interests in the eess and ras should oppose all typeapproval licenses for equipment without source mitigation that impacts eess and ras bands. recommendation 15: a combination of radio impact statements and/or statements of compliance with interference mitigation standards and emission standards should be mandated to accompany all proposals to federal agencies for the research and development of active service technology. recommendation 16: the fcc and ntia should follow up on specic recommendations of the u.s. spectrum policy task force (november 2002) to encourage spectral efciency, maintain eess and ras spectral allocations, and be prepared to enforce spectrum protection. in its nal report, the fcc™s spectrum policy task force made specic recommendations including the following: (1) ensure that the fcc has sufcient resources to independently monitor and enforce spectrum management rules,  spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.191findings and recommendations(2) improve the outofband interference performance of transmitters and receivers, (3) adopt a standard method for measuring the noise ˚oor, (4) create a public/private partnership for a longterm noisemonitoring network and for the archiving of data for use by the fcc and the public, (5) promote transmitter enhancements for interference control, (6) study the tightening of outofband emission limits, (7) accompany a clearer denition of interference with effective enforcement, (8) develop technical bulletins that explain interference rules for all radio services, and (9) develop the opportunistic or dynamic use of existing bands through either cognitive radio techniques to nd white space in existing bands or use protocols to relinquish bands to primary users.35.6 the path forwardthe radio spectrum is a nite resource that has been managed as such for the past 70 years by the federal government. this management enabled the growth of strong commercial and scientic communities. the pursuit of better techniques to leverage the unique characteristics of the radio spectrum has led to discoveries and innovations of enormous scientic and societal value. over the past 20 years, rapid technological improvements have increased the capabilities of both the scientic uses and commercial uses of the radio spectrum exponentially. the current regulatory regime is struggling to enable the capabilities and desires of either of these communities, let alone both. a new path is needed to maintain the vital engines both for the scientic discoveries that lead to societal benet and for the commerce that is straining to meet the demands of a mobile society.technological innovations continue to increase the utility of the radio spectrum. the onset of new technologies designed to exploit the diversity of the radio spectrum in space, frequency, polarization, and time will increase the efciency of its use. however, the current means of managing spectrum use must be changed, as the current policies threaten to thwart scientic discovery, diminish the utility of important environmental observations, and limit economic growth. therefore, new spectrum management policies need to be explored to foster these critical national capabilities.the next generation of spectrum management policies must enable better sharing of the spectrum as well as contribute to a full understanding of the actual use of the rf spectrum. this can be done by exploiting currently available technologies and hastening the development of nascent technologies. new policies should encourage the following: 3 federal communications commission, report of the spectrum policy task force, washington, d.c., november 2002.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century192the development of the means for direct interaction between the active and passive spectrum users in order to protect current and future scientic uses of the spectrum. the nation needs to provide the policies to strike a balance between pursuing advanced technology to decrease the cost of communications on the one hand and, on the other, to make the spectrum more usable and less noisy for all users; a regulatory environment that enables sharing the spectrum in both space and time. this is a ﬁwinwinﬂ scenario that will enable additional scientic uses without impacting commercial development; andinvestment in technology to enable spectrum sharing between active and passive users, over the entire radio spectrum. this investment should become commensurate with the investment made in remote sensing technology.in one sense, the management of the spectrum for passive purposes can be likened to the management of u.s. public parklands. while monetization of the spectrum by the free market may be one value metric, the true societal value of eess and ras spectrum should more properly be assessed in a manner consistent with how public parklands have been valued. as history continues to show, parklands reserved for public enjoyment, with limited to no development being permitted, have a high intrinsic community value. humankind has ultimately found a compelling need for such land, and this need has resulted in the preservation of parcels even within the most crowded urban areas where these parcels would otherwise sell on the open market at a premium price. there is a balance between development and preservation that recognizes the intrinsic value of parklands.more often than not, the very presence of such public land increases the value of adjacent private land beyond the value that it would otherwise have. in a similar manner, the eess and ras studies performed using passive spectrum often lead to improved communications technologies and scientic insights that engender efciencies and hence enhance prots and improve services within the private and public sectors.the new initiatives necessary for spectrum management and sharing will not be easy to design and implement, nor will they make successful management and sharing a certainty. it will likely take a national effort to understand clearly the needs of both communities, the scientic and the commercial, and to motivate each to make the choices necessary to enable greater access for each to the radio spectrum. that said, it should be clear that the next generation of scientic users of the radio spectrum needs to be afforded the capacity to develop the technology that will open new horizons. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.193findings and recommendations5.7 conclusionthe passive services both provide a critical return to society through operations in support of environmental prediction and offer scientic intellectual value. the impact of the latter is difcult to quantify, but it has been seen to make unique contributions to our nation™s progress. it would thus be in the strongest interests of the nation to see that access to spectrum for scientic purposes is maintained during the coming decades. the committee™s recommendations provide a pathway for putting in place the regulatory mechanisms and associated supporting research activities necessary to accomplish this important task. the committee believes that such a pathway will also lead to greater efciency in the active use of the spectrum, which should benet all direct and indirect consumers of wireless telecommunications and data services. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.appendixesspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.197appendix astatement of taskthe current system of allocating bands in the radio spectrum was developed more than 50 years ago, and a review of the needs of scientic users is in order. in recent years, the explosion of new wireless technologies has signicantly increased the demand for access to the radio spectrum. the increased demand has led to discussions in both government and industry with respect to new ways of thinking about spectrum allocation and use. scientic users of the radio spectrum (such as radio astronomers and earth scientists using remotely sensed data) have an important stake in the policies that will result from this activity. it is proposed that a survey of the scientic uses of the spectrum be conducted to identify the needs of today™s scientic activities and to assist spectrum managers in balancing the requirements of the scientic users of the spectrum with those of other interests. the survey will be carried out by a national research council (nrc) committee over a period of 18 months.a balanced committee of 15 people will be formed to prepare an nrc report surveying scientic uses of the spectrum. following is the committee™s statement of task: the committee will prepare a report exploring the scientic uses of the radio spectrum which will:portray the science that is currently being conducted using the radio spectrum; identify the spectrum requirements necessary to conduct research; identify the anticipated future spectrum requirements for at least the next 10 years; and spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century198advise spectrum policymakers on the value to the nation of accommodating scientic uses of the spectrum, recognizing the need to balance multiple communities. the committee will comment on the spectrum use by the relevant scientic communities but will not make recommendations on the allocation of specic frequencies.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.199marshall h. cohen, cochair, received his ph.d. in physics from ohio state university in 1952. he is a professor emeritus in the astronomy department at the california institute of technology (caltech). before going to caltech, he was a professor of electrical engineering and then a professor of astronomy at cornell university, spent 2 years as a professor of applied electrophysics at the university of california at san diego, and then went to caltech in 1968. dr. cohen has conducted radio astronomy research in solar physics and active galactic nuclei (agn) and optical research on magnetic white dwarfs and on agn. he was also involved with commissioning the arecibo telescope and in developing very long baseline interferometry (vlbi) and the network that was set up to manage vlbi observations in the 1970s. currently, he uses the very long baseline array to study the statistics of superluminal sources. using the large telescopes at the palomar and the w.m. keck observatories, he conducts polarization observations of the spectrum to study the relations among the different classes of objects and their evolution. dr. cohen has been very involved with activities of the national research council, having been a member of the division on engineering and physical sciences; the commission on physical sciences, mathematics, and applications; the proceedings of the national academy of sciences editorial board; the national academy of sciences (nas) class i membership committee; the united states national committee for the international union of radio science (usncursi); chair of nas section 12: astronomy; and chair of the 1980s astronomy survey committee. he was also on panels of the 1970s and 1990s astronomy survey study.appendix bbiosketches of  committee membersspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century200albin j. gasiewski, cochair, received his ph.d. degree in electrical engineering and computer science from the massachusetts institute of technology in 1989. previously, he had received m.s. and b.s. degrees in electrical engineering and he received a b.s. degree in mathematics from case western reserve university in 1983. from 1989 to 1997 dr. gasiewski was a faculty member within the school of electrical and computer engineering at the georgia institute of technology. as an associate professor there, he developed and taught courses on electromagnetics, remote sensing, instrumentation, and wave propagation theory. from 1997 through 2005 he worked at the u.s. national oceanic and atmospheric administration™s (noaa™s) earth system research laboratory (esrl) in boulder, colorado, where he was chief of the microwave systems development branch of the esrl physical science division. in 2006 he joined the department of electrical and computer engineering of the university of colorado at boulder, where he directs the noaacu center for environmental technology. his technical interests include passive and active remote sensing, radiative transfer theory and applications, electromagnetics, antennas and microwave circuits, electronic instrumentation, airborne sensors, meteorology, and oceanography. dr. gasiewski was the 20052006 president of the ieee geoscience and remote sensing society and was the general cochair of igarss 2006 in denver, colorado. he is also a member of the international union of radio science (ursi), where he currently serves as vice chair of the united states national committee for the international union of radio science (usncursi) commission f. he served on the u.s. national research council™s committee on radio frequencies (corf) from 1989 to 1995 and on the usncursi from 1996 to 1997. donald c. backer is a professor of astronomy and chair of the astronomy department at the university of california, berkeley. professor backer received a bachelor of engineering physics degree from cornell university in 1966, a master of science degree in radio astronomy from manchester university in 1968, and a ph.d. in astronomy from cornell university in 1971. he spent 2 years as a postdoctoral research assistant at the national radio astronomy observatory (nrao) in  charlottesville, virginia, and 2 years as a national research council (nrc) fellow at nasa™s goddard space flight center. since 1975 he has been at the university of california, berkeley. his past duties have included serving as executive ofcer, and later chair, of the u.s. very long baseline interferometry (vlbi) network. more recently he has served on the board of the berkeleyillinoismaryland association and the visiting committees of the nrao and the haystack observatory and is currently on the visiting committee of the arecibo observatory serving as chair. he chaired commission j of the u.s. national committee for the international union of radio science from 1997 to 1999 and was an nrc ex ofcio member.  professor backer™s research interests have focused on pulsars and active galactic spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.201appendix bnuclei. one research effort involves the timing of an array of millisecond pulsars for use as celestial clocks. the longterm goal is setting limits on the gravitational wave background that may result from the coalescence of massive black holes in distant galaxies. his shortterm goals include the investigation of smallscale turbulence in the interstellar plasma. he is involved with instrumentation for pulsar data acquisition at the arecibo, green bank, effelsberg, and nançay observatories. another of professor backer™s activities is focused on a deeper understanding of an enigmatic object in our galactic center, which may be the site of a massive black hole. vlbi observations at millimeter wavelengths are being pursued as well as proper motion measurements and also circular polarization. professor backer is a past member of the nrc™s committee on radio frequencies (former chair), the atacama large millimeter array review committee, and the 1980s astronomy survey committee. he currently serves on the committee on astronomy and astrophysics and the united states national committee for the international union of radio science.roberta balstad (formerly roberta balstad miller) is a senior research scientist at columbia university and a senior fellow with the center for international earth sciences information network (ciesin). dr. balstad has published extensively on science policy, information technology and scientic research, remote sensing applications and policy, and the role of the social sciences in understanding global environmental change. she is the author of numerous articles and books, including city and hinterland: a case study of urban growth and regional development (1979), and editor, with harriet zuckerman, of science indicators: implications for research and policy (1980). dr. balstad received her ph.d. from the university of minnesota in 1974. she was a senior fellow at oxford university in 1991 to 1992 and a guest scholar at the woodrow wilson international center for scholars in 1994. she is currently chair of the u.s. national committee on science and technology data (codata) and chaired the priority area assessment panel on scientic data and information of the international council for science (icsu). she is a member of the board of directors of the open geospatial consortium and of the u.s. national committee for the international institute for applied systems analysis. before  joining columbia university, dr. balstad had been the director of the division of social and economic sciences at the national science foundation, the founder and rst executive director of the consortium of social science associations (cossa), and president/chief executive ofcer of ciesin. in 1998, she led ciesin™s transition from saginaw, michigan, to become part of the earth institute at columbia university, where she served as ciesin™s director through april 2006. dr. balstad has lectured widely, both in the united states and abroad. from 1992 to 1994, she was vice president of the international social science council and has also served as chair of the nrc steering committee on space applications and commercialization, of the nato advisory panel on advanced scientic workshops/advanced spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century202research institutes, of the american association for the advancement of science™s committee on science, engineering and public policy, and of the advisory committee of the luxembourg income study. she currently serves as chair of st. antony™s college trust (oxford university) in north america. steven w. ellingson is an associate professor in the bradley department of  electrical and computer engineering at virginia polytechnic institute and state university. dr. ellingson received his ph.d. in electrical engineering from ohio state university in 2000. before going to virginia tech, he held research positions at ohio state university, raytheon, and booz allen hamilton, inc. dr. ellingson was previously a captain in the u.s. army, on active duty between 1989 and 1993. his research interests are in the general areas of electromagnetics, applied signal processing, and instrumentation. he is specically interested in direction nding, interference mitigation, wireless communications, radio astronomy, and the design of antennas and receivers. he has been working closely with the long wavelength array. dr. ellingson is a member of the nrc™s committee on radio frequencies and is a senior member of the institute for electrical and electronics engineers. darrel emerson was an assistant director of the national radio astronomy observatory (nrao), responsible for arizona operations, in tucson, arizona. his responsibilities included the operation of the nrao 12meter telescope at kitt peak, which undertakes fundamental astronomical research in the range 67300 ghz. he is heavily involved in the atacama large millimeter array project. dr. emerson received his ph.d. in radio astronomy in 1973 from the cavendish laboratory at the university of cambridge, england. before joining the nrao, he worked for several years with the max planck institute for radio astronomy 100meter radio telescope at effelsberg, near bonn, germany, and then with the institute for radio astronomy in millimeterwaves in grenoble, france. his current research interests include spectral line studies of nearby normal galaxies and the development of millimeterwave observational techniques. aaron s. evans is an associate professor of astronomy at the university of virginia and an associate astronomer at the national radio astronomy observatory. he received his ph.d. in astronomy from the institute for astronomy, university of hawaii, in 1996. his current research primarily deals with observations of colliding galaxies and their associated phenomena (starbursts and active galactic nuclei). the study of these galaxies requires a multiwavelength approach, which to date has included optical to midinfrared imaging, as well as nearinfrared and submillimeter spectroscopy. the observing facilities at which he carries out these programs are the mauna kea observatories in hawaii (university of hawaii spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.203appendix b2.2meter, united kingdom infrared telescope, james clerk maxwell telescope, w.m. keck observatory); the hubble space telescope; the owens valley millimeter array in california; the steward observatory 12meter telescope at kitt peak, arizona; and the iram 30meter telescope in spain. dr. evans received a nasa/ american society for engineering education faculty fellowship award in 2002, and chaired the national science foundation™s nrao 5year proposal panel. he also served on the nrc™s committee to review the science requirements for the atacama large millimeter array.joel t. johnson is a professor of electrical and computer engineering in the department of electrical engineering at the ohio state university. he received his ph.d. in 1996 from the massachusetts institute of technology. dr. johnson™s research interests include microwave remote sensing of geophysical media, both active and passive; the application of numerical techniques in electromagnetics to remote sensing problems; and the design of systems for radio frequency interference mitigation. he served from 2005 to 2009 as chair of the frequency allocations in remote sensing (fars) committee of the ieee geoscience and remote sensing society; the fars committee™s mission is to provide technical assessments, guidance, and recommendations regarding matters of frequency sharing and interference between remote sensing and other uses of the radio spectrum. paul kolodzy is a private consultant with kolodzy consulting, llc. he received his ph.d. and m.s. in chemical engineering from case western reserve university and his b.s. in chemical engineering from purdue university. prior to his work as a private consultant, he was the senior technology adviser and consultant to m2z networks. before joining m2z networks he was the director of the center for wireless network security (winsec) at the stevens institute of technology. prior to serving there, he was the senior spectrum policy adviser at the federal communications commission (fcc) and the director of the spectrum policy task force charged with developing the nextgeneration spectrum policy. dr. kolodzy has also been a program manager in the advanced technology ofce at the defense advanced research projects agency (darpa), managing research and development for communications programs developing generationafternext capabilities. before serving at darpa, he had been the director of signal processing and strategic initiatives at sanders (now bae systems), a premier electronic warfare company. dr. kolodzy got his start as the group leader and staff member at the massachusetts institute of technology™s lincoln laboratory, working on optical systems for laser radars, signal processing, and target recognition for acoustics, radio frequency (synthetic aperture radar), and optical signatures. dr. kolodzy has 20 years of experience in technology development for advanced communications, networking, electronic warfare, and spectrum policy for government, privateœsector, and academic groups. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century204he participated in the nrc computer science and telecommunications board™s forum on spectrum management policy reform. david b. kunkee conducts microwave remote sensing research at aerospace corporation. this research is related to the development of the national polarorbiting operational environmental satellite system, the defense meteorological satellite program, and nasa™s advanced microwave scanning radiometer. dr. kunkee is active in radio science applications and is an amateur radio hobbyist. he is a member of commission f of the international union of radio science and is a member of the institute of electrical and electronics engineers™ geoscience and remote sensing society, antennas and propagation society, and microwave theory and techniques society. he received his ph.d. in electrical engineering from the georgia institute of technology in 1995. molly k. macauley is a senior fellow and director of academic programs at resources for the future, inc. (rff). dr. macauley™s research at rff has included public nance, energy economics, the value of information, and economics and policy issues of outer space. she has been a visiting professor in the department of economics at the johns hopkins university. dr. macauley has testied before congress on numerous occasions on topics including space commercialization, remote sensing, and legislative and regulatory space policy. she has served on many committees, including the congressionally mandated economic study of space solar power for which she was chair. she currently serves on the space studies board of the nrc, the applied sciences advisory group for nasa™s earth sciences, and the climate working group of noaa™s science advisory board. james m. moran is a professor and senior radio astronomer at the harvardsmithsonian center for astrophysics and chair of the department of astronomy at harvard university. he has made fundamental and farranging contributions to astronomy through his key developments of radio spectroscopy combined with interferometry. he has used these techniques to study cosmic masers and has obtained, among other important results, direct and denitive evidence for the existence of a supermassive black hole. dr. moran observes molecular masers to study the dynamics of gas surrounding putative black holes in nearby galaxies. these masers can be tracked precisely in position and velocity with intercontinental arrays of radio telescopes operating as very long baseline interferometers. with the high angular resolution provided by these interferometers, he is able to measure the orbital characteristics of the gas as well as the mass and location of the black hole. dr. moran was principal investigator of the submillimeter array, an eightelement linked interferometric array, built near the summit of mauna kea in hawaii and used to study planetary atmospheres, star formation, quasars, dust and gas distribuspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.205appendix btion in nearby galaxies, and spectral lines from highly redshifted galaxies. dr. moran served on the u.s. national committee for the international astronomical union (member, january 2000 through december 2002), the astronomy and astrophysics survey committee (member, august 1998 through june 2002) and its panel on radio and submillimeterwave astronomy (vice chair, november 1998 through december 2001), the u.s. national committee for the international union of radio science (ex ofcio member, january 1991 through december 1993), and corf™s subcommittee on radio astronomy (member, july 1984 through june 1987). dr. moran is a member of the national academy of sciences. lee g. mundy is a professor and chair of the department of astronomy at the university of maryland at college park. he received his ph.d. in astronomy in 1984 from the university of texas at austin. dr. mundy studies the dense interstellar medium, star formation, and the initial stages of planet formation utilizing observations at centimeter through nearinfrared wavelengths and radiative transfer modeling tools. the observations are mainly acquired with the very large array and berkeley illinois maryland association/combined array for research in  millimeterwave astronomy, and through a space infrared telescope facility legacy project that is mapping ve major molecular clouds and more than 100 compact cores. dr. mundy is also collaborating with the nasa goddard space flight center in studies of a number of mission concepts for submillimeter through nearinfrared wavelength space interferometers. dr. mundy has published extensively. timothy j. pearson is a senior research associate at the california institute of technology. he received his ph.d. from the university of cambridge in 1977, after which he held a postdoctoral position at caltech and has been at caltech since then. dr. pearson™s research interests include the statistics of radio sources, and radio interferometry and its application to observations of active galactic nuclei and the cosmic microwave background radiation. he uses radio telescopes at cambridge, the owens valley radio observatory, the national radio astronomy observatory, and the cosmic background imager in chile. currently he is an associate editor for the monthly notices of the royal astronomical society.christopher s. ruf is a professor in the department of atmospheric, oceanic, and space sciences and in the department of electrical engineering and computer sciences at the university of michigan. he is also director of the space physics research laboratory. he received his ph.d. in electrical and computer engineering from the university of massachusetts at amherst. dr. ruf works in microwave radiometry, an important area of remote sensing and radio frequency protection issues. his research interests include earth environmental remote sensing, synthetic thinned aperture radiometry, the mitigation of radio frequency interference, spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century206selfcontained endtoend radiometer calibration systems, the use of stationary statistical properties of upwelling radiances to constrain absolute accuracy and the longterm stability of satellite measurements, and the proling of the lower, middle, and upper atmosphere using multispectral, multisensor, and climatological databases. before assuming his position at the university of michigan, dr. ruf had been an instrument scientist for the nasa topex and jasoni microwave radiometers, and he is currently a science team member for the nasa juno, aquarius, and global precipitation measurement (gpm) microwave imager microwave radiometers. dr. ruf has received numerous awards, including the international geoscience and remote sensing symposium prize paper award. he is the editor in chief of the ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, a member of ursi commission f, and a past member of the nrc™s committee on radio frequencies.frederick s. solheim is the president of radiometrics corporation, where he develops groundbased microwave radiometers for atmospheric and terrestrial remote sensing. dr. solheim was heavily involved with the development of the patented frequencyagile design that allows ˚exibility for a variety of atmospheric remote sensing applications used in the company™s radiometers. his research interests include microwave radiometry and radiosonding for proles of temperature, water vapor, and cloud liquid. dr. solheim also conducts research in signal propagation. previously he worked with the university corporation for atmospheric research in boulder, colorado. david h. staelin is a professor of electrical engineering in the department of electrical engineering and computer science (eecs) at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit). he has been a member of the eecs faculty and the research laboratory of electronics since 1965. he also was the assistant director, mit lincoln laboratory (19902001); cofounder, mit venture mentoring service (2000); chair, mit™s eecs graduate area in electronics, computers, and systems (19761990); and a faculty member of mit™s leaders for manufacturing program (19851998). he was a director of environmental research and technology, inc. (19691978) and a cofounder and chair of picturetel corp. (19841987). his research interests include remote sensing, wireless communications, signal processing, estimation, environmental sensing, microwave atmospheric sounding, and meteorological satellites. dr. staelin was a member of the president™s information technology advisory committee (20032005), chair of the nrc™s committee on radio frequencies (19831986), and a member of several nasa committees and working groups, including the space applications advisory committee, the advanced microwave sounder working group, the geostationary platformšearth science steering committee; and the tropical rainfall measuring mission science steering group. he was the principal investigator for the nasa nimbuse microspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.207appendix bwave spectrometer (launched in 1972 on nimbus5) and the scanning microwave spectrometer (launched in 1975 on nimbus6). he was a coinvestigator of the scanning multichannel microwave spectrometer (launched in 1977 on nimbus 7) and the voyager planetary radio astronomy experiment (launched in 1977 on voyagers 1 and 2). additionally, he is a member of the nasa atmospheric infrared sounder team (aqua launched in 2002), the npoess preparatory project science team (to be launched in about 2010), the noaa international program ofce sounder operational algorithm team, and the nasa precipitation mapping mission science team. dr. staelin is a fellow of the ieee and american association for the advancement of science and received the 1996 distinguished achievement award from the ieee geoscience and remote sensing society. alan b. tanner is an engineer at the nasa jet propulsion laboratory. he received his ph.d. in electrical engineering in 1989 from the university of massachusetts at amherst. his research interests include propagation, aperture synthesis, radiometers, and sounding. dr. tanner is involved in geostar, a microwave sounder intended for geosynchronous orbit. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.208appendix cdensity of interferers equationthe power received at a radiometer due to the emission of pt watts from a particular interferer at distance r can be predicted using the friis formula: ppgraertteff42 (c.1)where pr is the power received at the radiometer in watts, gt is the transmitter antenna gain in the direction of the radiometer (dimensionless), aeff is the effective aperture of the receive antenna (square meters), and eœ describes the attenuation of the transmitted power by atmospheric gases, clouds, and rain along the path from the transmitter to the receiver. the product ptgt when using the maximum of the transmitter antenna gain is also referred to as the equivalent isotropic radiated power (eirp) of a source. for multiple uncorrelated radio frequency interference (rfi) sources within a radiometer footprint, the eirp of the interference is usually approximated as the sum of that of all the individual sources. the received power pr produces a brightnesstemperature perturbation of  tpkbrk (c.2)where k is boltzmann™s constant (1.38 × 10œ23 w œ hzœ1kœ1) and b is the radiometer bandwidth (hz). combining equations c.1 and c.2 and using the property that the radiometer beamwidth (and hence footprint size) is related to the antenna size spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.209appendix c(and hence to the square root of the effective aperture area), the density (in w/m2) of the eirp within the radiometer eld of view can be related to the maximum tolerable brightness perturbation: pgatkbett2264wm (c.3)where a is the radiometer footprint area (m2); equation c.3 shows that it is the density of eirp per area (computed over the radiometer footprint) that determines the interference to the radiometer. eirp limits on individual transmitters must be combined with information on the expected number of transmitters within a specic area in order to predict or interpret observed interference levels t.as an example, a 6.9 ghz advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth (amsre) observation (2,500 km2 footprint area) with a bandwidth of 350 mhz will experience a brightness increase of 1 k if even a single interferer having a 130 milliwatt eirp (in the direction of the radiometer antenna) is included in the footprint area. that such low radiated interference powers can perturb observed brightness temperatures demonstrates the high sensitivity of earth explorationsatellite service observations to interference. the fact that multiple interference sources may reside within any radiometer footprint substantially exacerbates the problem. the impact of a specic interference level on a particular geophysical measurement depends on the sensitivity of the measurement to changes in brightness temperature, as discussed in §2.2 in chapter 2 of this report. the accuracy achieved in current radiometer systems typically makes even small changes in brightness caused by radio frequency interference to have a signicant impact on measured products.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.210appendix danalysis of outofband emission impacts to the eess from §27.53 of the fcc rulesthe general analysis presented here is applicable both to earth explorationsatellite service (eess) radiometers and to radio astronomy service (ras)  radiometers. eess and ras radiometers are governed by the same technical principles, and for both, a source of radio frequency interference (rfi) operating in compliance with federal communications commission (fcc) rules can deleteriously affect a radiometer operating in a primary protected band, as described below.parameters of two federal aviation administration (faa) air route surveillance radars (arsrs) are given in table d.1, from piepmeier and pellerano.1according to fcc rules, 47 c.f.r., §27.53, part (j) (page 387) outofband (oob) emission limits for the class of radars specied in table d.1 are as follows:for operations in the unpaired 13901392 mhz band and the paired 13921395 mhz and 14321435 mhz bands, the power of any emission outside the licensee™s frequency band(s) of operation shall be attenuated below the transmitter power (p, in watts) by at least (43 + 10 log (p)) db.2 note that the ﬁlogﬂ function refers here to the base 10 logarithm. in order to determine if the specied attenuation is achieved, measurement of the outofband 1 j.r. piepmeier and f. a. pellerano, ﬁmitigation of terrestrial radar interference in lband spaceborne microwave radiometers,ﬂ in proceedings of the 2006 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (igarss), denver, colorado, 2006, pp. 22922296, doi 10.1109/igarss.2006.593. 2 see 47 c.f.r., §27.53, part (j), available at http://ecfr.gpoaccess.gov/; accessed january 15, 2010.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.211appendix dradiated power in a 1 mhz bandwidth is specied by the fcc. it is therefore possible to radiate larger outofband total powers in bandwidths larger than 1 mhz. these regulations specify for the arsr4 radar, for example, that the allowed oob emission is ptoob = 10 log(6 · 104 w) œ (43 + 10 log(6 · 104 w)) = œ43 dbw (peak) in a 1 mhz bandwidth.the friis formula species the power received by an eess radiometer from a transmitting source: plpggrrfifdrttrrrtt142,, where lfdr is the frequency dependent rejection (fdr) factor, pt is the transmit power of the radar, gt (t, t) is the gain of the radar transmitting antenna in the direction of the radiometer, gr (r, r) is the gain of the radiometer antenna in the direction of the radar,  is the wavelength of the radar frequency, and r is the range between the radar and the radiometer. using this equation to test the permissible spurious and oob power levels according to §27.53, set lfdr = 1.0, since it is assumed that the oob emissions occur within the radiometer bandwidth. assume that gt (t, t)  20 dbi ( ~ œ15 db from maximum gain due to elevation differences in the lineofsight [los] to the spacebased radiometer), gr (r, r) of the aquarius (or similar) radiometer is ~25 db,  = 0.21 m, and r 1  106 m los from a low earth orbit (leo) of altitude ~700 km. these values result in: prfioob ~ (œ43 dbw) + (20 dbi) + (25 dbi) + (œ155.5 db) = œ153.5 dbw for an arsr4 radar system. this is a peak power level whose impact would be reduced when integrated over a longer integration period; the most conservative (i.e., shortest) relevant ratio of the radar pulse width to the radiometer integration time is ~(6  10œ5)/(1  10œ3) = 6  10œ2 œ12.2 db. however, the oob received table d.1 parameters of two federal aviation administration air route surveillance radarsnamefrequency (mhz)peak power (kw)antenna gain  (dbi)azimuth beamwidth (degrees)scan rate  (rpm)pulse width (µsec)pulse repetition frequency (prf)  (hz)arsr3125013505000341.2552310365arsr41215140060351.459/60216/72source: j.r. piepmeier and f.a. pellerano, ﬁmitigation of terrestrial radar interference in lband spaceborne microwave radiometers,ﬂ in proceedings of the 2006 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (igarss), denver, colorado, 2006, pp. 22922296, doi 10.1109/igarss.2006.593.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century212power is increased by the fact that the eess radiometer passband is ~27 mhz, compared to the 1 mhz bandwidth specied in §27.53(a)4; the case of oob emissions at the permitted level throughout the entire 27 mhz bandwidth adds 14.3 db to ptoob . therefore, for a single integration time of 1 ms, the spurious power received by the eess radiometer from a single radar may be ~ œ153.5 œ 12.2 + 14.3 = œ151.4 dbw. in contrast, the single sample sensitivity of an lband eess radiometer with a 1 ms integration time can be derived using similar parameters:  ttttrecnfsysrecant2901012010k100k for hpolarization over the ocean. therefore the sensitivity is  tbwrms100100110271006136int.k.the minimum detectable change in power of the eess radiometer with a factor of 10 safety margin for a single sample is as follows: ktb13810271000616623161..jksk..5dbw. in this scenario there is safety margin of ~10 in the impact from a single radar. this means that the oob emission requirements are inadequate to protect eess, and they do not even closely meet the expectations of international telecommunication unionradio (itur) rs.1029 that interfering signal levels should be below œ171 dbw within a 27 mhz bandwidth at 1.4 ghz by roughly 5 db. note that this analysis is for a single radar within the footprint of the radiometer. more than one radar in the radiometer eld of view results in further reduction of the safety factor and errors in the data that are virtually impossible to detect without auxiliary information. unfortunately, it appears that limits of the adjacent signal rejection of the eess radiometer (due to lter limitations) result in additional contamination of the eess radiometer eld as detailed in piepmeier and pellerano.33 j.r. piepmeier and f.a. pellerano, ﬁmitigation of terrestrial radar interference in lband spaceborne microwave radiometers,ﬂ in proceedings of the 2006 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (igarss), denver, colorado, 2006, pp. 22922296, doi 10.1109/igarss.2006.593. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.213appendix din eess radiometer systems, rfi levels are cumulative. therefore, impacts from adjacent signals described by piepmeier and pellerano,4 coupled with the additional impacts from spurious and oob emissions in the above analysis, suggest that a single arsrtype radar operating in full compliance with fcc §27.53 can impact the operation of eess radiometers operating in the 1.4 ghz protected region.this analysis has assumed that the oob emissions from the radar are at the maximum allowable level (œ43 dbw/mhz) throughout the entire 27 mhz  radiometer bandwidth; that the radar transmits its peak power over its pulse width, which lies entirely within the radiometer integration period; and that the antennas are oriented so that 15 db below maximum antenna coupling occurs.4 j.r. piepmeier and f.a. pellerano, ﬁmitigation of terrestrial radar interference in lband spaceborne microwave radiometers,ﬂ in proceedings of the 2006 international geoscience and remote sensing symposium (igarss), denver, colorado, 2006, pp. 22922296, doi 10.1109/igarss.2006.593. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.214appendix edescriptions of earth explorationsatellite service parameters related to table 2.1air temperature profilesglobal air temperature proles are critical to numerical weather predictions (npws) because temperature is inversely related to air density and therefore to the differential gravitational forces on air that help drive local and global winds. temperature also serves as a tracer of atmospheric motion. although satelliteborne infrared imaging spectrometers can measure these proles, clouds often introduce signicant errors, particularly in the lower troposphere, in certain polar seasons, and in ﬁbaroclinicﬂ regions, that commonly exert a disproportionate in˚uence on future weather events. current operational weather satellites combine both microwave and infrared spectrometer data to take advantage of the relative strengths of each; this sensor combination probably makes the single most important contribution of weather satellite data to the dramatic improvements achieved in providing useful global weather predictions up to a week in advance. although the 5060 ghz oxygen absorption bands provide most such data, they are generally supplemented by other bands that help correct the results for precipitation, humidity, and surface effects, discussed below in this appendix. in addition, it has been found that the original operational temperature sounding microwave instruments (microwave sounding units, or msus) can be calibrated across satellites to yield a very sensitive indicator of global warming in the middle troposphere with accuracies on the order of 0.1 k per decade. these observations are being continued using successor instruments such as advanced msus (amsus). systematic radio frequency interferspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.215appendix eence (rfi) at levels too low to be otherwise detected could, in principle, introduce errors in such measurements.precipitation rateobservations of global precipitation are important to both weather forecasts and climate studies. they are particularly useful in monitoring severe storms such as hurricanes and damaging fronts. precipitation is important not only to safety, agriculture, and commerce, but also to hydrology and predictions of ˚oods, soil moisture, and sea surface salinity (sss). since the locations of convective precipitating cells cannot be predicted well, and because they sometimes reside under higher cloud shields such as those obscuring hurricanes and other severe storms, only microwave sensors can reveal their intensities and locations. precipitation is generally observed using the same sensors as those used for water vapor, which include (1) windowchannel sensors at frequencies such as 18.7, 22, 23.8, 31.4, 37, and 89 ghz that observe raindrop emission against colder backgrounds such as ocean and lowemissivity soil (e.g., special sensor microwave/imager [ssm/i], special sensor microwave imager/sounder [ssmi/s], advanced microwave scanning radiometerearth [amsre]), and (2) the opaque water vapor resonance 176191 ghz in combination with lower frequencies such as 89, 150, and 164168 ghz; glaciated cell tops are particularly visible and sensitive to convective strength. in addition, the opaque oxygen bands 5056 ghz are useful because they are sensitive to ice particle size distributions and therefore to the heavier precipitation rates (e.g., amsu, ssmi/s).sea surface salinitysea surface salinity is a critical missing parameter that scientists need in order to meet climate research goals. measuring global sss over time will contribute to scientists™ understanding of change in the global earth system and how the system responds to natural and humaninduced change. global measurements of sss can be achieved to ~0.2 practical salinity units using spacebased passive microwave radiometry at 1.4 ghz and radar scatterometry at 1.26 ghz.1 these measurements can provide signicant new information about how global precipitation, evaporation, and the water cycle are changing. global sss variability provides key insight regarding freshwater ˚ow into and out of the ocean associated with precipitation, evaporation, ice melting, and river runoff. global sss measurements will also provide important background about how climate variation induces changes in global ocean circulation. the combination of global sss and sea surface temperature 1 see http://aquarius.nasa.gov/science.php; accessed on january 15, 2010.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century216(sst) measurements can be used to determine seawater density, which regulates ocean circulation and the formation of water masses. sea surface temperatureglobal allweather sea surface temperature data are critical for nwp and climate research. sst measurements are important for understanding heat exchange and coupling between the ocean and atmosphere, and sst data are required by operational ocean analyses in order to properly constrain upperocean circulation and thermal structure.2 sst measurements in clear air can be obtained using electrooptical (traditional) instruments; however, clouds prevent these measurements, so passive microwave measurements within the 5 to 6 ghz region are critical for obtaining coverage in areas that are seasonally cloudcovered. for example, areas in the u.s. exclusive economic zone off the coast of washington and oregon are not imaged with traditional satellite sst sensors for weeks at a time owing to persistent stratus cloud cover, necessitating an allweather solution. the standard sst measurement uncertainty for spacebased sst measurements is 0.5 k at 50 km (passive microwave, allweather capability). to achieve this standard for microwave measurements, interfering signal power within a (typical) receiving bandwidth of 350 mhz (e.g., amsre) must be below approximately œ126 dbm3 using a factor of 10 power margin. for reference, this power level is effectively 3 db higher than recommended levels from international telecommunication unionradio (itur) rs.1029, but still far below the level of interference that would be considered acceptable for nearly all other communication and signal systems. spacebased sst measurements near 6 ghz near land are impacted primarily by landbased emitters operating in the xed service within full compliance of their regulations. less pervasive rfi impacts are encountered from shipboard radar. for sst measurements using 10.7 ghz such as trmm™s tmi and amsre, substantive rfi is incurred from geostationary transmitters operating immediately adjacent to the upper edge of the 10.7 ghz eess band segment as depicted in figure 2.16 in chapter 2 in this report. soil moistureglobal, highquality soil moisture measurements are expected to advance weather forecasting and earth hydrology studies signicantly. a proposed nasa 2 c.j. donlon, p.j. minnett, c. gentmann, t.j. nightingale, i.j. barton, b. ward, and m.j. murray, ﬁtoward improved validation of satellite sea surface skin temperature measurements for climate researchﬂ journal of climate, 15: 353369 (february 2002).3 with a factor of 0.5 sensitivity, this value is (1.38  10œ23 j ł kœ1)(0.05 k)(350  106 hz) = 2.42  10œ16 w.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.217appendix emission, soil moisture active passive (smap), would provide measurements of soil moisture using 1.4 ghz passive microwave radiometry and 1.26 ghz radar scatterometer to measure soil moisture to approximately 4 percent uncertainty with about 1.5 kg/m2 surface vegetation water content. soil moisture measurements at higher frequencies, such as those planned for the national polarorbiting operational environmental satellite system (npoess) near 6 and 10 ghz, will also provide additional data refresh reducing data latency and measurements capable of producing soil moisture estimates to approximately 8 percent uncertainty at 50 km horizontal spatial resolution. a national centers for environmental prediction (ncep) scientic assessment has determined that the ncep eta model requires soil moisture to properly calculate the energy ˚uxes at the surface. to support the model, the u.s. department of commerce requires measurements at the surface with a horizontal resolution of 50 km, mapping uncertainty of 3 km, and measurement accuracy of approximately 10 cm of water per 1 meter column of soil.4sea surface wind vectorspacebased remote sensing of sea surface winds (ssws) depends on precision measurements of polarimetric upwelling microwave emissions from the ocean surface at 10.737.0 ghz. highquality sst measurements based on 6 ghz region brightness temperatures are also required to produce the best ssw direction product. global ssw data are critical for highquality nwp forecasts, developing tropical cyclone warnings, aircraft and ship operations, ship routing, and other civil and military operations. ssw data constitute one of the most important parameters (environmental data records, or edrs) in operational meteorological remote sensing. the accuracy of the wind vector products obtained from windsat retrievals to date has reached or exceeded that available from active scatterometer systems such as quikscat at moderate to high wind speeds, and the ability of microwave radiometers to simultaneously measure atmospheric and sea temperature properties motivates attempts to improve the accuracy of the radiometer products further. sea iceone of the rst applications of spacebased passive microwave imagery was for monitoring sea ice characteristics. the electrical scanning microwave radiometer (esmr) data set provides the earliest allweather, allseason imagery of polar 4 npoess integrated operational requirements document (iord), acquisition decision memorandum 01xxx, march 16, 2001. spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century218sea ice. some satellite data of sea ice in the visible and infrared wavelengths were available in the late 1960s and early 1970s (before the introduction of spacebased passive microwave observations), but since the polar regions are either dark or cloudcovered for much of the year, the generation of consistent, longterm data records from visible and infrared sensing was not practical.passive microwave data introduced a major advance in the usefulness of satellite sea ice imaging. the value of passive microwave data for sea ice studies derives from the large contrast in microwave emissivities between sea ice and open water. at 19.35 ghz, open water has an emissivity of approximately 0.44, whereas various sea ice types have emissivities ranging from approximately 0.8 to 0.97. the resulting contrast in microwave brightness temperatures allows accurate estimates of sea ice concentrations (percentages of ocean area covered by sea ice) and hence the identication of sea ice distributions throughout the region of observation, as well as temporal variations of these distributions throughout the time period of observation.5water vapor profilesglobal water vapor proles are essential to the nwp of rainfall and drought, and they help constrain such predictions in general. as in the case of temperature prole measurements, combined microwave and infrared spectral data can yield nearallweather global performance despite most clouds. two different types of microwave observations are used, those in transparent bands within which the water vapor absorption stands out against the colder ocean background (ocean partially re˚ects the extremely cold cosmic background radiation), or against that of cold lowemissivity land. no prole information is usually retrieved, only an estimate of the columnintegrated abundance. the frequencies most often used for this purpose include 18.7, 22, 23.8, 31.4, 37, and 89 ghz. to improve retrieval accuracies, these channels are often dualpolarized (horizontal and vertical) and scanned at a constant angle of incidence (e.g., ssm/i, ssm/is, and amsre). in addition, the opaque water vapor resonance near 183 ghz is often used in combination with some of the lower frequencies; these frequencies generally include 89, 150, 164168, and 176191 ghz, but must be used in combination with temperature prole information to yield the most accurate results (e.g., amsu, ssm/is). instruments retrieving water vapor proles are generally used to retrieve other parameters simultaneously, such as cloud water content, precipitation rate, ice and snow information, and so on.5 t.t. wilheit, nimbus5 user™s guide, nasa/goddard space flight center,greenbelt, maryland, pp. 59105.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.219appendix ecloud waterthe ability of microwave radiometers to measure water vapor and cloud water directly is a signicant capability, provided by no other remote sensing system. radars measure cloud re˚ectivity, which has a strong dependence on water droplet size. uncertainty in the cloud droplet size distribution makes radar measurements of cloud water inaccurate. because liquid water is a strong absorber (and hence emitter) of microwave energy, the volume of cloud water can be more accurately measured with microwave radiometers. the microwave technique is also far more accurate than infrared or optical methods owing to the high re˚ectance, or albedo, of clouds at these wavelengths.numerical weather predictionin general nwp models such as the european centre for mediumrange weather forecasts (ecmwf), navy nogaps use a full range of passive microwave data: 19.35, 22.235, 23.624.0, 31.331.8, 37, 50.357.3, 85.5, 89, 150, 176190 ghz operationally. although spacebased global microwave observations have their largest impact where other data sources are sparse, signicant positive impact is also identied in datarich areas. it is estimated that in the southern hemisphere, microwave observations provide 60 to 70 percent of the impact of all satellite data in the ecmwf model. the total proportional impact, that is, the relative reduction if a particular band is lost, is over 50 percent for the band 5457 ghz alone. similarly, a loss of 24 ghz data would represent 30 percent of the total impact from microwave measurements. note that these estimates assume that all other data remain intact, so the loss of more than one channel is more serious than a linear combination of losses would suggest. other bands at a similar level of importance are 31.331.8, 5759, 89, and 183.31 ghz.6trace gasesalthough the protective stratospheric ozone layer is indeed recovering, the need for passive millimeter and submillimeterwave monitoring continues today. the ability to monitor the individual abundance, spatial distribution, and temporal trend of each of the trace species that contributes to the depletion process allows the efcacy of the montreal protocol to be directly veried. more importantly, recent, largescale changes in the stratospheric makeup suggest that the rate of recovery of the ozone layer may be slowing.6 s. english, the value of passive microwave satellite observations to nwp, forecasting research technical report no. 484, exeter, u.k.: met ofce, 2006.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century220millimeter and submillimeterwave frequencies distributed from approximately 183 to 916 ghz are ideally suited for observing ice clouds.7 these high frequencies are necessary in order for scattering to be the dominant interaction mechanism. the wide range of frequencies accommodates the large dynamic range of ice water path that occurs in nature and is incorporated in the submillimeter infrared radiometer ice cloud experiment (sirice) mission that is currently in prephase a development at nasa. see table 2.4 in chapter 2 of this report. 7 a.j. gasiewski, ﬁnumerical sensitivity analysis of passive ehf and smmw channels to tropospheric water vapor, clouds, and precipitation,ﬂ ieee transactions on geoscience and remote sensing, 30: 859870 (1992); k.f. evans and g.l. stephens, ﬁmicrowave radiative transfer through clouds composed of realistically shaped ice crystals. part ii: remote sensing of ice clouds,ﬂ journal of the atmospheric sciences, 52: 20582072 (1995); k.f. evans, s.j. walter, a.j. heymseld, and m.n. deeter, ﬁmodeling of submillimeter passive remote sensing of cirrus clouds,ﬂ journal of applied meteorology, vol. 37 (1998); k.f. evans, a.h. evans, i.g. nolt, and b.t. marshall, ﬁthe prospect for remote sensing of cirrus clouds with a submillimeterwave spectrometer,ﬂ journal of applied meteorology, 38: 514525 (1999).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.221act atacama cosmology telescope agn  active galactic nucleusalma atacama large millimeter arrayamsre advanced microwave scanning radiometerearthamsu  advanced microwave sounding unit arm atmospheric radiation monitoringarsr  air route surveillance radarsata  the allen telescope arrayatms advanced technology microwave sounderaui associated universities, inc.avhrr advanced very high resolution radiometeraws  advanced wireless servicesboinc  berkeley open infrastructure for network computingbrs/ebs broadband radio service and educational broadband servicecape connective available potential energyccat cornell caltech atacama telescopecfc chloro˚uorocarboncmb cosmic microwave backgroundcme coronal mass ejectioncmis compact microscope imaging systemcobe cosmic background explorerappendix facronyms and abbreviationsspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century222corf committee on radio frequenciescr cognitive radiodda direct data assimilationdfs dynamic frequency selectiondia denver international airportdmsp defense meteorological satellite programdod department of defenseecv essential climate variableedr environmental data recordeess  earth explorationsatellite service eirp  equivalent isotropically radiated powereos  earth observing systemesmr electrical scanning microwave radiometerestar electronicallyscanned thinned array radiometerevla expanded very large arrayfasr frequency agile solar radiotelescopefcc federal communications commissionfs  fixed service gbt green bank telescopegcomw global change observation missionwater gcos global climate observing systemgeo geostationary orbit (satellite); group on earth observationsgeoss global earth observation system of systemsgfsc goddard space flight centergmi  global precipitation measurementmicrowave imagergoes geostationary operational environmental satellitesgpm global precipitation measurement (mission)gps global positioning systemgr  einstein™s theory of general relativityhcfc  hydrochloro˚uorocarbonhfc hydro˚uorocarbonhomer hybrid optimization model for electric renewableshsb humidity sounder for brazilipcc intergovernmental panel on climate changeitu  international telecommunication union spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.223appendix fitur itu radiocommunication sectoriturr itu radio regulationsiucaf  scientic committee on frequency allocations for radio astronomy and space scienceiwp ice water pathjmr jason microwave radiometerleo low earth orbitli lifted indexligo laser interferometer gravitational wave observatorylisa laser interferometer space antennalms land mobile servicelmss  land mobile satellite servicelmt large millimeter telescopelwa long wavelength arraymems  microelectromechanical systemsmhs microwave humidity soundermiras microwave imaging radiometer using aperture synthesismis microwave imager/soundermls microwave limb soundermodis moderate resolution imaging spectroradiometermsu microwave sounding unitmwa murchison wideeld arraynaic national astronomy and ionosphere centernasa national aeronautics and space administrationnems  nimbuse microwave spectrometernoaa national oceanic and atmospheric administrationnpoess national polarorbiting operational environmental satellite systemnprm  notice of public rule makingnrao national radio astronomy observatorynrc national research councilnrqz  national radio quiet zonensf national science foundationntia national telecommunications and information administrationnwp numerical weather predictionoob  outofband (emissions)spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century224path  precipitation and allweather temperature and humiditypecad/cadre production estimate and crop assessment division™s crop condition data retrieval and evaluationpfd  power ˚ux density (usually measured in wmœ2)psr  polarimetric scanning radiometer psu practical salinity unitpwv precipitable water vaporras  radio astronomy service rf radio frequencyrfi radio frequency interferencerms  rootmeansquarernss  radionavigation satellite servicerr radio regulations (the international treaty governing spectrum use)sair synthetic aperture interferometric radiometersar  synthetic aperture radarsclp snow and cold land processessdr softwaredened radioseti search for extraterrestrial intelligencesfmr stepped frequency microwave radiometersirice  submillimeter infrared radiometer ice cloud experimentska square kilometer arraysm soil moisturesmap soil moisture active passivesmmr scanning multichannel microwave radiometersmos soil moisture ocean salinitysnr  signaltonoise ratiospfd spectral power ˚ux density (measured in wmœ2 hzœ1)spt south pole telescopesptf spectrum policy task forcesrs  space research service ssm/i  special sensor microwave imager ssmi/s special sensor microwave imager/sounderssm/t  special sensor microwave/temperaturesss sea surface salinitysst sea surface temperaturesubtel  subsecretaría de telecomunicacionessswv sea surface wind vectorswe snow water equivalentspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.225appendix ftdm  timedivision multiplexingtdrss  tracking and data relay satellite systemtiros television infrared observation satellitetmi trmm microwave imagertopex topography experimenttovs tiros operational vertical soundertrmm  tropical rainfall measuring mission tti total of totals indexual united airlinesuwb  ultrawidebandvla very large arrayvlba very long baseline arrayvlbi very long baseline interferometrywmts wireless medical telemetry servicewp7d itu working party 7d wrc  world radiocommunication conference spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.226altimetry: the measurement of altitude, possibly by using radar.anisotropic: having different physical properties along different axes.anomaly correlation: a common measure of forecast accuracy, with values above 0.6 generally considered to be signicant.antenna main beam: the part of an antenna™s radiation pattern (transmit and receive properties) that contains the maximum power and eld strength. synonymous with ﬁbeam lobe.ﬂ antenna sidelobe: the part of an antenna™s radiation pattern (transmit and receive properties) that is not part of the main beam.array: an interferometric observational scheme that employs multiple linked antennas or dishes to mimic the capabilities of a much larger, single dish.backhaul: in telecommunications, the intermediate communication link(s) between the end user and the core communications network. for example, for cellular transmissions, the backhaul is the link(s) between the cellular tower and the core communications system.appendix gglossaryspectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.227appendix gbeam/radiation pattern: the directional dependence of radiation power from the antenna (transmit) or as received by the antenna (receive).bolometer: an instrument that measures incident electromagnetic radiation.crossfrequency mitigation: the process of measuring a particular band by splitting it into subbands (spectral analysis) and then looking ﬁacross the frequenciesﬂ for outlier channels. these outliers are presumed to be contaminated with rfi because they have more power in them than would be expected.direct data assimilation (dda): a powerful technique developed during the past two decades. dda optimally uses all available data from satellites, balloons, radars, and surface stations to steer numerical weather prediction (nwp) models. dda applied to satellite data is known as direct radiance assimilation (dra) and accounts for most of the improvements in the performance of nwp models in the southern hemisphere where other sensors are scarce.downwelling: natural radiation that radiates down from the sky.environmental data record (edr): characteristic information regarding an environment that has been observed: once an earth remote sensing observatory collects incident radiation and it is sent to researchers for processing, the researchers organize the data and interpret them to produce edrs. edrs include sea and land wind speed, sea and air temperature, precipitation, sea salinity, and soil moisture. see table 2.1 in chapter 2 for a complete list.gaussian: a frequency distribution of a variable that exhibits normality and is useful for identifying noise in an instrument.global navigation satellite system (glonass): a radiobased russian geonavigation satellite constellation operated by the russian space forces that is similar to the united states™ global positioning system.interference: the effect of unwanted energy due to one or a combination of emission(s), radiation(s), or induction(s) on reception in a radiocommunications system, manifested by any performance degradation, misinterpretation, or loss of information that could be extracted in the absence of such unwanted energy.interference mitigation: the process of preempting, identifying, and excising radio or microwave interference from observational data. it can be either unilateral (in the case of excising) or multilateral (in the case of coordination agreements).spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century228interferometry: an observational technique that achieves a large angular resolution by combining the collected radiation from numerous dispersed, linked dishes and examines the resulting interference pattern. the use of interferometry, for which multiple smaller dishes are built, can be more costeffective than building one enormous dish.interstellar medium: the physical space between stars that consists of gas, dust, atomic particles, and magnetic elds.iridium: a radiobased communications satellite constellation operated by iridium, inc., that provides global, handheld, satellite telephone service.isotropic: having equal physical properties along different axes.nowcasting: the practice of forecasting the next 6 hours of weather using observational data. nowcasting is more precise than forecasting because it has better information on smallscale weather structures.numerical weather prediction (nwp) models: computer simulations that forecast future conditions based on information on current weather conditions. a signicant limitation of any forecasting model is the reliability and availability of data input.outofband emission: a type of emission that causes interference on a frequency or frequencies immediately outside the necessary bandwidth and that results from the modulation process, but excluding spurious emissions.part 15 device: a device that is regulated by section 15 of title 47 of the code of federal regulations and therefore is not subject to licensing before radiating on an intentional or unintentional basis.passband/bandpass: the range of frequencies that can pass through a lter.passive radio/microwave observations: observations of the natural radio or microwave environment that are made on a receiveonly basisšthat is, there are no transmissions involved.polarimetry: the measurement of the polarization of incident radiation that has been re˚ected and thus provides information on the object off of which the radiation was re˚ected.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.229appendix gpower ˚ux density (pfd): the radio power incident on the antenna, called the ˚ux density or spectral power ˚ux density. flux density is measured in janskys, where 1 jy = 10˛26 wm˛2 hzœ1.quantum transition: the change of an atom or molecule from one quantum state to another.radio and microwave bands of relevance:lband (12 ghz)cband (48 ghz)xband (810 ghz)kband (2040 ghz)vband (5075 ghz)radiometry: the study of the measurement of electromagnetic radiation.radio science: any scientic endeavor that employs the use of radio or microwave radiation to explore the fundamental characteristics of natural phenomena.radiosonde: an instrument ˚own aboard a weather balloon to measure localized, current atmospheric parameters. radiosonde observations are important inputs to numerical weather prediction models.recommendation itur rs.1029: this international telecommunication union (itu) document recommends œ134 dbm with a 100 mhz reference bandwidth. the equivalent recommended maximum level using 100 mhz reference bandwidth is œ131 dbm.scatterometry: the measurement of a normalized radar cross section of pulses re˚ected off a surface. this technique has been particularly useful for the measurement of ocean surface winds.signal modulation: varying a periodic waveform.spectral efciency: the degree to which a given portion of the spectrum is actually used, compared with the maximum theoretical possible use of that portion. spectral occupancy: the fraction of time that a transmission can be detected at a given frequency, for a given sensitivity and a given timefrequency resolution.spectrum management for science in the 21st centurycopyright national academy of sciences. all rights reserved.spectrum management for science in the 21st century230spectrometer: an instrument that analyzes incident radiation to allow the measurement of individual spectral lines that are characteristic of specic atoms or molecules.spectroscopy: a technique that analyzes incident radiation to allow the measurement of individual spectral lines that are characteristic of specic atoms or molecules.spurious emission: emission that causes interference on a frequency or frequencies that are outside the necessary bandwidth and the level of which may be reduced without affecting the corresponding transmission of information. spurious emissions include harmonic emissions, parasitic emissions, intermodulation products, and frequency conversion products but exclude outofband emissions. subband: a smaller piece of a specied band.synthetic aperture: a technique that uses the combined collecting area of numerous dispersed dishes to mimic the capabilities of a much larger, single dish.typeapproved device: an emitting device that is approved by the federal communications commission by its type under the code of federal regulations.unwanted emission: emissions consisting of spurious emissions and outofband emissions. upwelling: natural radiation that radiates up from earth.